
=== PAGE 1 ===
UNITED STATES BANKRUPTCY COURT
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK

x

In re: : Chapter 11
ENRON CORP., et al., : Case No. 01-16034 (AJG)
Debtors. : Jointly Administered

FINAL REPORT OF NEAL BATSON,
COURT-APPOINTED EXAMINER

November 4, 2003

=== PAGE 2 ===
VI.

VIL

VI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION ...0... ee eseccesceseseesesscesnsscsessessssssessessssscssssasacessseesssnssecscesssesseseres 1
A. Background... 1
B. Prior Reports .............. 2
C. Summary of Conclusions.............. 6
Dz Standard Adopted by the Examiner .. 13
E. How to Read This Report .......c ccs sccscssssssssssesssesssssnsssersessossssenssssensseres 14
BACKGROUND 0... eesesssesecreressecereneneneecssereseseesseseseseessessseesssssesesssnesseneensnaseee 15
A. Events of Fall 2001 0... eessseseseeeescsssrersecessnseceresesessessesessesssnesesnsseseeesse 15
B. The Bankruptcy Filings and Subsequent Events .............ssssssessseseeeeeeees 17

ROLES OF ENRON’S PROFESSIONALS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
AND OUTSIDE DIRECTORS IN SPE TRANSACTIONS AND

THEORIES OF LIABILITY oo. eceseseessesceesescscsescresessarsescscscscscsesesensscacscassesnees 18
A. OVELVICW oe ecceesestssceseeeeecsereesesseesscsessesssassesseeescsseessnsnsssacassesressssorseesenees 18
B. Persons and Entities Involved in Enron’s Use of SPES «0... 22
C. Theories of Potential Liability and Defenses... te eesseeeeseereneeeeeeees 23
SPECIFIC ROLE OF ANDERSEN AND POTENTIAL LIABILITY ................ 39
A. Role of Andersen in Enron’s SPE Transactions .
B. Potential Liability... eee eeeseceeeceeeeseececseesesescsesesssesestaeseeeseeseesaeens
SPECIFIC ROLES OF ATTORNEYS AND POTENTIAL LIABILITY ........... 48
A. OVELVICW 0. cece csecssessscscteesesseasscessscsesssseassssessssessassnsnsasssesesssesosssaseseeseavee 48
B. Outside Law Firms... eeescseesesescnceseseseeceseseseneesssseseseseseeesssassesseseseas 48
Cc. Enron’s In-House Attorneys occ ccccccs cesses cssscssacscsseesessssssesecenereseeneee 52
' SPECIFIC ROLES OF LAY, SKILLING AND OUTSIDE DIRECTORS

AND POTENTIAL LIABILITY oo. eeccsseessesesesceeeneeseseeeeeaeasecsserecsssnesvensaeee 56
A. Roles of Lay, Skilling and Outside Directors in Enron’s SPE

TYaMSactiOns 0.0... cece ceeeceeseeeseeececeseeecsceccscesceasseeseeceeesanseedseeesaeaeeesessueeaees 56
B. Potential Liability... eesecsccsecescesccesesescececeseseseeececeeescscnenssesseeeeesaeeees 60
C. Lay’s and Skilling’s Use of Enron Stock to Repay Corporate Loanas....... 61
ROLE OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS IN ENRON’S SPE
TRANSACTIONS AND THEORIES OF LIABILITY oe eeesesseeeestessesenees 63

A. Theories of Potential Liability
B. Potential Defenses to Aiding and Abetting Claims and Equitable
Subordination... se esceenseseseteesssescnceeresseeesessesssseeeseseseeesesnsseesssnesesesses 64

SPECIFIC ROLES OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND


=== PAGE 3 ===
SOO D>

HOW COULD THIS HAVE HAPPENED?.

OVELVICW ....eccecetceseeececeseeeeeererscsensesoseasees
Why Did Enron Officers Behave This Way? ..... .
Methods Used by Officers to Implement Strategy ...........cssssesereeretsees
Failure of Professionals to Provide Checks and Balances............:0:006

Failure of Lay and Skilling to Provide Checks and Balances... ws
Failure of Enron Board to Provide Checks and Balances...........cc0e0

X. FINAL REPORT occ ccssssescscrsssssssssssssssesscessssssesessssesesensesesaseseeseoeeetaseseseeseeesense

Appendix A
Appendix B
Appendix C
Appendix D
Appendix E
Appendix F
Appendix G

— Certain Defined Terms

— Role of Andersen

— Role of Enron’s Attorneys

— Roles of Lay, Skilling and Outside Directors
— Role of RBS and its Affiliates

— Role of CSFB and its Affiliates

— Role of Toronto Dominion and its Affiliates

-ii-

=== PAGE 4 ===
L INTRODUCTION

A. Background

On December 2, 2001 (the “Petition Date”) and on certain dates thereafter, Enron
Corp. (“Enron”), an Oregon corporation, and certain of its affiliates (collectively, the
“Debtors”) filed voluntary petitions for relief under Chapter 11 of Title 11 of the United
States Code (the “Bankruptcy Code”) with the United States Bankruptcy Court for the
Southern District of New York (the “Court”) (collectively, the “Bankruptcy Case”).!

This Court entered an Order on April 8, 2002 (the “April 8" Order”) authorizing
and directing the appointment of an examiner pursuant to 11 U.S.C. §1104(c).? On
May 22, 2002, the United States Trustee appointed Neal Batson (the “Examiner”) as the
examiner. The Court, by Order dated May 24, 2002, approved the appointment.

The Examiner has been authorized to investigate all transactions involving special
purpose vehicles created or structured by the Debtors or at the behest of the Debtors (the

“SPEs”) and those individuals, institutions and professionals involved therein?

1 On July 11, 2003, the Debtors filed their Joint Plan of Affiliated Debtors Pursuant to Chapter 11 of the
United States Bankruptcy Code. Docket Number 11698. On September 18, 2003, the Debtors filed their
Amended Joint Plan of Affiliated Debtors Pursuant to Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code
(the “Debtors’ Joint Plan”). Docket Number 12822. The hearing on the adequacy of the disclosure
statement with respect to the Debtors’ Joint Plan is presently scheduled for November 18, 2003.

2 Among other things, the April 8" Order authorized the Examiner to:

investigate all transactions (as weil as all entities as defined in the Bankruptcy Code and
pre-petition professionals involved therein): (i) involving special purpose vehicles or
entities created or structured by the Debtors or at the behest of the Debtors (the “SPEs”),
that are (ii) not reflected on the Enron Corp. balance sheets, or that (iii) involve hedging
using the Enron Corp. stock, or (iv) as to which the Enron Examiner has the reasonable
belief are reflected, reported or omitted in the relevant entity’s financial statements not in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or that (v) involve potential
avoidance actions against any pre-petition insider or professional of the Debtors.

> The April 8" Order contained the provision that authorized the Examiner, if appropriate (taking into
account the absolute priority rule, the financial condition of the Debtors’ estates and the need not to waste
value available to creditors), to review possible legal mechanisms pursuant to which the equity holders of
Enron could share in the value of the Debtors’ estates. There are legal mechanisms that could be used that

=== PAGE 5 ===
On September 21, 2002, the Examiner filed the First Interim Report of Neal
Batson, Court-Appointed Examiner (the “First Interim Report”). On January 21, 2003,
the Examiner submitted to the Court the Second Interim Report of Neal Batson, Court-
Appointed Examiner (the “Second Interim Report”). On June 30, 2003, the Examiner
submitted to the Court the Third Interim Report of Neal Batson, Court-Appointed
Examiner (the “Third Interim Report”; together with the First Interim Report and the
Second Interim Report, the “Prior Reports”). This Final Report of Neal Batson, Court-
Appointed Examiner, constitutes the Examiner’s fourth and final report (the “Report”;
together with the Prior Reports, the “Reports”).4

B. Prior Reports

Six SPE transactions were examined in the First Interim Report, and the Examiner
concluded that the transactions were, to varying degrees, susceptible of being
recharacterized under a “‘true sale” challenge. If this recharacterization were to occur, the
remaining assets in those structures, having a value of approximately $500 million, would

be restored to the Debtors’ estates.

would enable the equity holders to share in the value of the Debtors’ estates, including plan provisions that
provide that equity holders share in a portion of the proceeds of any allowed claim of any party-in-interest,
including the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). Based upon: (i) the status of ongoing
negotations regarding the Debtors’ Joint Plan; (ii) the information contained in the Debtors’ amended
schedules; (iii) the insolvency analysis undertaken by the Debtors and the Official Committee of Unsecured
Creditors (the “Creditors” Committee”); (iv) the comments of the Court regarding the ability of the equity
holders to recover in these cases based upon the apparent amount of claims in the cases; and (v) the desire
not “‘to waste value available to creditors,” the Examiner has not undertaken an extensive analysis of these
legal mechanisms or their viability.

‘ Any references in the Reports to meetings, communications, contacts and actions between the Examiner
and third parties are intended to refer to the office of the Examiner, which shall include the Examiner and
his professionals. Therefore, references to any meetings, communications, contacts and actions taking
place between the Examiner and a third party should not be construed as indicating that Neal Batson was
present personally for such meetings, communications, contacts or actions.

=== PAGE 6 ===
The Second Interim Report focused on substantially all of Enron’s material SPE
transactions identified to date. The Examiner provided his views on the role of the SPEs
in the collapse of Enron, including a discussion of how Enron used the SPEs in
conjunction with six accounting techniques to impact dramatically its financial
statements. The Examiner concluded that Enron manipulated its financial statements in
violation of GAAP and failed to make appropriate disclosures of its SPE transactions to
the public under applicable disclosure standards. Furthermore, the Second Interim
Report sets forth the Examiner’s conclusions that many of these transactions were, to
varying degrees, susceptible of “true sale” or substantive consolidation challenges which,
if successful, would result in assets having an estimated aggregate value between $1.7
billion and $2.1 billion being restored to the Debtors’ estates. Finally, the Examiner
identified potential avoidable transfers in the face amount of approximately $2.9 billion

that may be recovered by the Debtors’ estates.°

5 As noted in the Prior Reports, the ability of the Debtors to realize on certain of these avoidance actions is
subject to: (i) affirmative defenses of any transferee; (ii) valuation evidence (particularly in the case of
constructively fraudulent transfers); and (iii) collectability. As to valuation, both the Debtors and the
Creditors’ Committee have engaged investment bankers or other valuation experts. In order to avoid
duplication of effort, and because the Examiner does not have authority to prosecute actions on behalf of
the Debtors’ estates, the Examiner has not sought to retain such an expert. To the extent an action is
pursued by the Debtors or the Creditors’ Committee, investment bankers retained by such party may
provide valuation advice.

As set forth in the Prior Reports, the Examiner received assurances from the professionals for the Debtors
and the Creditors’ Committee to the effect that the Debtors, in coordination with the Creditors’ Committee,
would undertake to complete an insolvency analysis with respect to the Debtors. Accordingly, for the
purposes of the Examiner’s analysis of potential avoidance actions as well as for other purposes, the
Examiner has assumed insolvency of the Debtors under Section 101(32) of the Bankruptcy Code at the
time of any subject transfer. The professionals for the Debtors recently have advised the Examiner that the
Debtors’ professionals have concluded that Enron and certain of its Debtor affiliates were insolvent as of
December 31, 1999, under the tests articulated under the Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act and/or the
Uniform Fraudulent Conveyance Act, as those acts may be applicable. Accordingly, and as discussed in
the Prior Reports, there may be additional voidable transfer claims that may inure to the benefit of the
Debtors’ estates by virtue of the application of Section 544(a) of the Bankruptcy Code and the use of state
law fraudulent transfer theories to challenge transfers made, or obligations incurred, more than one year
prior to the Petition Date. The Examiner has been advised that the Debtors and the Creditors’ Committee
are investigating these claims. The Examiner also has been advised that the Debtors are investigating

=== PAGE 7 ===
The primary focus of the Third Interim Report was on certain persons and entities
that, under applicable legal standards, may have responsibility for the Debtors’ misuse of
its SPE structures. The Examiner concluded that there was sufficient evidence from
which a fact-finder could conclude that certain senior officers of Enron, including
Andrew Fastow (“Fastow”), Rick Causey (“Causey”), Ben Glisan (“Glisan”) and Jeff
McMahon (“McMahon”), breached their fiduciary duties under applicable law by causing
the Debtors to enter into SPE transactions that were designed to manipulate the Debtors’
financial statements and that resulted in the dissemination of financial information known
by these officers to be materially misleading. In addition, the Examiner concluded that
there was sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude that certain
financial institutions involved in Enron’s SPE transactions: (i) aided and abetted these
officers in breaching their fiduciary duties; and (ii) engaged in inequitable conduct such
that a court could determine that the claims of such financial institutions, totaling in
excess of $5 billion,® should be equitably subordinated to the claims of other creditors.

This would be in addition to any affirmative recovery that may be available to the

possible avoidance actions arising out of Enron’s equity forward transactions (as described in foonote 22 of
the Third Interim Report).

§ This amount could be significantly greater. As discussed in Appendix B (Legal Standards) to the Third
Interim Report, published case law is unclear as to what happens if the “tainted” claim of a financial
institution is purchased by another entity. That is, if a financial institution engaged in inequitable conduct
such that equitable subordination was warranted, and if that financial institution then sold ail or a portion of
its claim (or syndicated a portion of the loan to other financial institutions after the closing of the
transaction), would the claims of these purchasing financial institutions be subject to equitable
subordination on the basis of the transferor’s conduct? If the answer to that question is “yes,” then an
analysis of what claims, if any, were sold (or syndicated post-closing) by the financial institution that
engaged in misconduct should be undertaken. The Examiner did not undertake this analysis given the
expense involved and the uncertainty of the case law.

This amount does, however, include the claims of certain entities (primarily trusts) that filed proofs of
claim relating to or based on certain transactions in which a financial institution is the beneficial holder of
the debt.

=== PAGE 8 ===
Debtors against these financial institutions for aiding and abetting the officers’ breach of
fiduciary duty, assuming that the Debtors have the requisite standing to pursue such a
claim.’

The Examiner also considered whether Section 548(a)(1)(A) of the Bankruptcy
Code, which allows the avoidance of obligations and transfers made with the intent to
hinder, delay or defraud creditors, could be applied to the Debtors’ SPE transactions. If
such a theory is applicable, and if a fact-finder determined that the Debtors entered into
an SPE transaction with actual intent to hinder, delay or defraud its creditors, then the
obligations incurred in that SPE transaction would be unenforceable. Either as a result of
such a finding or if the fact-finder determined that the transfers made in connection with
such SPE transactions were made with intent to hinder, delay or defraud, such transfers
could be recovered by the Debtors’ estates. Any transferee that entered into such an ,
obligation or received such payments in good faith, however, would have a defense to

this claim to the extent value was given to the Debtors.®

7 On September 24, 2003, Enron and Enron North America Corp. (f/k/a Enron Capital & Trade Resources
Corp.) (“ENA”) filed the Debtors’ Complaint for the Avoidance and Return of Preferential Payments and
Fraudulent Transfers, Equitable Subordination, and Damages, Together With Objections and
Counterclaims to Creditor Defendants’ Claims with the Court against certain of these financial institutions
and their affiliates. Enron Corp. v. Citigroup Inc., No. 03-09266 (AJG) (Bankr. S.D.N.Y. filed Sept. 24,
2003). In this complaint, the Debtors seek, among other things, to: (i) equitably subordinate the financial
institutions’ claims; (ii) recover in excess of $3 billion from these financial institutions as alleged avoidable
transfers or obligations; and (iii) recover unstated damages resulting from alleged aiding and abetting on
the part of these financial institutions.

8 While the Examiner has not made a case-by-case analysis pursuant to this theory, there is sufficient
evidence for a fact-finder to conclude that, with respect to Enron’s overall use of SPEs, Enron entered into
these transactions with the intent to hinder, delay or defraud its creditors. The Examiner also notes that the
facts applicable to the potential claims of aiding and abetting a breach of fiduciary duty, or the potential
equitable subordination of certain financial institutions’ claims, are facts that would be relevant to the good
faith defense.

=== PAGE 9 ===
Finally, the Examiner identified additional potential avoidable transfers in the
face amount of approximately $438 million that, to varying degrees, may be recovered by
the Debtors’ estates.”

(on Summary of Conclusions

Enron’s officers, directors, accountants, attorneys and financial institutions had
different roles and duties in the SPE transactions. As discussed in the Third Interim
Report and in this Report, certain of these persons and entities may be liable to Enron or
others for their roles in these transactions. Regardless of their respective legal liability,
these parties are included within a circle of responsibility for Enron’s financial demise.

In the Third Interim Report, the Examiner reported on the role and potential

liability of Enron’s officers and certain financial institutions. The primary focus of this

° The Examiner’s analysis, for the most part, has not addressed the inter-estate avoidance action issues that
may be implicated by the various SPE transactions discussed in the Reports. For example, in a number of
transactions, ENA was the financial counterparty to an SPE, such as Delta or Mahonia — the SPEs used in
certain of the Prepay Transactions. To the extent that ENA paid those obligations, and its obligations were
guaranteed by Enron, ENA may be able to assert a preference claim against both the transferee (Delta or
Mahonia) or against Enron under Sections 547 and 550 of the Bankruptcy Code. There also may be
fraudulent transfer or obligation actions available to some estates against other estates by virtue of the SPE
transactions. For example, as noted by the Examiner in the Third Interim Report, where ENA made certain
payments in respect of the Mahonia transactions on behalf of its affiliate, ENG, the bankruptcy estate of
ENA may be able to assert a fraudulent transfer claim with respect to those transfers to the extent that the
subsidiary was insolvent at that time. See Third Interim Report, Annex 1 to Appendix J (Avoidance
Actions), at 22 n.56. In addition, because Enron guaranteed many of the obligations of ENA under
commodity swaps, total return swaps and similar derivative instruments in connection with the SPEs, if
both Enron and ENA were insolvent at the time of the execution of the guaranty, the Enron estate may be
able to assert that it did not receive reasonably equivalent value as a result of the incurrence of the
obligation under the guaranty. The success of this type of avoidance claim would require, among other
things, a finding of insolvency on the part of Enron and the applicable subsidiary as well as a finding that
the value of the bundle of rights received by Enron in comnection with the transaction was less than
reasonably equivalent value for the obligations incurred. That bundle of rights could include, among other
things, cash received by Enron by virtue of Enron’s cash management system (although upon Enron’s
receipt of such funds, an intercompany debt to the subsidiary was created) as well as a contingent claim
against the subsidiary for indemnification, contribution or subrogation in the event Enron was required to
honor the guaranty, even if that claim was subject to a standstill provision.

=== PAGE 10 ===
Report is on additional persons and entities that may have liability under applicable legal
standards for the Debtors’ misuse of its SPE structures.!°
Specifically, in this Report the Examiner concludes that:
Andersen

e There is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude
that Andersen: (i) committed professional negligence in the rendering
of accounting services to Enron; and (ii) aided and abetted certain
Enron officers in breaching their fiduciary duties to Enron by causing
Enron to enter into SPE transactions that were designed to manipulate
the Debtors’ financial statements and that resulted in the dissemination
of financial information known by these officers to be materially
misleading. Because Enron’s officers participated in the wrongful
conduct, however, Andersen may assert that the actions by the Enron
officers should be imputed to Enron and consequently, that claims by
Enron should be barred or reduced under comparative fault rules."’

In-house Attorneys

e There is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude
that certain Enron in-house attorneys committed legal malpractice by:
(i) failing to advise Enron adequately regarding the disclosure of its
SPE transactions, including the related party transactions; (ii) failing to

© The scope of the Examiner’s investigation is limited by the terms of the April 8" Order. Generally, the
Reports do not address any potential causes of action that may arise as a result of any transactions or
arrangements that do not involve the Debtors’ use of SPEs or other matters specifically identified in the
April 8" Order. For example, many of the financial institutions discussed in the Reports were involved in
transactions and arrangements with Enron that are not related to subjects listed in the April 8" Order and, as
a consequence, the Examiner generally expresses no opinion as to whether there are potential causes of
action that may arise as a result of such other transactions or arrangements.

In the Prior Reports, the Examiner analyzed and reported on certain legal, structural and accounting issues
that arose from Enron’s SPE transactions. In the course of that analysis, the Examiner identified a number
of third parties whose relationships with Enron appeared to warrant further investigation given the scope of
the April 8" Order. Generally, these parties had the most significant involvement in Enron’s SPE
transactions and the most substantial claims against the Debtors’ estates. Furthermore, the Examiner
analyzed and discussed various causes of action that may be available to the Debtors in each of the Reports.
Neither the identified third parties nor causes of action are necessarily exhaustive. In many cases, there
may be alternative theories or claims that could be available to the Debtors against the parties identified in
the Reports or others, which the Debtors may or may not elect to pursue.

1! As used in this report, “comparative fault rules” include Texas’ “Proportionate Responsibility” statute,
Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code Ann. §§ 33.001-002, and the equitable principle of in pari delicto. The legal
standards applicable to Andersen, including comparable fault rules, are discussed in detail in Annex 2 to
Appendix B (Role of Andersen). It is possible that choice of law determinations could require
consideration of similar doctrines that impact Enron’s standing to bring such claims.

=== PAGE 11 ===
advise adequately Enron’s Board of Directors (the “Board” or the
“Enron Board”) and certain of its committees with respect to legal and
corporate governance issues raised by certain related party
transactions; and (iii) failing to advise the Enron Board of material
facts surrounding Enron’s use of SPEs.'? There is also sufficient
evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude that certain in-house
attorneys breached their fiduciary duties by assisting certain officers
who breached their fiduciary duties to Enron by causing the Debtors to
enter into SPE transactions that were designed to manipulate the
Debtors’ financial statements and that resulted in the dissemination of
financial information known to be materially misleading. Because
Enron’s officers participated in the wrongful conduct, however, these
attorneys may assert that the actions by the Enron officers should be
imputed to Enron and consequently, that claims by Enron should be
barred or reduced under comparative fault rules.

Outside Attorneys

e There is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude
that certain of Enron’s outside attorneys:'? (i) committed legal
malpractice in connection with their legal services provided to Enron
with respect to the SPE transactions; or (ii) aided and abetted certain
Enron officers in breaching their fiduciary duties.'* Because Enron’s
officers participated in the wrongful conduct, however, these attorneys
may assert that the actions by the Enron officers should be imputed to
Enron and consequently, that claims by Enron should be barred or
reduced under comparative fault rules.

?2 Ag set forth more fully in this Report (including its Appendices), the types of claims, weight of evidence,
availability of defenses and other mitigating factors differ among the in-house attorneys.

3 Enron’s outside law firms discussed in this Report are: (i) Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. (“Vinson & Elkins”);
and (ii) Andrews & Kurth L.L.P. (“Andrews & Kurth”). As set forth more fully in this Report (including
its Appendices), the types of claims, weight of evidence, availability of defenses and other mitigating
factors differ among the outside attorneys.

4 As set forth in Annex 1 to Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Attorneys), there is a lack of consensus among
the courts as to whether a cause of action by a corporate client against its attorney based upon aiding and
abetting a fiduciary duty breach is a separate cause of action or is subsumed within a malpractice cause of
action. The Examiner expresses no view on this issue. For purposes of this Report, the Examiner’s
analysis of the attorneys’ conduct includes consideration of the elements of an aiding and abetting cause of
action, regardless of which label may ultimately attach to any potential cause of action.

=== PAGE 12 ===
Lay and Skilling'*

e There is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude
that Kenneth Lay (“Lay”), Enron’s Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer, and Jeffrey Skilling (“Skilling”), Enron’s President and Chief
Operating Officer, in their capacities as officers, breached their
fiduciary duties under applicable law by failing to provide adequate
oversight of Enron’s use of SPEs because they failed to respond
appropriately to the existence of “red flags” indicating that certain
senior officers were misusing SPE transactions to disseminate
materially misleading financial information. If a fact-finder so
concludes, the director exculpation provision in Enron’s articles of
incorporation would not protect Lay and Skilling from such a claim
because this failure occurred in their capacity as officers.'®

e There is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude
that Lay and Skilling, in their capacities as members of the Enron
Board, breached their fiduciary duty of good faith under applicable
law in approving the LJM1/Rhythms non-economic hedging
transaction (the “LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction”) and certain
LJM2/Raptors non-economic hedging transactions (the
“LJM2/Raptors Hedging Transactions”) because there is evidence that
they were in possession of facts necessary to conclude that these

15 Lay appeared for a one-day interview with the Examiner that was not conducted under oath, and he has
provided no sworn testimony to any party in connection with any examination of Enron conducted after the
Petition Date. Skilling invoked his Fifth Amendment privilege and did not provide the Examiner with
either testimony or an interview. Skilling, however, provided sworm testimony to the SEC and a
subcommittee of the House of Representatives Energy and Commerce Committee (the “HEC”). Both Lay
and Skilling apparently were infrequent users of email and produced little relevant written material in
response to the Examiner’s subpoenas. As a result, the evidence available to the Examiner with respect to
Lay and Skilling consisted primarily of: (i) Lay’s one-day interview by the Examiner; (ii) Skilling’s sworn
testimony to the SEC and the HEC; (iii) Lay’s and Skilling’s interviews with the Powers Committee; (iv)
interviews with and testimony of others, including members of Enron’s Board and certain Enron officers;
and (v) documentary evidence produced by Enron and others.

16 Enron’s articles of incorporation contain an exculpation provision that provides that a director of Enron
shall not be personally liable to Enron or its shareholders for monetary damages for conduct as a director,
except for liability: (i) for any breach of the director’s duty of loyalty to Enron or its shareholders; (ii) for
acts or omissions not in good faith or which involve intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of law;
Gii) for any unlawful distribution under Or. Rev. Stat. § 60.367; or (iv) for any transaction from which the
director derived an improper personal benefit. See Article VII, Section A, Articles of Incorporation of
Enron Corp. [AB0785 03888-AB0785 04147]. As set forth more fully in this Report (including its
Appendices), the weight of evidence, availability of defenses and other mitigating factors differ between
Lay and Skilling.

=== PAGE 13 ===
transactions lacked any rational business purpose.” If a fact-finder so
concludes, the director exculpation provision in Enron’s articles of
incorporation would not protect Lay and Skilling from such a claim
because it involves acts or omissions not in good faith.

e There is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude
that Skilling, in his capacity as an officer, breached his fiduciary duties
under applicable law by failing adequately to inquire into red flags
with respect to the transactions between LJM1 and Enron and LIM2
and Enron, including red flags relating to the compensation that
Fastow received in connection with LJM1 and LJM2. Because this
failure occurred in Skilling’s capacity as an officer, the director
exculpation provision in Enron’s articles of incorporation would not
apply to such a claim.

e There is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude
that: (i) Lay’s repayment to Enron of more than $94 million of loans
with Enron stock was not duly authorized or approved by the Enron
Board under applicable corporate law; and (ii) the repayment is
voidable by Enron, which would result in Lay being obligated to repay
in excess of $94 million to Enron and Enron returning the stock to
Lay.

e There is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude
that: (i) Skilling’s repayment to Enron of more than $2 million of
loans with Enron stock was not duly authorized or approved by the
Enron Board under applicable corporate law; and (ii) the repayment is
voidable by Enron, which would result in Skilling being obligated to
repay in excess of $2 million to Enron and Enron returning the stock to
Skilling.

7 As discussed below, the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and the LJM2/Raptors Hedging
Transactions were non-economic hedges. That is, they were accounting hedges (with the sole purpose of
providing financial statement benefits) and did not provide economic protection to Enron because the assets
used to support the hedge were Enron’s own assets.

'8 The Examiner concluded in the Second Interim Report that Enron has an alternative claim against Lay
for $74.025 million of this amount under Section 548(a)(1)(B) of the Bankruptcy Code. See Second
Interim Report, Appendix P (Avoidance Actions). The Creditors’ Committee is currently prosecuting a suit
against Lay on account of these transfers. Official Comm. of Unsecured Creditors of Enron Corp. v. Lay,
No. 03-02075-AJG (Bankr. S.D.N.Y. filed Jan. 31, 2003).

-10-

=== PAGE 14 ===
Outside Directors”

e Although the oversight of the SPE transactions by the Enron Board,
the Audit and Compliance Committee of the Enron Board (the “Audit
Committee”) and the Finance Committee of the Enron Board (the
“Finance Committee”) may be criticized, the Examiner has not
discovered sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could
conclude that members of the Enron Board who served during the
period 1997 to the Petition Date, other than Lay and Skilling (the
“Outside Directors”) and these committees either (i) abdicated or
displayed sustained inattention to their monitoring responsibilities or
(ii) consciously disregarded red flags indicating Enron officers were
misusing the SPE transactions to disseminate materially misleading
financial information. In the absence of this type of conduct, because
of the director exculpation provision in Enron’s articles of
incorporation, the Outside Directors would not have liability to Enron
arising out of their duty of oversight.

e There is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude
that certain of the Outside Directors breached their fiduciary duty of
good faith under applicable law in approving the LJM1/Rhythms
Hedging Transaction and certain of the LJM2/Raptors Hedging
Transactions because there is evidence that they were in possession of
facts necessary to conclude that these transactions lacked any rational
business purpose. If a fact-finder so concludes, the director
exculpation provision in Enron’s articles of incorporation would not

1? Under certain circumstances, the courts have held that the fiduciary duties of a board to the corporation
and to its shareholders may expand to include fiduciary duties to creditors. The more recent decisions in
the area find that upon the corporation’s insolvency (or when the corporation is within the “zone of
insolvency”), the board of directors must manage the corporation in a manner consistent with the interests
of creditors (and, potentially, shareholders as well). Certain courts have recognized’ the standing of
creditors (and, in certain cases, bankruptcy trustees as the representative of creditors) to initiate litigation
against directors to recover damages for the breach of the fiduciary duty to creditors. These cases typically
involve situations where the directors have breached their duty of loyalty (such as preferring themselves).
Other courts have held that claims of this sort are individual or personal creditor claims, which a trustee or
debtor in possession does not have standing to assert. Ultimately, the law of the state of incorporation
should govern these types of claims and the law in Oregon is not fully developed on this particular set of
issues. Accordingly, individual creditors and/or the Debtors (in their capacity as debtors in possession and
representatives of the estates) may be able to state a claim against the Enron Board in connection with
certain decisions made by the Enron Board while Enron was insolvent. One aspect of that litigation may be
the ability of the plaintiff to take the position that the director exculpation provision in Enron’s articles of
incorporation does not apply to the plaintiff (suing on behalf of the creditors) and, potentially, that the so-
called business judgment rule does not apply. The Examiner has analyzed the conduct of the Enron Board
under the assumption that the director exculpation provision contained in Enron’s articles of incorporation
and the business judgment rule would apply. If, and to the extent, litigation were brought by a plaintiff
with standing (be that the debtor in possession, a litigation trustee appointed under the terms of the
Debtors’ Joint Plan or an individual creditor), the conduct of the Enron Board may be subject to review
without consideration of these doctrines.

-11-

=== PAGE 15 ===
protect the Outside Directors from such a claim because it involves
acts or omissions not in good faith.”

Additional Financial Institutions”!

e There is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude
that certain financial institutions not previously discussed in the Prior
Reports (the “Financial Institutions”) that were involved in Enron’s
SPE transactions” aided and abetted certain Enron officers who
breached their fiduciary duty by causing Enron to enter into SPE
transactions that were designed to manipulate the Debtors’ financial
statements and that resulted in the dissemination of financial
information known by these officers to be materially misleading.
However, because Enron’s officers participated in’ the wrongful
conduct, the Financial Institutions may assert the actions by the Enron
officers should be imputed to Enron and consequently, either that
Enron lacks standing to assert any such claim or that the doctrine of in
pari delicto is a defense to defeat a claim by Enron.’

e There is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude
that: (i) certain of the Financial Institutions that were involved in the
LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction had actual knowledge of the
wrongful conduct of Fastow in this transaction, which resulted in
Fastow breaching his fiduciary duty of loyalty; (ii) these Financial
Institutions gave substantial assistance to Fastow by participating in
transactions designed to circumvent restrictions imposed by the Enron
Board (as reflected in LJMI1’s partnership agreement) in connection
with the LIM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction; and (iii) injury to the
Debtors was the direct or reasonably foreseeable result of such

20 As set forth more fully in this Report (including its Appendices), the weight of evidence, availability of
defenses and other mitigating factors differ among the Outside Directors. The Examiner has not assessed
the potential liability of individual Outside Directors.

21 As set forth more fully in this Report (including its Appendices), the weight of evidence, availability of
defenses and other mitigating factors differ among the Financial Institutions.

» The financial institutions discussed in this Report (collectively, the “Financial Institutions”) are: (i) The
Royal Bank of Scotland plc and its affiliates and predecessors (collectively, “RBS”); (ii) Credit Suisse First
Boston, Inc. and its affiliates and predecessors (collectively, “CSFB”); and (iii) Toronto Dominion Bank
and its affiliates and predecessors (collectively, “Toronto Dominion”). The order of presentation of each
Financial Institution is based upon the apparent size of the Financial Institution’s claims in the Bankruptcy
Case (as measured by the proofs of claim filed by the Financial Institution or on its behalf), from the largest
to the smallest claims.

3 See Third Interim Report, Appendix B (Legal Standards) for a discussion of principles of standing and
in pari delicto under New York law. If Texas law governs, comparative fault rules, discussed above, would

apply.

-12-

=== PAGE 16 ===
conduct. As a result, a fact-finder could conclude that these Financial
Institutions aided and abetted Fastow in breaching his fiduciary duties.

e There is sufficient evidence of inequitable conduct by the Financial
Institutions in connection with the SPE transactions for a court to
determine that the claims of such Financial Institutions, totaling in
excess of $1 billion,” may be equitably subordinated to the claims of
other creditors.”°

Finally, in Section IX of this Report, the Examiner addresses the question that
many people have asked: how could this have happened?

D. Standard Adopted by the Examiner

The Examiner is not the ultimate decision maker on these matters. The Examiner
has analyzed the evidence he has gathered to date against the legal standards applicable to
the issues identified in this Report. The Examiner has considered direct evidence and the
reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom. If there are sufficient facts to support
a claim, even though there is evidence to the contrary, then a court would submit that
claim to a fact-finder. Where the Examiner reaches the conclusion that there is sufficient
evidence for a fact-finder to conclude that a claim exists, the Examiner has determined

that in a legal proceeding regarding such matter, the proposition would be submitted to

** This amount could be significantly greater. See supra n.6.

® In addition, if Section 548(a)(1)(A) of the Bankruptcy Code, which allows the avoidance of obligations
incurred and transfers made with the intent to hinder, delay or defraud creditors, can be applied to the SPE
transactions to which these Financial Institutions were parties, and a fact-finder determined that Enron
entered into these SPE transactions with actual intent to hinder, delay or defraud its creditors, obligations
incurred in these SPE transactions would be unenforceable. Either as a result of such a finding or if the
fact-finder determined that the transfers made in connection with such SPE transactions were made with
intent to hinder, delay or defraud, such transfers made to the Financial Institutions could be recovered by
the Debtors’ estates. The Financial Institutions that entered into the transaction giving rise to such an
obligation or received such payments in good faith, however, would have a defense to this claim to the
extent value was given to the Debtors. See Third Interim Report, Appendix B (Legal Standards), at 114-33.

-13-

=== PAGE 17 ===
the fact-finder for decision.*° In most cases, the fact-finder would be a jury, although in
equitable subordination actions the bankruptcy court serves as the fact-finder. The
decision of the fact-finder would be made after evaluating the documentary evidence, the
testimony and credibility of witnesses and the reasonable inferences that may be drawn
from this evidence.

E. How to Read This Report

The remaining Sections of this Report provide an overview of the Examiner’s
conclusions with respect to the matters identified above. More detailed analyses and
supporting evidence are set forth in the Appendices to this Report. Therefore, the reader
should review the applicable Appendices (and any Annex attached thereto) for a more
complete understanding of the issues addressed in the summaries below.

The first appendix to this Report — Appendix A (Certain Defined Terms) — is

designed to provide the reader with certain definitions used throughout this Report.

26 Tn connection with any claims against a professional that are based on malpractice, the plaintiff would
generally be required to produce a qualified expert to give his or her competent opinion as to, among other
things, whether the defendant satisfied the applicable standard of care. Where the Examiner reaches the
conclusion that there is sufficient evidence for a fact-finder to conclude that these types of negligence
claims exist, the Examiner has determined that the plaintiff would be able to produce a qualified expert to
express such an opinion. The Examiner’s conclusion does not mean that the defendant would be unable to
produce a qualified expert who would give a competent opinion contrary to that expressed by the plaintiffs
expert. As noted in Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Attorneys), Vinson & Elkins has offered certain opinions
of law school professors and practitioners on several matters as to which the Examiner took testimony.

-14-

=== PAGE 18 ===
IL. BACKGROUND

A. Events of Fall 2001

Until the fall of 2001, Enron was one of the largest companies in the world and
was considered to be one of the most innovative and successful.”” In the fall of 2001,
however, Enron made a series of financial disclosures and restatements of its financial
statements that triggered a chain of events culminating in its bankruptcy filing.

1,

In an earnings release issued on October 16, 200 Lay announced that Enron

was taking “after-tax non-recurring charges” of $1.01 billion in the third quarter.” On
that same day, although not disclosed as part of its earnings release, Enron disclosed that
it would record a $1.2 billion reduction in shareholders’ equity as of the end of the third

30

quarter.” On November 8, 2001, Enron announced its intention to restate its financial

77 According to the 2001 Fortune 500 Rankings, Fortune magazine ranked Enron as the seventh largest
corporation in the world, based upon revenues. The 500 Largest U.S. Corporations, Fortune, Apr. 16,
2001, at F-1. On February 19, 2001, Fortune magazine named Enron as the Most Innovative Company in
America for the fifth consecutive year. America’s Most Admired Companies, Fortune, Feb. 19, 2001, at
104.

8 Enron Press Release, “Enron Reports Recurring Third Quarter Earnings of $0.43 Per Diluted Share;
Reports Non-Recurring Charges of $1.01 Billion After-Tax; Reaffirms Recurring Earnings Estimates of
$1.80 for 2001 and $2.15 for 2002; And Expands Financial Reporting,” Oct. 16, 2001, at ELIB00001783-
00003 [ELIB00001783-00001-ELIB00001783-00005]. Enron’s third quarter ended September 30th.

» Although there were several components to the charge, one component related to Enron’s “early
termination during the third quarter of certain structured finance arrangements with a previously disclosed
entity.” The “previously disclosed entity” was LIM2 Co-Investment, L.P. (“LJM2”), a private investment
limited partnership founded in December 1999. LJM2 was run by Fastow and Michael J. Kopper
(“Kopper”), an Enron employee, and had as its limited partners a significant number of institutional and
individual investors. Enron Form 10-Q filed with the SEC for the Quarter ended Sept. 30, 2001 (the “10-Q
for 3Q/2001”), at 18-19, Note 4 to Consolidated Financial Statements in connection with related party
transactions. The charge related to Enron’s termination of four SPEs known as Raptor I, II, III and IV (the
“Raptor SPEs”) pursuant to which Enron had entered into the LJM2/Raptors Hedging Transactions. As a
result of this termination, Enron recognized a $544 million after-tax charge to net income for the third
quarter 2001. The pre-tax charge was $710 million. Jd.

° October 16, 2001, 9:00 a.m. C.T., Enron Corp. Conference Call regarding Third Quarter 2001 Earnings
Release, Moderator: Mark Koenig (the “Earnings Release”), at AB0252 04610 [AB0252 04603-AB0252
04629].

-15-

=== PAGE 19 ===
statements for 1997 through 2000, and the first and second quarters of 2001, to reduce
previously reported net income by an aggregate of $586 million?!

On November 19, 2001, Enron filed its third quarter Form 10-Q, including
interim financial statements that gave effect to the previously announced “non-recurring
charges” and restatement of prior financial statements.” In addition, in its third quarter
2001 balance sheet, Enron reported total debt under generally accepted accounting
principles (“GAAP”) of $12.978 billion. On the same day, senior Enron executives
informed certain of its bankers that, while the debt reflected on its third quarter 2001
balance sheet under GAAP was $12.978 billion, Enron’s “debt” (as described in the
presentation) was $38.094 billion.** Thus, as Enron noted, $25.116 billion of debt was
“off-balance sheet,” or in some cases, reflected on the balance sheet, but classified as
something other than debt. Approximately $14 billion of this $25.116 billion of

additional “debt” was incurred through structured finance transactions involving the use

3! Enron Form 8-K filed with the SEC on Nov. 8, 2001. This filing also contained additional information
surrounding the related party transactions. At the time of the announced restatement, the third quarter 2001
financial statements had not been filed, but a loss of $618 million had been announced in the Earnings
Release. On October 31, 2001, Enron announced that its Board of Directors had formed a Special
Investigative Committee, headed by William Powers, Jr., Dean of the University of Texas Law School (the
“Powers Committee”), to examine and recommend actions with respect to transactions between Enron and
entities connected with related parties. Jd. LJM2 and another partnership, LIM Cayman, L.P. (“LJM1”), as
well as other investment partnerships, were the principal focus of the Report of Investigation by the Special
Investigative Committee of the Board of Directors of Enron Corp., released February 1, 2002 (the “Powers
Report”).

32 10-Q for 3Q/2001. These financial statements gave effect to the previously announced “non-recurring
charges” and restatement of prior financial statements. Due to the pending investigation by the Powers
Committee and the previously announced restatement, Andersen was unable to finalize its review of these
quarterly statements as required by SEC Rule 10-01(d) of Regulation S-X.

33 Id. The debt consisted of $6.434 billion of short-term debt and $6.544 billion of long-term debt.

34 Enron Corp. PowerPoint Bank Presentation, Waldorf Astoria, New York, N.Y., Nov. 19, 2001 (the
“Bank Presentation”), at 48-62 [AB000321534-AB000321605].

-16-

=== PAGE 20 ===
of SPEs. Enron’s presentation to the banks divided the additional debt into eight

categories, shown in the following table:

Category of Additional “Debt” Amount at 9/30/01 in billions
FAS 140 Transactions $2.087
Minority Interest Financings $1.690
Commodity Transactions with Financial Institutions $4.822
Share Trusts $3.352
Equity Forward Contracts $.304
Structured Assets $1.532
Unconsolidated Affiliates $10.733
Leases $.596
Total $25.116

B. The Bankruptcy Filings and Subsequent Events

Less than one month after meeting with its bankers, Enron and certain of its
affiliates filed for bankruptcy. In the months immediately following Enron’s disclosures,
allegations surfaced of securities fraud, accounting irregularities, energy market price
manipulation, money laundering, breach of fiduciary duties, misleading financial
information, ERISA violations, insider trading, excessive compensation and wrongdoing

by certain of Enron’s bankers.*°

> Numerous Congressional Committees have investigated aspects of Enron’s business activities or
practices. In addition, there have been several class action lawsuits filed on behalf of shareholders and
employees, which are still pending, naming the Debtors, certain of their directors, Andersen, certain other
professionals, and others as defendants. These include Newby v. Enron Corp., No. 01-CV-3624 (S.D. Tex.
filed Oct. 22, 2001), a lawsuit alleging, among other things, violations of securities laws (the “Newby Class
Action”), Other class actions include Severed Enron Employees Coalition v. Northern Trust Co., No. 02-
CV-267 (S.D. Tex. filed Jan. 24, 2002) and Tittle v. Enron Corp., No. 01-CV-3913 (S.D. Tex. filed Nov.
13, 2001), lawsuits alleging, among other things, breach of fiduciary duty under ERISA. (Shortly after it
was filed, the Severed Enron Employees Coalition case was administratively closed and consolidated with
the Tittle case.) Another lawsuit, Chao v. Enron Corp., No. 03-CV-2257 (S.D. Tex. filed June 26, 2003),
alleges that Enron, its directors and certain employees did not manage the assets of Enron’s pension plans
in accordance with the standards set forth in ERISA. The Examiner expresses no opinion as to the merits
of any of these lawsuits.

-17-

=== PAGE 21 ===
Ill. ROLES OF ENRON’S PROFESSIONALS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND
OUTSIDE DIRECTORS IN SPE TRANSACTIONS AND THEORIES OF
LIABILITY
A. Overview
In his Second Interim Report, the Examiner concluded that, through the pervasive

use of structured finance techniques involving SPEs and aggressive accounting practices,
Enron so engineered its reported financial position and results of operations that its
financial statements bore little resemblance to its actual financial condition and
performance. As an example, the Examiner used 2000, the last year for which Enron
issued audited financial statements, to illustrate the impact of these techniques.°° That
year, Enron’s use of six accounting techniques produced 96% of its reported net income
and 105% of its reported funds flow from operating activities and enabled it to report
$10.2 billion of debt rather than $22.1 billion of debt. The six accounting techniques are
summarized as follows:

* FAS 140 Transactions.’ Enron’s FAS 140 Transactions were
essentially bridge financings of illiquid assets. Although Enron treated
these transactions as sales to SPEs for accounting purposes, Enron
assumed liability for repayment of the debt incurred and retained

substantially all of the economic benefits and risks of ownership of the
asset.

3° The financial impact of Enron’s use of its six accounting techniques to produce and disseminate
materially misleading financial information is not limited to its 2000 annual financial statements. The
effect of these techniques on the 2000 annual financial statements is presented only as an illustration. The
Examiner has concluded that use of these techniques caused the 1999 annual financial statements and
earlier financial statements to be misleading as well.

37 See Second Interim Report, at 107-12; Second Interim Report, Appendix M (FAS 140 Transactions).

38 These transactions are structured finance transactions that were intended to comply with either
Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishments of Liabilities, Statement
of Financial Accounting Standards No. 125 (Financial Accounting Standards Bd. 1996) (“FAS 125”), or its
successor, Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishments of Liabilities,
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 140 (Financial Accounting Standards Bd. 2000) (“FAS
140”). FAS 125 was the accounting standard that governed securitizations of financial assets from January
1, 1997, until it was replaced by FAS 140, which became effective with respect to transactions closed on or
after April 1, 2001. Although this Report discusses some transactions that were governed by FAS 125 and

-18-

=== PAGE 22 ===
e ax Transactions.*? Enron’s Tax Transactions were, for the most part,
artificial transactions lacking a bona fide business purpose other than
the creation of accounting income for Enron. The Tax Transactions
were designed to allow Enron to record the potential benefit of
speculative future tax deductions as current income on its financial
statements and, in some cases, as pre-tax income rather than as after-
tax income resulting from reduced tax expense in the tax provision of
Enron’s income statement.

¢ Non-Economic Hedges.” Through these transactions, which include
the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and the LJM2/Raptors
Hedging Transactions, Enron “hedged” the decrease in value of certain
of its investments that it had marked-to-market by entering into
derivative contracts with counterparties that were related to Enron.
These transactions were accounting hedges and did not provide
economic protection to Enron because the assets used to support the
hedge were Enron’s own assets."!

¢ Share Trust Transactions.” Enron’s Share Trust Transactions were
off-balance sheet financing structures through which an issuing entity
would issue notes and equity certificates in the institutional private
placement market. The proceeds would be used, in part, to fund the
purchase or refinancing of assets owned by Enron or its affiliates.

others that were governed by FAS 140, this Report refers to this type of transaction and other similar
transactions generally as a “FAS 140 Transaction.”

3° See Second Interim Report, at 87-94; Second Interim Report, Appendix J (Tax Transactions).

© These transactions were part of a group of transactions among Enron and its related parties (collectively,
the “Related Party Transactions”) described in Appendix L (Related Party Transactions) of the Second
Interim Report.

‘| Tn explaining that the LJM2/Raptors Hedging Transactions did not transfer any of Enron’s economic
risk, the head of Enron’s research group, Wincenty Kaminski (“Kaminski”), gave the following example:
“So you have—you have a mortgage, and the mortgage company insists that you insure your house, but if
you go to a -- but if you go to your wife and buy insurance from her, there’s a chance that the mortgage
company will object to this insurance because there’s no effective risk transfer to a third party.” Sworn
Statement of Wincenty Kaminski, Managing Director, Enron Wholesale Services, to William C.
Humphreys, Jr.. A&B, May 9, 2003, at 184. Kaminski, a Ph.D. in economics, also testified that he
“thought [the LJM2/Raptors Hedging Transactions] were terrible, terrible economic hedges.” Id. at 183.
He testified that these transactions “were poorly structured and they created a huge reputational risk for the
company... .” Id.; see also Memorandum from Steven Rosen, Wilmer Cutler, to Enron Files, regarding
Interview of Wincenty Kaminski, Dec. 19, 2001, at 2 (describing Kaminski’s background) [AB000000462-
AB000000470].

® See Second Interim Report, at 67-78; Second Interim Report, Appendix G (Whitewing Transaction);
Second Interim Report, Appendix H (Marlin Transaction). This Report refers to these transactions as
“Share Trust Transactions,” or individually as “Whitewing” or “Marlin.”

-19-

=== PAGE 23 ===
Repayment of the notes and certificates was supported by Enron stock
and ultimately by Enron’s promise to pay.

¢ Minority Interest Transactions.™ Enron’s Minority Interest
Transactions allowed Enron to obtain funds while showing the
proceeds as a “minority interest” on the balance sheet between
liabilities and equity, rather than as debt.

e Prepay Transactions.’ In the Prepay Transactions, Enron obtained
financing through a combination of offsetting commodity trades and
swaps. Although the transactions were loans in economic substance,
Enron reported its obligations as price risk management liabilities
rather than debt. Moreover, the increase in the outstanding prepay
balance from one period to the next served to increase cash flow from
operating activities.

In the Third Interim Report, the Examiner concluded that there is sufficient
evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude that Fastow, Causey, Glisan and
McMahon, among others, breached their fiduciary duties to Enron by causing Enron to
enter into certain SPE transactions that were designed to manipulate the Debtors’

financial statements and that resulted in the dissemination of financial information known

to be materially misleading.” That is, they engaged in a course of conduct, through the

*® See Second Interim Report, at 79-86; Second Interim Report, Appendix I (Minority Interest
Transactions). This Report refers to these transactions as “Minority Interest Transactions.”

“ See Second Interim Report, at 58-66; Second Interim Report, Appendix E (Prepay Transactions). This
Report refers to these transactions as a “Prepay” or a “Prepay Transaction.” As discussed in the Second
Interim Report, Enron engaged in billions of dollars of Prepay Transactions.

4 Because Fastow, Causey, Glisan and McMahon exercised their Fifth Amendment rights, the Examiner’s
conclusions are based on a review of documentary evidence and the testimony of others. See the Third
Interim Report, Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Officers) for a full review of this evidence. The Examiner
subpoenaed or otherwise requested the opportunity to take the testimony of a number of witnesses who
responded by asserting the privilege against self-incrimination contained in the Fifth Amendment to the
United States Constitution (the “Self-Incrimination Clause”) (U.S. Const. amend. V). See Third Interim
Report, at 23 (identifying Enron employees that had asserted their privilege against self-incrimination).
Where a witness asserted the Self-Incrimination Clause in writing, the Examiner took no further steps to
compel any examination of that witness. At least one of those witnesses had either testified in other
proceedings, or had produced documents in this bankruptcy proceeding. The Examiner concluded that
either of those actions created, at best, only a small chance that the Self-Incrimination Clause had been
waived with respect to testimony compelled by the Examiner and, as a result, the Examiner did not pursue
this waiver argument. See United States v. Balsys, 524 U.S. 666, 672 (1998); United States v. Housand,
550 F.2d 818, 821 n.3 (2d Cir. 1977); United States v. Miranti, 253 F.2d 135 (2d Cir. 1958); United States

-20-

=== PAGE 24 ===
use of SPE transactions, that resulted in the false and misleading presentation of the
financial condition of Enron by overstating its cash flow from operating activities,
overstating its earnings and understating its obligations. In addition, the Examiner
concluded that there is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude that

. breaches of the fiduciary duty of loyalty occurred in connection with certain of the
Related Party Transactions, most notably the involvement of Fastow and other officers in
the LJM1 and LJM2 transactions.

As stated in the Third Interim Report, an officer of a corporation has fiduciary
duties of good faith, due care and loyalty. Whenever corporate fiduciaries communicate
publicly or directly with shareholders, they must do so honestly, candidly and completely
in all material respects. Knowing dissemination of false information about the financial
condition of the company is a breach of these fiduciary duties.

Although its SPE structures were complex, Enron’s objectives were simple:
(i) borrow money on what the financial institutions required to be essentially a recourse
basis without recording debt; and (ii) record the loan proceeds as cash flow from
operating activities.“© Enron’s financial reporting of the transactions discussed in the
Reports resulted in the materially misleading presentation of Enron’s financial condition
by failing to disclose the substance of such transactions, regardless of whether the

accounting was technically correct. Furthermore, in many of these transactions, the terms

v. Wilcox, 450 F.2d 1131, 1141-42 (Sth Cir. 1971); Marcello v. United States, 196 F.2d 437 (Sth Cir. 1952);
Poretto v. United States, 196 F.2d 392 (Sth Cir. 1952).

‘© The Tax Transactions were designed to allow Enron to produce reported income but did not generate
any cash flow. The Non-Economic Hedges in the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and the
LJM2/Raptors Hedging Transactions were designed to allow Enron to record income that would offset any
decline in the value of certain fair value assets, so that Enron could avoid recording a charge to earnings.
The Non-Economic Hedges did not generate any cash flow.

~21-

=== PAGE 25 ===
required by certain of the financial institutions violated GAAP rules and precluded the
desired accounting treatment. The evidence suggests that Enron officers nonetheless
achieved the desired accounting treatment by entering into undisclosed side agreements,
arrangements with no business purpose and “hardwired” transactions in an attempt to
circumvent GAAP.

B. Persons and Entities Involved in Enron’s Use of SPEs

Given the magnitude of Enron’s misuse of its SPEs, it is clear that Enron’s officers
could not have acted alone. Instead, these officers received assistance, in varying degrees
and through different means, from a number of third parties. Under the terms of the April
8" Order, the Examiner is authorized to investigate, among other things, persons and
entities involved in Enron’s use of SPEs.

Enron’s officers, directors, accountants, attorneys and financial institutions had
different roles and duties in the SPE transactions. Regardless of their respective legal
liability, these parties are included within a circle of responsibility for Enron’s financial
demise. In the Third Interim Report, the Examiner reported on potential liability for certain
officers and financial institutions. In this Report, the Examiner considers the specific roles
of other persons and entities that were involved in aspects of Enron’s development, use,
approval, oversight and disclosure of the SPEs. These persons and entities include: (i)
Andersen; (ii) Enron’s attorneys; (iii) Lay and Skilling; and (iv) the Outside Directors.

Specifically, with respect to each of these persons and entities, the Examiner considered:

47 As used in the Reports, a “hardwired transaction” is one in which the transaction documents are drafted
to achieve indirectly an economic result that would have violated applicable GAAP had it been provided
for directly.

-22-

=== PAGE 26 ===
e The role of the person or entity in Enron’s SPE transactions, including
whether the person or entity assisted Enron in its misuse of SPEs or
was responsible for the monitoring of the SPEs, or both.

e Whether the conduct of the person or entity could give rise to potential
liability under applicabie legal standards.

e Ifthe person or entity assisted Enron in the misuse of Enron’s SPEs or

failed to monitor adequately Enron’s use of SPEs, the factors that may
have caused (or contributed) to this failure.

Cc. Theories of Potential Liability and Defenses

Andersen

Although Andersen was Enron’s auditor, its professionals were certified public
accountants. The SEC has noted the CPA’s public duty and described the critical
importance of auditor independence in fulfilling that duty:

Independent auditors have an important public trust. Investors must be

able to rely on issuers’ financial statements. It is the auditor’s opinion that

furnishes investors with critical assurance that the financial statements

have been subjected to a rigorous examination by an objective, impartial,

and skilled professional, and that investors, therefore, can rely on them.”

Aside from its duty to the public, Andersen owed a direct duty to the Audit
Committee. Statement of Auditing Standards No. 61 (“SAS 61”) “requires the auditor to

ensure that the audit committee receives additional information regarding the scope and

results of the audit that may assist the audit committee in overseeing the financial

“8 Revision of the Commission’s Auditor Independence Requirements, Securities Act Release No. 33-7919
[2000-2001 Transfer Binder] Fed. Sec. L. Rep. (CCH) { 86,406 at 83,990. Additionally, the American
Institute of Certified Public Accountants (“AICPA”) has stated that “[i]ndependent auditors should not only
be independent in fact; they should avoid situations that may lead outsiders to doubt their independence.”
Independence, Statement on Auditing Standards No. 1 (American Institute of Certified Public Accountants
1972) (“SAS 1”), at § 3 (AU § 220.03). As late as August 2001, Andersen advised the Enron Audit
Committee that “AA believed independence was not only the cornerstone of its profession, but the only
sound basis to its continued success.” Minutes of Enron Audit Committee Meeting, Aug. 13, 2001 (the
“Audit Committee 08/13/01 Minutes”), at 2 [AB000203966- AB000203968].

-23-

=== PAGE 27 ===
reporting and disclosure process for which management is responsible.””? Under
SAS 61, the matters required to be communicated include:

The initial selection of and changes in significant accounting policies or
their application. The auditor should also determine that the audit
committee is informed about the methods used to account for significant
unusual transactions and the effect of significant accounting policies in
controversial or emerging areas for which there is a lack of authoritative
guidance or consensus. For example, significant accounting issues may
exist in areas such as revenue recognition, off-balance-sheet financing,
and accounting for equity investments.*°

In addition, SAS 90 (effective for Enron’s 2000 financial statements) required
‘Andersen to have “open and frank” discussions on the “quality and not just the

acceptability” of Enron’s use of accounting principles, and on “items that have a

significant impact on the representational faithfulness of the financial statements.”°!

In this Report, the role of Andersen in Enron’s SPEs is considered against two
legal theories:

e Accounting Malpractice — whether there is sufficient evidence for a
fact-finder to conclude that Andersen breached the standard of care
that an accountant owes to its client such that Andersen may be liable
for damages to Enron, assuming that the claim is not barred by the
conduct of Enron’s officers.

e Aiding and Abetting a Breach of Fiduciary Duty — whether there is
sufficient evidence for a fact-finder to conclude that Andersen aided
and abetted the wrongful conduct of Enron’s officers that constituted
breaches of fiduciary duty such that Andersen may be liable for

* Communication with Audit Committees, Statement on Auditing Standards No. 61 (American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants 1988) (“SAS 61”), at § 2 (AU § 380.02). Statements on Auditing Standards,
normally cited as “SAS (statement number),” were also codified, as issued, into the Codification of
Statements on Auditing Standards by the AICPA (cited as “AU (section number)”). Where a SAS is cited,
a short citation to the related AU codification is provided for ease of reference.

50 Td. at § 7 (AU § 380.07).

>! Audit Committee Communications, Statement on Auditing Standards No. 90 (American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants 1989) (“SAS 90”), at § 1 (amending SAS 61, at § 11) (effective for audits of
financial statements for periods ending on or after December 15, 2000) (AU § 380.11).

-24-

=== PAGE 28 ===
damages to Enron, assuming that the claim is not barred by the
conduct of Enron’s officers.

Accounting Malpractice. Whether Andersen exercised the degree of care, skill
and competence that reasonably competent members of the profession would exercise
under similar circumstances is determined by reference to GAAP and generally accepted
auditing standards (“GAAS”). An accountant satisfies his or her professional duties by
complying with GAAP and GAAS.” “GAAP are those principles recognized as
appropriate in the recording, reporting, and disclosing of financial information.”*> GAAP
“includes not only broad guidelines of general application, but also detailed practices and
procedures.”"* GAAP is a technical term: it includes the conventions, rules and
procedures that define acceptable accounting practices. GAAP provides the standards for
determining a company’s assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, net income or net loss
and sources and uses of cash. The ultimate goal of GAAP is to set out financial
information that is relevant, reliable and useful.*° Similarly, GAAS sets forth the

accepted standards of practice for auditors in planning and performing audits.° An

* But see Goss v. Crossley (In re Hawaii Corp.), 567 F. Supp. 609, 617 (D. Haw. 1983) (“Compliance
with GAAP and GAAS, however, will not immunize an accountant when he consciously chooses not to
disclose on a financial statement a known material fact.”) (citations omitted).

3 Id. at 618.

4 The Meaning of Present Fairly in Conformity With Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the
Independent Auditor’s Report, Statement on Auditing Standards No. 69, at § 2 (American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants 1992) (“SAS 69”) (AU § 411.02).

°° Second Interim Report, Appendix B (Accounting Standards), at 3-5; Goss, 567 F. Supp. at 620
(“Economic substance should prevail over legal form if there is a difference.”).

°° United States v. Arthur Young & Co., 465 U.S. 805, 811 (1984); Monroe v. Hughes, 31 F.3d 772, 774
(9th Cir. 1994); Greenstein, Logan & Co. v. Burgess Mktg., Inc., 744 S.W.2d 170, 185 (Tex. App. 1987);
see also Bankr. Servs., Inc. v. Ernst & Young (In re CBI Holding Co.), 247 B.R. 341 (Bankr. S.D.N.Y.
2000).

-25-

=== PAGE 29 ===
auditor’s good faith compliance with GAAS generally discharges the auditor’s
professional duty to act with reasonable care in planning and performing an audit.°”

Aiding and Abetting. For Andersen to be liable to Enron for aiding and abetting, a
fact-finder must first determine that there has been a breach of fiduciary duty by one or
more Enron officers. If a fact-finder concludes that there has been such a breach, the
fact-finder may then conclude that Andersen is liable to Enron for aiding and abetting
such breach if the evidence shows that: (i) Andersen had actual knowledge of the
wrongful conduct giving rise to the breach; (ii) Andersen gave substantial assistance to
the wrongdoer; and (iii) injury to the Debtors was the direct or reasonably foreseeable
result of such conduct. While there is some authority to the contrary, the actual
knowledge standard is strict — “should have known” or “suspicion” will not suffice.

Defenses Available to Andersen. The facts and circumstances surrounding
Andersen must be considered independently, and Appendix B to this Report analyzes
these issues in more detail, The Examiner has reviewed a substantial amount of
evidence, including documentary and testimonial evidence, and has noted the reasonable
inferences that could be drawn from the evidence. A fact-finder may draw alternative or
contrary inferences from the same evidence. Whether Andersen will succeed on one or
more defenses to any of these causes of action will depend upon the fact-finder’s
resolution of the facts.

Andersen may contend that the evidence is not sufficient to establish one or more

essential elements of these claims (e.g., a breach of the standard of care, or Andersen’s

57 Monroe, 31 F.3d at 774; In re CBI Holding Co., 247 B.R. at 362; Greenstein, Logan & Co., 744 S.W.2d
at 185.

-26-

=== PAGE 30 ===
knowledge of wrongful acts by Enron’s officers). Andersen also may assert that the
wrongful acts committed by Enron’s officers should be imputed to Enron so as to defeat
such claims. There are few Texas cases that address the circumstances under which the
wrongful conduct of a corporation’s officers would be imputed to the corporation to
defeat such claims, but it appears that imputation is a factual matter. If the officers’
wrongful conduct is imputed to Enron, then Andersen could assert that Enron’s wrongful
conduct was greater than Andersen’s wrongful conduct, and therefore claims by Enron
should be barred or reduced under comparative fault rules.

Attorneys

Enron’s attorneys — whether in the role of in-house counsel or outside counsel —
owed professional duties to their corporate client, Enron, which included the duty to
provide competent legal advice on the matters on which the attorneys were hired to
work,” and, in so doing, to “exercise independent professional judgment and render
_ candid advice.” Unlike accountants, attorneys generally owe their professional duties
to their client, rather than to any third party or to the public, as a whole.®! Ordinarily,
Enron’s attorneys had to “abide by [Enron’s] decisions,” as communicated by Enron’s
officers and employees, and could not substitute their own judgment or objectives for

those of Enron.”

%8 See generally Texas Disciplinary Rules of Prof’1 Conduct (available following Tex. Gov’t Code Ann. §
84.004) (the “Texas Rules”).

»° Texas Rule 1.01.

© Texas Rule 2.01.

§! See, e.g., Schatz v. Rosenberg, 943 F.2d 485 (4th Cir. 1991).
® Texas Rule 1.02(a) and 1.12(a).

-27-

=== PAGE 31 ===
Attomeys who represented Enron on many of the SPE transactions or in regard to
related public disclosures at times between 1997 and the Petition Date were confronted
with instructions from certain Enron officers, including Fastow, Causey, Kopper and
Glisan, that, if carried out, constituted a breach of a legal duty to Enron (such as a breach
of fiduciary duty) or a violation of law (such as inadequate disclosure). As discussed
more fully in this Report, these circumstances potentially altered the attorneys’ duties
such that they had to determine whether they were required to take “reasonable remedial
actions,” that potentially included “asking reconsideration” of instructions received or
“referring the matter to higher authority [at Enron], including, if warranted by the
seriousness of the matter, referral” to the Enron Board.” In short, Enron’s attorneys in
numerous situations were required to balance all information available to them in order to
determine whether their usual role — of abiding by decisions of Enron’s officers — had
been materially altered to require that those attorneys take information over the heads of
these Enron officers and call into question the appropriateness of the officer’s conduct.

The role of certain of Enron’s in-house attorneys, and certain of its outside

counsel, in Enron’s SPEs is considered against two legal theories:

§ Texas Rule 1.12(a).

Tn the case where a law firm has filed a claim against the Debtors, this Report also considers whether
there is sufficient evidence for a court to conclude that such claims should be equitably subordinated to the
claims of the other creditors. An attorney’s claim filed in the Bankruptcy Case may be equitably
subordinated to the payment of other claims filed in the case if (i) the attorney engaged in inequitable
conduct and (ii) that conduct resulted in harm to other creditors. In the case of creditors that are not
insiders or fiduciaries of the debtor, the standard of inequitable conduct is high and has been said to require
a breach of a recognized duty. Several cases stand for the proposition that a creditor’s participation in the
debtor’s misrepresentation of its financial condition to other creditors may constitute inequitable conduct
that will justify the equitable subordination of the creditor’s claim. If an attorney engaged in inequitable
conduct by participating in Enron’s misrepresentation of its financial condition, a fact-finder could
conclude that other creditors were injured by this conduct because they relied on this information in
extending (or continuing to extend) credit to Enron.

-28-

=== PAGE 32 ===
e Legal Malpractice — whether there is sufficient evidence for a fact-
finder to conclude that an attorney breached the standard of care owed
to his client such that the attorney may be liable for damages to Enron,
assuming that the claim is not barred by the conduct of Enron’s
officers.

e Aiding and Abetting a Breach of Fiduciary Duty — whether there is
sufficient evidence for a fact-finder to conclude that an attorney aided
and abetted Enron’s officers’ breaches of fiduciary duty such that the
attorney may be liable for damages to Enron, assuming that the claim
is not barred by the conduct of Enron’s officers.

Legal Malpractice. An attorney (whether in-house counsel or outside counsel)
may become liable to his or her client as a result of a failure to exercise the competence
and diligence normally exercised by attorneys in similar circumstances. Such a failure,
as well as reckless or knowing conduct that constitutes a breach of an attorney’s duty to
his or her client, is usually referred to as legal malpractice. To prevail on a claim for legal
malpractice, Enron must prove: (i) the attorney owed a duty to Enron; (ii) the attomey
breached his or her duty; (iii) there is a causal link between the breach and Enron’s
injury; and (iv) damages resulting from the breach. To establish an attorney’s breach of
his professional duty, Enron must show that the attorney failed to act as an attorney of
reasonable prudence would have in a similar situation. As a general rule, a plaintiff must
rely upon competent, admissible expert testimony to establish the relevant standard of
care, the corresponding breach and causation.

A relevant provision of the Texas Disciplinary Rules of Professional Conduct (the
“Texas Rules”) may be considered by a fact-finder in understanding and applying the
standard of care for malpractice when that rule is designed for the protection of persons

in the position of the plaintiff. Texas Rule 1.12 addresses the attorney’s role when the

attorney represents an organization (such as a corporation), and learns that a

-29-

=== PAGE 33 ===
representative of the organization has committed or intends to commit a violation of a
legal obligation to the organization (such as a breach of fiduciary duty) or a violation of
law that reasonably might be imputed to the organization (such as the dissemination of
misleading financial information). Ordinarily, an attorney must comply with the
directives received from the officers of the client. In the circumstances set forth in Texas
Rule 1.12(b), however, the attorney “must take reasonable remedial actions” that are in
the best interest of the organization. Those circumstances are:

whenever the lawyer learns or knows that:

(1) an officer . . . has committed or intends to commit a violation ofa legal

obligation to the organization or a violation of law that reasonably might

be imputed to the organization;

(2) the violation is likely to result in substantial injury to the organization;
and

(3) the violation is related to a matter within the scope of the lawyer’s
representation of the organization.

Remedial action may include “referring the matter to higher authority in the
organization,” which, “if warranted by the seriousness of the matter,” may mean the
board of directors.” In some circumstances, the attorney may be required to withdraw
from the representation. An analogous rule provides that a lawyer may not participate
in a client’s fraudulent conduct.”

Thus, an attorney for Enron who knew that (i) an officer was engaging in

wrongful conduct, (ii) substantial injury to Enron was likely to occur as a result of that

® Texas Rule 1.12(c)(3).
§ See Annex 1 to Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Attorneys).
®? Texas Rule 1.15(a)(1) and 1.02, cmt. 8.

-30-

=== PAGE 34 ===
conduct and (iii) the violation was within the attorney’s scope of representation, but
failed to take appropriate affirmative steps to cause reconsideration of the matter —
including referral of the matter to a higher authority in the company, including, if
appropriate, the Enron Board — would not have acted as an attorney of reasonable
prudence would have in a similar situation.

Aiding and Abetting. For an attorney to be liable to Enron for aiding and abetting,
a fact-finder must first determine that there has been a breach of fiduciary duty by one or
more Enron officers. If a fact-finder concludes that there has been such a breach, the
fact-finder may then consider whether an attorney is liable to Enron for aiding and
abetting that breach if the evidence shows that: (i) the attorney had actual knowledge of
the wrongful conduct giving rise to the breach; (ii) the attorney gave substantial
assistance to the wrongdoer; and (iii) injury to the Debtors was the direct or reasonably
foreseeable result of such conduct. While there is some authority to the contrary, the
actual knowledge standard is strict — “should have known” or “suspicion” will not
suffice. Although the legal standards applicable to outside attorneys are also applicable
to in-house attorneys, in light of the fiduciary duties that an in-house attorney who is also
an officer owes to the corporation as an officer, it is more appropriate to evaluate the
actions of an in-house attorney on the basis of his or her fiduciary duties as an officer of
the corporation rather than from the perspective of aiding and abetting.

Defenses Available to Enron’s Attorneys. The facts and circumstances
surrounding Enron’s attorneys must be considered independently, and Appendix C (Role
of Enron’s Attorneys) to this Report analyzes these issues in more detail. The Examiner

has reviewed a substantial amount of evidence, including documentary and testimonial

-31-

=== PAGE 35 ===
evidence, and has noted the reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the evidence.
A fact-finder may draw alternative or contrary inferences from the same evidence.
Whether an attorney will succeed on one or more defenses to any of these causes of
action will depend upon the fact-finder’s resolution of the facts.

All of the defenses available to Andersen, including defenses based upon
comparative fault rules, would be available to the attorneys defending against these
claims.

Outside Directors

The role of a corporate director includes two principal functions: a decision-
making function and an oversight function. The decision-making function generally
involves action taken at a particular point in time, while the oversight function generally
involves ongoing monitoring of the corporation’s business and affairs over a period of
time. As a result, the role of the Outside Directors in Enron’s SPEs is considered against
two legal theories:

e Decision-Making — whether there is sufficient evidence for a fact-
finder to conclude that the Outside Directors breached their fiduciary
duties by approving any of the SPE transactions; and

e Oversight — whether there is sufficient evidence for a fact-finder to
conclude that the Outside Directors breached their fiduciary duties by
failing to provide adequate oversight with respect to the SPE
transactions and related matters.

Decision-Making. As explained more fully in Appendix B (Legal Standards) to

the Third Interim Report, when directors of a corporation make business decisions on

6 2 ABA Model Bus. Corp. Act Ann. (3d ed. 2000 & Supp. 2002) § 8.31 Official cmt. at 8-204.

-32-

=== PAGE 36 ===
behalf of the corporation, they must satisfy their fiduciary duty of care. A doctrine
known as the “business judgment” rule focuses the legal scrutiny of business decisions on
the process by which the decision was reached (e.g., was all material information
reasonably available taken into consideration), as opposed to the substance of the
decision itself (e.g., was a reasonably careful, or risk free, course of action selected).”
Accordingly, where the business judgment rule applies, the duty of care may be
characterized as a duty to exercise informed business judgment. Under Oregon law, the
adequacy of the decision-making process (i.c., whether the business decision was
sufficiently informed) likely would be measured by concepts of ordinary negligence.
There is a limit, however, on the amount of judicial deference afforded to the
substance of a business decision under the business judgment rule. Even if a director
makes a business decision in a manner that satisfies the duty of process due care, the
business judgment rule will not protect a decision that cannot be attributed to any rational

71

business purpose.’’ Moreover, a business decision that lacks any rational business

® Directors also must satisfy their fiduciary duties of good faith and loyalty, each of which is discussed in
Appendix B (Legal Standards) to the Third Interim Report.

% See Brehm v. Eisner, 746 A.2d 244, 264 (Del. 2000) (“Courts do not measure, weigh or quantify
directors’ judgments. We do not even decide if they are reasonable in this context. Due care in the
decisionmaking context is process due care only.”) (emphasis in original).

” The limited substantive review contemplated by this outer limit of the business judgment rule may be
thought of as a manifestation of the fiduciary duty of good faith. See, e.g., Parnes v. Bally Entm’t Corp.,
722 A.2d 1243, 1246 (Del. 1999) (“The presumptive validity of a business judgment is rebutted in those
tare cases where the decision under attack is ‘so far beyond the bounds of reasonable judgment that it
seems essentially inexplicable on any ground other than bad faith.’”) (quoting West Point — Pepperell, Inc.
v. JP. Stevens & Co. (In re J.P. Stevens & Co.), 542 A.2d 770, 780-81 (Del. Ch. 1988)); In re RJR
Nabisco, Inc. S’holders Litig., No. 10389, 1989 WL 7036, at *22 n.13 (Del. Ch. Jan. 31, 1989) (stating that
the limited substantive review contemplated in the business judgment rule (i.e., whether the decision is
irrational or egregious or so beyond reason) is really a way of inferring bad faith), appeal refused, 556 A.2d
1070 (Del. 1989).

-33-

=== PAGE 37 ===
purpose may be evidence of a breach of the duty of good faith. Violations of the duty of
good faith are not protected by a director exculpation provision.

Oversight. A board of directors’ oversight responsibility has two principal
components: a duty to monitor corporate affairs and a duty to inquire into circumstances,
or “red flags,” indicating that potential problems exist within the corporation. A director
who negligently fails to fulfill his or her duty of oversight, but who does not (i) abdicate
his or her monitoring responsibilities, (ii) exhibit a conscious disregard for known risks,
or (iii) otherwise fail to act in good faith, may be protected from liability to a corporation
and its shareholders, if the corporation has adopted a director exculpation provision in its
charter, as Enron has done. A director exculpation provision, however, does not protect a
director who is also an officer of the corporation from liability for negligence when
acting in his or her capacity as an officer.

Lay and Skilling

As explained in Appendix B (Legal Standards) to the Third Interim Report,
although officers and directors are generally held to the same standards of conduct, the
roles and responsibilities of officers present a different context in which to apply those
standards and may subject officers to a higher degree of scrutiny than that of directors.”
For example, “full-time officers will generally be expected to be more familiar with the

affairs of a corporation than outside directors.””* Similarly, “[o]fficers will be expected

® See Third Interim Report, Appendix B (Legal Standards), at 6-8; see also Mixon v. Anderson (In re
Ozark Rest. Equip. Co.), 41 B.R. 476 (Bankr. W.D. Ark. 1984), rev’d on other grounds, 61 B.R. 750 (W.D.
Ark. 1986); Bynum vy. Scott, 217 F. 122 (E.D.N.C. 1914); Taylor y. Alston, 447 P.2d 523 (N.M. Ct. App.
1968); Raines v. Toney, 313 S.W.2d 802 (Ark. 1958).

® American Law Institute, Principles of Corporate Governance: Analysis & Recommendations § 4.01 cmt.
a (1994).

-34-

=== PAGE 38 ===
to be more familiar with business affairs under their direct supervision than officers who
do not have such responsibility.” Oregon’s statutory standard of care for corporate
directors allows for these differing circumstances to be taken into account by requiring
directors to exercise the care of an ordinarily prudent person “in a like position . . . under
similar circumstances.” Indeed, the drafters of the Model Act observe that the phrase
“in a like position . . . under similar circumstances” is intended to recognize, among other
things, that the “management responsibilities of a particular director may be relevant in
evaluating that director’s compliance with the standard of care.””© Finally, when an
inside director acts (or fails to act) in his or her capacity as an officer, he or she does not
enjoy the protections of a director exculpation provision.

In summary, due to the inapplicability of Enron’s director exculpation provision
to officers, liability for the failure of an inside director of Enron to recognize and respond
to red flags that arise in an area for which he or she has management responsibility as an
officer likely would be evaluated under standards of ordinary negligence. Moreover, due
to an inside director’s greater role in and responsibility for the corporation’s day-to-day
affairs, he or she has more occasion to encounter red flags and, correspondingly, more
responsibility for responding to them in the exercise of ordinary care.

Defenses Available to Lay, Skilling and Outside Directors

The facts and circumstances surrounding Lay, Skilling and the Outside Directors

must be considered independently, and Appendix D to this Report analyzes these issues

™ Td.
* Or. Rev. Stat. § 60.357(1).
7 2 ABA Model Bus. Corp. Act Ann. § 8.30 Official cmt. at 8-170.

~35-

=== PAGE 39 ===
in more detail. The Examiner has reviewed a substantial amount of evidence, including
documentary and testimonial evidence, and has noted the reasonable inferences that could
be drawn from the evidence. A fact-finder may draw alternative or contrary inferences
from the same evidence. Whether Lay, Skilling and the Outside Directors will succeed
on one or more defenses to any of these causes of action will depend upon the fact-
finder’s resolution of the facts.

Reliance on Officers. Under Oregon law, officers and directors are entitled to rely
on information provided or presented by other officers or employees of the corporation
whom the officers or directors reasonably believe to be reliable and competent in the
matters presented.’”’ Lay, Skilling and the Outside Directors may assert that they relied
on information provided to them by senior officers of Enron. Lay and Skilling may also
assert that as CEO and COO, they could not have possessed complete information about
all aspects of Enron’s operations and, therefore, necessarily relied on their subordinate
officers. This reliance by Lay, Skilling and the Outside Directors must be reasonable,
however, and it would not be reasonable if they were aware of facts or circumstances
concerning the matter in question that rendered such reliance unwarranted. An officer or
director does not act in good faith if he or she is aware of facts or circumstances
concerning the matter in question that render reliance on such information, opinions,
reports or statements unwarranted.”

Reliance on Professionals. In addition to relying on Enron officers who were

experienced accountants and lawyers, Lay, Skilling and the Outside Directors may assert

77 Or. Rev. Stat. § 60.357(2)(a) and Or. Rev. Stat. § 60.377(2)(a).
78 Or. Rev. Stat. § 60.357(3).

-36-

=== PAGE 40 ===
that they relied on an array of highly qualified professionals, including Andersen and
Enron’s attorneys. Oregon law expressly permits a director or an officer to rely on
information provided by “[I]Jegal counsel, public accountants or other persons as to
matters the [director or officer] reasonably believes are within the person’s professional
or expert competence.””” A fact-finder would have to decide whether Lay, Skilling and
the Outside Directors actually relied on these professionals. and, if so, whether their
reliance was reasonable. The reasonableness of their reliance will be considered in light
of any facts that Lay, Skilling and the Outside Directors may have known that rendered
such reliance unwarranted. A fact-finder would also likely consider circumstances where
the professionals may not have been candid with management or the Board, and also
circumstances where officers at the company failed to provide the professionals with all
relevant information about Enron’s transactions.

Reliance on Board Committees. A director is also entitled to rely on information
and reports provided by a committee of the board if the director reasonably believes the
committee merits confidence.” For example, certain SPE transactions were presented to
the Finance Committee, which then recommended them to the Board for approval. In
some instances, important details about the transaction were provided to the Finance
Committee but not to the Board. Members of the Board who approved the transactions,
but who were not present at the Finance Committee meetings, might argue that they had a

right to rely on the recommendations of the Finance Committee. However, such reliance

® Or. Rev. Stat. § 60.357(2)(b) and Or. Rev. Stat. § 60.377(2)(b).
8 Or. Rev. Stat. § 60.357(2)(c).

-37-

=== PAGE 41 ===
‘must be reasonable and, therefore, the directors who assert such reliance must not have
known facts that would make such reliance unwarranted.

Exculpation and Indemnity. Consistent with applicable Oregon law, Enron’s
articles of incorporation provide that a director shall not be personally liable to Enron or
its shareholders for monetary damages for conduct as a director except for liability for,
among other things, “acts or omissions not in good faith or which involve intentional
misconduct or a knowing violation of law.”®| This director exculpation provision likely
will apply to any claim by Enron or its shareholders against the Outside Directors
alleging breach of fiduciary duty, so long as the Outside Directors acted in good faith.
This director exculpation provision is not available to Lay or Skilling acting (or failing to
act) in their capacities as officers because, by its terms, the provision does not extend to

officers.®?

5! Article VII, Section A, Articles of Incorporation of Enron Corp. [AB0785 03888-AB0785 04147].

8 Td. Under certain circumstances, directors and officers of Oregon corporations can be entitled to
indemnification from the corporation with respect to claims made against them in their capacity as directors
or officers. See Annex 2 to Appendix D (Roles of Lay, Skilling and Outside Directors); Third Interim
Report, Appendix B (Legal Standards), at 32-34. However, such claims may be subject to disallowance
pursuant to Section 502(e)(1)(B) of the Bankruptcy Code. An officer’s or director’s right of
indemnification would not, however, provide relief from, or alter the liability standard for, any claims
brought by the company against such officer or director. See Annex 2 to Appendix D (Roles of Lay,
Skilling and Outside Directors), Exculpation and Indemnity.

-38-

=== PAGE 42 ===
IV. SPECIFIC ROLE OF ANDERSEN AND POTENTIAL LIABILITY

A. Role of Andersen in Enron’s SPE Transactions

Enron was described by Andersen as “the largest client of our firm by a wide
margin in Fiscal 1999." Fees paid by Enron to Andersen totaled $26.5 million in 1998,
$46.4 million in 1999 and $47.9 million in 2000. The majority of these fees came from
services related to Andersen’s attestation of Enron’s internal controls and financial
statements, and from accounting consultation on the design and implementation of
Enron’s SPE transactions. From 1989 through 2000, at least eighty-six Andersen
accountants left Andersen to become employed by Enron, some of whom became key
executives in Enron’s accounting and treasury functions.

As discussed in the Prior Reports, Enron’s financial statements and related
disclosures were materially misleading. For example, virtually all of Enron’s $979
million of net income and $3 billion of funds flow from operating activities for the year
2000, and approximately $8.6 billion of fully recourse indebtedness not reflected on
Enron’s balance sheet as of December 31, 2000, were attributable to six accounting
techniques used by Enron. Each of these accounting techniques was implemented with
Andersen’s assistance and approval. Each also was designed so that Enron could report
the SPE transactions in a manner that _ materially more favorable than their economic

substance.

33 Email from James D. Edwards, Andersen, to Thomas H. Bauer, Andersen, et al., Oct. 13, 1999
(“Congratulations to you and the entire Enron team for the unbelievable results of service to this client in
Fiscal 1999. With $47 million in fees and a growth rate of 88%, Enron became the largest client of our
firm by a wide margin in Fiscal 1999.”) [AB0971 02377].

-39-

=== PAGE 43 ===
As set forth in Appendix B (Role of Andersen), the evidence reviewed by the
Examiner indicates that Andersen provided extensive guidance and assistance to Enron in
planning and executing numerous SPE transactions for which the Examiner has
determined that Enron’s accounting treatment and disclosures were materially
misleading. In particular, the evidence reviewed by the Examiner is sufficient to permit a
fact-finder to conclude that:

e Andersen assisted Enron’s abuse of rules-based GAAP by helping
Enron design accounting techniques or “models”™ that Enron could
use to report income, cash flow and financial position more favorably
than if the financial statements and related disclosures faithfully

represented the economic substance of the transactions.*

e Andersen failed to exercise due care in auditing whether the third party
entities used by Enron in its Prepay Transactions were SPEs,®° and

54 These “models” include each of the six accounting techniques described in the Examiner’s Second
Interim Report. See generally Second Interim Report; see also Appendix B (Role of Andersen).

85 “Representational faithfulness” is a concept found in Financial Accounting Concept No. 2, (“FAC 2”),
and stands for the proposition that the accounting for a transaction should “faithfully represent” the
substance of the underlying transaction. The FACs are not a part of the “GAAP hierarchy” described in
SAS 69. Thus it is perhaps possible, at least under the standards that accountants have adopted for
themselves, that financial statements could “fairly present in accordance with GAAP” the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flow of an entity, but still not faithfully represent the economic
substance of the entity’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flow. That does not mean,
however, that GAAP statements cannot be materially misleading. See United States v. Simon, 425 F.2d 796
(2d Cir. 1969) (“critical test” is whether financial statements as a whole “fairly present” the financial
position and results of operations of the company for the period under review; compliance with GAAP
“persuasive” but not “conclusive” that the facts as certified were not materially misleading). The work of
the Blue Ribbon Committee, as evidenced in SAS 90, amending SAS 61 effective for financial statements
issued after December 15, 2000, sought to clarify the accountant’s responsibility in this regard: if an entity
is using rules-based GAAP to report financial information that does not faithfully represent the economic
substance of the entity’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flow, the accountant must report
this to the audit committee. See SAS 90. In responding to one of his colleagues who suggested that a
particular accounting result might violate Financial Accounting Concepts, John Stewart of the Andersen
Professional Standards Group (“PSG”) stated, “The conceptual framework has little to do with how we in
practice respond to day to day questions. . . . As you know, the FASB’s conceptual framework was
developed primarily to help the FASB itself as it developed new standards not so much to aid practice on a
day to day basis.” Email from John E. Stewart, Andersen, to Kieva M. Skinner, Andersen, and copy to H.
Ronald Weissman, ef al., Andersen, regarding ANZ Transaction, Aug. 9, 1999, at 1 [AB0633 2448-
AB0633 2456].

88 See Appendix B (Role of Andersen), Accepting Questionable Audit Evidence.

-40-

=== PAGE 44 ===
whether the 3% equity investments in the SPEs utilized by Enron in its
FAS 140 Transactions were at risk.*”

e Andersen failed to discharge its duty under applicable auditing
standards to “determine that the audit committee is informed about the
methods used to account for significant unusual transactions and the
effect of significant accounting policies in controversial or emerging

areas for which there is a lack of authoritative guidance or
consensus.”**

Without Andersen’s certification of Enron’s financial statements and various
other approvals provided by Andersen, Enron would not have been able to employ those
transactions to distort Enron’s reported financial condition, results of operations and cash
flow. The evidence suggests that Andersen approved Enron’s SPE transactions in an
environment that permitted literal, or often no more than arguable, compliance with
GAAP, despite the fact that the result often was financial presentation inconsistent with
economic substance. The Examiner has concluded, however, that Enron’s accounting for
many of its significant SPE transactions did not comply with GAAP.

As noted in the Third Interim Report and as discussed in Appendix B (Role of
Andersen), evidence suggests that, in numerous instances, Enron officers concealed
material transaction information from Andersen. For example, Andersen accountants
have indicated that they were unaware that Enron officers had entered into side

agreements guaranteeing repayment of equity that was supposedly “at-risk” in SPE

87 See Appendix B (Role of Andersen), Evidence of Enron’s Deception of Andersen.

88 SAS 61, at § 7 (AU § 380.07). Similarly, the evidence suggests that Andersen failed to discharge its
duty under applicable auditing standards to have an “open and frank” discussion with Enron’s Audit
- Committee concerning the “quality, not just the acceptability, of [Enron’s] accounting principles as applied
in its financial reporting” and by failing to discuss “items that have a significant impact on the
representational faithfulness ... of the accounting information included in the financial statements, which
include related disclosures.” SAS 90, at § 1 (amending SAS 61, at § 11) (AU § 380.11); see also Appendix
B (Role of Andersen), Andersen ’s Interaction with Enron’s Audit Committee.

-41-

=== PAGE 45 ===
transactions.’ Andersen accountants also indicate that, had they known this information,
they would not have approved Enron’s accounting for those transactions.” While these
facts demonstrate that Enron officers were deceiving Andersen, a fact-finder could
conclude that, under the circumstances, Andersen overlooked obvious risks that such
activities were occurring and should have implemented an audit plan designed to detect
them.

The evidence reviewed by the Examiner also indicates that Andersen failed to
discharge its duty under applicable auditing standards to “determine that the audit
committee is informed about the methods used to account for significant unusual
transactions and the effect of significant accounting policies in controversial or emerging

areas for which there is a lack of authoritative guidance or consensus.”

Many of
Enron’s significant SPE transactions fell squarely within the foregoing description, but
Andersen consistently failed to determine whether Enron’s Audit Committee was
informed about the “effect” of Enron’s SPE transactions and other significant accounting
policies on its financial statements.

For example, Andersen quantified and summarized for its internal analysis the

effect on Enron’s 1999 and 2000 income statements of Enron’s FAS 140 Transactions,

® In-Person Interview with Kimberly Scardino, Andersen, by H. Bryan Ives, III and William T. Plybon,
A&B, May 29, 2003 (the “Scardino Interview”); Sworn Statement of Debra A. Cash, Andersen, to H.
Bryan Ives, III, A&B, June 5, 2003, at 139-42; Sworn Statement of Carl E. Bass, Andersen, to H. Bryan
Ives, HI, A&B, June 4, 2003 (the “Bass Sworn Statement”), at 31-32; In-Person Interview with Benjamin
S. Neuhausen, Andersen, by H. Bryan Ives, III], A&B, June 13, 2003; In-Person Interview with John E.
Stewart, Andersen, by H. Bryan Ives, III, A&B, June 12, 2003 (the “Stewart Interview”); Sworn Statement
of Patricia Grutzmacher, Andersen, to H. Bryan Ives, II, A&B, June 11, 2003 (the “Grutzmacher Sworn
Statement”), at 106-07.

° Scardino Interview; Stewart Interview; Bass Sworn Statement, at 44-46.
>} SAS 61, at § 7 (AU § 380.07).

-42-

=== PAGE 46 ===
mark-to-market accounting and fair value accounting.” Andersen also quantified and
summarized for its internal analysis the effect of the related party transactions with LIM

°3 However, Andersen did not

and Whitewing on Enron’s 2000 income and cash flow.
share this quantitative summary analysis with the Enron Audit Committee. There is
evidence that in his oral presentation Andersen partner David Duncan may have warned
the Audit Committee of the risk that others could have a different view of Enron’s
aggressive accounting and disclosure. Such comments were, however, accompanied by
assurances that “[we] are on board with the company’s positions or you would hear about
them.” Evidence suggests that Andersen failed to determine that the Audit Committee
was informed about the effect of these transactions on Enron’s financial statements or the
specific aspects of the transactions that introduced the risk or the impact of these
transactions on the representational faithfulness of Enron’s financial statements. Indeed,

multiple Audit Committee members have stated that they were not informed by Andersen

of the magnitude of the transactions that involved “high risk” accounting judgments.”

* Enron Client Retention Meeting Presentation (the “Retention Meeting Presentation”), at 5 [AA-
EX00269472-AA-EX00269499].

3 Td.

* David Duncan, Handwritten Notes on Audit Update Presentation entitled, “Selected Observations —
1999 Financial Reporting” (the “Duncan Notes on 1999 Selected Observations”) (presentation slide
attached to Audit Committee 2/7/00 Minutes) [AB0911 2265].

5 See, e.g., Sworn Statement of Ronnie C. Chan, Enron, to William C. Humphreys, Jr., A&B, Aug. 9,
2003 (the “Chan Sworn Statement”), at 57, 243, 247-49; Sworn Statement of Paulo V. Ferraz Pereira,
Enron, to William C. Humphreys, Jr., A&B, Sept. 12, 2003, at 179-80; Sworn Statement of Wendy L.
Gramm, Enron, to William C. Humphreys, Jr., A&B, Aug. 20, 2003 (the “Gramm Sworn Statement”), at
111-13, 131-33, 156; Sworn Statement of John Mendelsohn, Enron, to William C. Humphreys, Jr., A&B,
Sept. 9, 2003, at 84, 85, 94-97, 99, 103-04; Sworn Statement of Joe H. Foy, Enron, to William C.
Humphreys, Jr., A&B, Aug. 26, 2003 (the “Foy Swom Statement”), at 138-39, 143; Sworn Statement of
Lord John Wakeham, Enron, to John L. Latham, A&B, Dec. 5, 2002, at 52, 73-78, 99-100, 120-22, 140-42,
203-04.

-43-

=== PAGE 47 ===
In an internal February 2001 Andersen meeting regarding whether Enron should
be retained as a client, the Engagement Team presented a slide prepared for its
anticipated presentation to the Audit Committee that disclosed that the application of
GAAP to Enron’s structured transactions often requires “extreme” judgment.°° When
Andersen made the actual presentation to the Audit Committee a week later, however, the

97

word “extreme” was replaced with the word “significant” on that slide.*’ The evidence

suggests that Andersen took a similar approach in other aspects of its presentations to

”

Enron’s Audit Committee, in which “accounting risk” and “disclosure risk” were
described as a product of the complexity of Enron’s business, when in fact that risk arose
from the aggressive accounting techniques that Enron employed with Andersen’s
support, to enhance Enron’s financial presentation.”®

There were other occasions on which Andersen failed to advise the Audit
Committee and the Enron Board of its concerns regarding the SPE transactions. For
example, in an internal email dated May 28, 1999, one senior Andersen accountant
discussing the LIM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction noted:

Setting aside the accounting, idea of a venture entity managed by CFO is

terrible from a business point of view. Conflicts of interest galore. Why
would any director in his or her right mind ever approve such a scheme?

°® Retention Meeting Presentation, at 23 (presentation slide entitled, “Selected Observations — 2000
Financial Reporting”).

°” Compare Audit Update Presentation entitled, “2000 Audit Update: Selected Observations - 2000
Financial Reporting,” at AB000204304 (attached to the Audit Committee 2/12/01 Minutes)
[AB000204301-AB000204305] (handwriting redacted to improve legibility), with the Retention Meeting
Presentation, at 23. Notes related to that meeting suggest that in his oral presentation, David Duncan may
have described the risks as “extreme.” David Duncan, Typed Notes entitled, “Financial Comments,”
undated [AB0911 2292].

% See, e.g., Audit Update Presentation entitled, “Selected Observations — 1999 Financial Reporting,” at
AB000201144 (attached to Audit Committee 2/7/00 Minutes) (stating that “[s]ophistication of Company’s
Business Practices Introduced A High Number of Accounting Models and Applications Requiring
Complex Interpretations and Judgement [sic].”) [AB000201141-4B000201144].

-44-

=== PAGE 48 ===
Plus, even if all the accounting obstacles below are overcome, it’s a

related party, which means FAS 57 disclosures of all transactions. Would

Enron want these transactions disclosed every year as related party

transactions in their financial statements?”°

While accountants are not responsible for their client’s business decisions, there is
no evidence that Andersen raised the nature or degree of its internally expressed concemms
over these structures. Evidence indicates that Enron officers persuaded Andersen to
acquiesce in the aggressive presentation of Enron’s transactions, and that Enron officers
sometimes failed to heed more conservative advice from Andersen. For example,
Andersen suggested, prior to Enron’s issuance of both its 1999 and 2000 financial
statements, that Enron disclose the impact of the Prepay Transactions on the financial
statements. Management refused to make the disclosures, however, and Andersen
determined that Enron’s financial presentation would not be materially misleading absent
the disclosures. The Prepay Transactions accounted for all of Enron’s $1.2 billion of
operating cash flow in 1999, and $1.5 billion of Enron’s $4.8 billion of operating cash
flow in 2000. Yet, without additional disclosure, it was not possible, without some
independent knowledge of the Prepay Transactions, to determine from Enron’s financial
presentations that such a large amount of operating cash flow was actually the proceeds
of borrowings through the Prepay Transactions. Putting aside whether Andersen’s
judgment as to the materiality of these transactions was appropriate, applicable
professional standards reserved for the Audit Committee, in the exercise of its duties, the

determination of whether it was appropriate for Enron to be taking these accounting and

disclosure risks. When Andersen failed to inform the Audit Committee about the nature

°° Email from Benjamin S. Neuhausen, Andersen, to David B. Duncan, Andersen, May 28, 1999, at 1 (the
“Neuhausen/Duncan 5/28/99 Email”) [ELIB00003903-00001-ELIB00003903-00002]. :

-45-

=== PAGE 49 ===
and magnitude of these risks, Andersen omitted a critical step in the financial disclosure
process.

B. Potential Liability

The evidence reviewed by the Examiner is sufficient for a fact-finder to conclude
that Andersen breached its professional duty of care and was negligent as to certain
portions of the work it performed for Enron. In public statements and testimony,
Andersen has acknowledged that.it made material accounting and auditing errors. The
Examiner has discovered facts that suggest additional acts of negligence beyond those
previously acknowledged, including evidence indicating a failure to inquire about facts
that were critical to Andersen’s understanding of the transactions.

Beyond instances of negligence, there is also evidence from which a fact-finder
could conclude that Andersen gave substantial assistance to Enron’s officers who
breached their fiduciary duties to Enron by causing it to disseminate materially
misleading financial information, by:

e providing consultation services with respect to the SPE transactions
necessary for Enron’s accounting and other financial officers to design
and implement the accounting techniques they used to manipulate
Enron’s reported financial condition, results from operations, cash
flow, and MD&A;

e agreeing with Enron’s accounting and financial officers that full
disclosure regarding the SPE transactions was not necessary despite
the requirement that the financial presentations not be materially
misleading; and

e failing to ensure that the Audit Committee was informed about the
effects of these accounting and disclosure decisions by management

and Andersen before the Audit Committee approved Enron’s financial
statements for issuance to the public.

-46-

=== PAGE 50 ===
Based on Andersen’s substantial assistance to Enron’s accounting and financial officers
described above, as well as a clear understanding of the effects of these efforts on
Enron’s public financial information, a fact-finder could conclude that Andersen had
actual knowledge of the breaches of fiduciary duty by these officers. As a result, a fact-
finder could conclude that Andersen aided and abetted the officers’ breaches of fiduciary

duty.

-47-

=== PAGE 51 ===
V. SPECIFIC ROLES OF ATTORNEYS AND POTENTIAL LIABILITY

A. Overview

Enron employed over 250 in-house attorneys and retained hundreds of law firms.
Certain of these attorneys were involved in providing legal advice and assistance to
Enron in the SPE transactions that have been the subject of Prior Reports. Some of these
same attorneys advised Enron on disclosures, which the Examiner has concluded in Prior

Reports were materially misleading.

B. Outside Law Firms
Vinson & Elkins

Vinson & Elkins was Enron’s primary outside law firm. Enron paid fees to
Vinson & Elkins of $18.6 million, $26.6 million, $37.8 million, $42.8 million, and $36.4
million in 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000 and 2001, respectively. Vinson & Elkins represented
Enron in a wide variety of matters, including approximately sixty-six SPE transactions
consummated by the Debtors between 1997 and the Petition Date, many of which have
been criticized in Prior Reports. This work included rendering legal opinions in many
transactions, including certain FAS 140 Transactions, which opinions were required by
Andersen to allow Enron to obtain the accounting treatment that it sought for these
transactions. Vinson & Elkins also served as Enron’s outside counsel in many of the
Related Party Transactions that were discussed in the Second Interim Report. In
addition, Vinson & Elkins advised Enron on certain disclosure matters.

The Examiner concludes that there is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder
could determine that Vinson & Elkins committed malpractice based on Texas Rule 1.12,

aided and abetted breaches of fiduciary duty by Enron officers, or committed malpractice

-48-

=== PAGE 52 ===
based on negligence in connection with several transactions. The events or transactions

where such liability may be found include Vinson & Elkins’ representation of Enron with

respect to:

The delivery of true issuance opinions in connection with certain FAS
140 Transactions in light of Vinson & Elkins’ knowledge that (i) these
opinions did not address the critical issues under FAS 140, as Vinson
& Elkins understood those issues, (ii) Andersen was using its opinions
to support Enron’s financial reporting, and (iii) these transactions were
significant to Enron’s earnings.

Project Nahanni, a transaction that had no business purpose except to
create cash flow from operating activities at year-end 1999 through a
loan that was “hardwired” to be repaid within one month after
closing.

The LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction, which was a hedge for
financial statement purposes only and lacked any economic substance
or rational business purpose, but was intended by certain of Enron’s
officers to manipulate Enron’s financial statements.

The LJM2/Raptors Hedging Transactions from January 2000 through
their restructuring in early 2001, which provided hedges for financial
statement purposes only, and lacked any economic substance or
rational business purpose, but were intended by certain of Enron’s
officers to manipulate Enron’s financial statements.

The delivery of a true sale opinion in the Sundance Industrial
transaction that enabled Enron to book a $20 million gain, even though
Vinson & Elkins knew that there was no valid business purpose for
this feature of the transaction and that a valid business purpose was
essential to a true sale opinion.

Enron’s related party transaction disclosure for the proxy statement
filed in 2001, for which Vinson & Elkins rendered advice regarding
the non-disclosure of the amount of Fastow’s interest in LJM without
knowing the amount of that interest, even though Vinson & Elkins
knew that Fastow wanted to prevent the Enron Board from learning
how much he was making from the LJM transactions with Enron.

1 See Third Interim Report, Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Officers), at 61-66 (defining “hardwired”).

-49-

=== PAGE 53 ===
e The Watkins’ Investigation, without making full disclosure of Vinson
& Elkins’ role in the transactions being investigated, including the
concerns Vinson & Elkins had about the transactions, some of which
were similar to those raised by Watkins.
e The delivery of tax opinions in connection with certain Tax
Transactions which enabled Enron to “generate” accounting income
from projection of future tax savings.
Andrews & Kurth
Over time, Andrews & Kurth became Enron’s firm of choice for its FAS 140
Transactions. This work generated fees of $1 million, $2.4 million, $6.7 million, $9.7
million and $9.3 million in 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000 and 2001, respectively. From
November 1998 through October 2001, Andrews & Kurth provided legal services to
Enron in connection with twenty-eight FAS 140 Transactions. Andrews & Kurth assisted
Enron with fifteen related transactions whereby Enron caused the initial FAS 140
Transaction to be prepaid, thereby unwinding fifteen of the twenty-eight initial FAS 140
Transactions. Andrews & Kurth delivered at least twenty-four legal opinions regarding
true issuance or true sale and substantive consolidation in the FAS 140 Transactions.
Andrews & Kurth was concerned about several terms in these transactions that created

questions about whether a sale had occurred. In an early transaction, this included

concerns about the ability of Enron to prepay at any time and get the asset back.!*' There

'! On December 21, 1999, in the midst of closing the Discovery transaction, Andrews & Kurth asked
Enron:

Assuming a buyer is found for the FirstWorld Interests, ENA may desire to unwind the
FASB 125 transaction by prepaying the facility during the first two months of 2000.
Would prepayment and sale so soon after the FASB 125 sale by ENA jeopardize the
FASB 125 treatment of the transaction? Does it matter if ENA intends to arrange such a
sale and prepay the facility at the time of entering into the FASB 125 transaction?

Memorandum from Mike Blaney and David Grove, Andrews & Kurth, to Project Discovery and Enron
Communications FirstWorld Working Groups, regarding Project Discovery Issues List, Dec. 21, 1999, at 2
(12/21/99 draft) (emphasis in original) [AKED00083764-AKED00083767]. The Examiner has not

-50-

=== PAGE 54 ===
is evidence suggesting that Andrews & Kurth knew that these planned early unwinds
were a problem for the intended accounting of the transactions both from a legal and an
accounting standpoint. For example, an Enron memo that Andrews & Kurth revised at
Enron’s request states:
Keep in mind that the Auction-related mechanisms will come into play
ONLY if the indebtedness is not prepaid by the Sponsor, which is always
Global Finance’s planned means of unwind and has been, with one
exception I’m aware of, the actual means of unwind. Nonetheless,
because this prepayment plan is not memorialized in any deal
documentation (and cannot be for financial accounting and legal opinion
purposes), these mechanisms still must be analyzed from a tax
perspective.
The Examiner concludes that there is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder
could determine that Andrews & Kurth committed malpractice based on Texas Rule 1.12,
aided and abetted a breach of fiduciary duty or committed malpractice based on
negligence in connection with these FAS 140 Transactions. A fact-finder could

determine that Andrews & Kurth knew that Enron had no intention to relinquish control

over, or the risks and rewards of, the assets transferred in certain of the FAS 140

discovered any evidence that Andrews & Kurth received an answer to this question. Andrews & Kurth
appeared to think that the answer required an accounting judgment, but the question called for a legal
conclusion.

12 Email from Bill Bowes, Enron, to Tom Popplewell, Andrews & Kurth, May 22, 2001, at 1 (emphasis in
original) [AK 0067236-AK 0067238]. Bowes’ email to Popplewell stated, “I would appreciate your
thoughts and comments on the accuracy of my description. ...” Jd. at 1. Popplewell’s reply stated: “Here
are our comments.” Email from Tom Popplewell, Andrews & Kurth, to Bill Bowes, Enron, May 24, 2001,
at 1 [AK 0067236-AK 0067238]. As early as November 1998, in connection with the first FAS 140
Transaction that Andrews & Kurth handled for Enron, Andrews & Kurth was aware that Enron did not
intend to transfer the monetized asset to a third party. “GB [Gareth Bahlmann, former Assistant General
Counsel, Enron Global Finance] did not want to mention the auction in the consent. I said this was okay as
long as Enron were [sic] absolutely confident that there would never in practice be a sale to a third party.
GB said that this was correct ....” Memorandum from Danny Sullivan, Andrews & Kurth, to File,
regarding Enron/Sarlux, Nov. 19, 1998 [AK 0073331].

-51-

=== PAGE 55 ===
Transactions and therefore was engaging in the FAS 140 Transactions to produce
materially misleading financial statements.

Cc. Enron’s In-House Attorneys

Derrick

From 1991 until after the Petition Date, James V. Derrick (“Derrick”), a former
partner at Vinson & Elkins, served as General Counsel to Enron. Although Derrick
attended meetings of the Enron Board, his participation was generally limited to making
presentations regarding litigation matters, and it appears that he rarely provided any legal
advice to the Enron Board. The Examiner concludes there is sufficient evidence from
which a fact-finder could determine that Derrick committed malpractice based on
negligence in connection with the performance of his duties as General Counsel of Enron
with respect to:

e Derrick’s failure to inform himself and then the Enron Board with
respect to the Related Party Transactions, or to confirm that those to
whom he had delegated the responsibility were taking adequate steps
to do so.

e Derrick’s failure to become familiar with the facts of the
LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and the conflict of interest issues
presented by that transaction and governing law, so as to enable proper
execution of his responsibilities as legal advisor to the Enron Board.

e Derrick’s failure to inform himself about (i) the content of the
“anonymous letters” delivered to Lay in August 2001 or (ii) the extent
of Vinson & Elkins’ involvement in the transactions criticized by the
“anonymous letters,” which meant that he was unable to advise Lay
properly with respect to the investigation or the propriety of retaining
Vinson & Elkins to conduct that investigation.

Rogers

As Associate General Counsel, Rex Rogers (“Rogers”) was the in-house lawyer

primarily responsible for disclosure in Enron’s periodic SEC filings. The Examiner

-52-

=== PAGE 56 ===
concludes that there is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could determine that
Rogers failed to inform himself about the SPE transactions so that he could advise Enron
with respect to the related disclosure issues and accordingly, committed malpractice
based on negligence. A fact-finder could determine that Rogers committed malpractice
based on Texas Rule 1.12 or breached his fiduciary duties, or both, in connection with his
failure to inform the Enron Board of the restructuring of the Raptors SPEs in early 2001,
which involved, among other things, Enron’s infusion of 12 million additional shares of
its stock, valued in excess of $600 million.
Mordaunt
Kristina Mordaunt (“Mordaunt”) served as a senior in-house attorney within
Enron Global Finance and its predecessor on several SPE transactions. The Examiner
concludes that there is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could determine that
Mordaunt committed malpractice based on Texas Rule 1.12, committed malpractice
based on negligence or breached her fiduciary duties with respect to:
e The Chewco transaction, because she was aware of the conflict of
interest created by Kopper’s role as general partner of Chewco but did
not take steps to analyze the Code of Ethics with respect to his conflict
of interest or to inform the Enron Board of the related party nature of
the Chewco transaction when it was asked to approve that transaction.
e The LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction, which was a hedge for
financial accounting purposes only, lacking any economic substance or
rational business purpose, but was intended by certain Enron officers
to manipulate Enron’s financial statements.
The Examiner concludes that there is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder
could determine that Mordaunt committed malpractice and breached her fiduciary duties

in connection with her investment of $5,826 in Southampton and her receipt of more than

$1 million as a return on that investment without advising Derrick or the Office of the

-53-

=== PAGE 57 ===
Chairman of the investment and without receiving the necessary approval as required by
the Code of Ethics and rules of professional conduct.

Sefton

Scott Sefton (“Sefton”) served as General Counsel of Enron Global Finance for
one year, between September 1999 and early October 2000. The Examiner concludes
that there is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could determine that Sefton
committed malpractice based on Texas Rule 1.12, committed malpractice based on
negligence, or breached his fiduciary duties with respect to:

e Project Nahanni, a transaction that had no business purpose except to
create cash flow from operating activities at year-end 1999 through a
loan that was “hardwired” to be repaid within one month after closing.

© The LJM2 transactions, where he failed to advise (or make appropriate
efforts to have Derrick or another Enron attorney advise) the Enron
Board of numerous significant conflict of interest issues relevant to
LJM2 matters.

e Two of the four LJM2/Raptors Hedging Transactions, all of which
were non-economic hedges, lacking any economic substance or valid
business purpose, but which were intended by certain Enron officers to
manipulate Enron’s financial statements.

Mintz

Jordan Mintz (“Mintz”) was Sefton’s successor as General Counsel to Enron
Global Finance. The Examiner concludes that there is sufficient evidence from which a
fact-finder could determine that Mintz committed malpractice based on Texas Rule 1.12,
committed malpractice based on negligence or breached his fiduciary duties with respect
to:

e Certain matters pertaining to LJM2, including (i) his knowledge that
the Enron Audit and Finance Committees had not been informed of

Enron’s repurchases of certain assets from LJM2 during 2000, (ii) his
knowledge that Enron employees (in addition to Fastow) were acting

-54-

=== PAGE 58 ===
in furtherance of the interests of LJM2 in a manner contrary to Enron’s
interests and (iii) his knowledge that Fastow wanted to prevent the
Board from learning how much money he was making from the LIM
transactions with Enron.

Enron’s related party transaction disclosure in the proxy statement
filed in early 2001, and its failure to disclose the amount of Fastow’s
interest in the LJM transactions.

Enron’s tax indemnity payment to Chewco, demanded by Kopper in

the Chewco unwind, despite the fact that Mintz knew the documents as
originally drafted did not require that payment.

-55-

=== PAGE 59 ===
VI. SPECIFIC ROLES OF LAY, SKILLING AND OUTSIDE DIRECTORS
AND POTENTIAL LIABILITY

A. Roles_of Lay, Skilling and Outside Directors _in Enron’s SPE
Transactions

During the period 1997 through the Petition Date, Lay and Skilling held the top
two officer positions at Enron. Lay was Chairman and CEO, and Skilling was President
and COO, and both men served on Enron’s Board. For a six-month period, from
February through August 2001, Skilling held the position of CEO and Lay continued as
Chairman. In August 2001, when Skilling abruptly resigned all his positions with Enron,
Lay resumed the role of CEO.

Lay joined the predecessor of Enron in 1984, and Skilling joined Enron in 1990.
Both hold advanced degrees: Lay has a Ph.D. in economics, and Skilling received an
MBA from Harvard where he was in the top 5% of his class. Together, they led Enron
during its steep climb to become the seventh largest public company in America, and,
during its dramatic plummet to become, in December 2001, the world’s then-largest
bankruptcy petitioner.

The Enron Board for the five years from 1997 through 2001 was comprised of
between fifteen and nineteen directors, including Lay and Skilling. The Outside

Directors? included a group of men and women who were highly successful in their

1 In addition to Lay and Skilling, there were three directors who had other roles at Enron including
Rebecca Mark-Jusbasche (“Mark-Jusbasche”), Ken Harrison (“Harrison”) and John Urquhart (“Urquhart”).
Harrison and Mark-Jusbasche were full-time Enron employees, and Urquhart provided full-time consulting
services for Enron for a period of time. For purposes of this Report, however, the term “Outside Directors”
includes all of the members of Enron’s Board who served during the period 1997 to the Petition Date other
than Lay and Skilling. Although Harrison, Mark-Jusbasche and Urquhart were employed or engaged by
Enron, based on the evidence available to the Examiner, their positions with the company were such that
they would have had effectively no involvement with the SPE transactions beyond that of the non-officer
and non-employee directors.

-56-

=== PAGE 60 ===
professional careers. Most had advanced degrees, many held senior leadership positions
in U.S. and international businesses, and many served on the boards of other for-profit
U.S. corporations. Enron’s Outside Directors included, for example, four people who
held Ph.D.s and one with an honorary doctorate, two medical doctors who each served as
president of one of the world’s leading cancer treatment centers, and two law school
graduates. The group also included twelve people who had served as CEOs, a Dean of
the Stanford University School of Business, a member of Great Britain’s House of Lords
who served under then Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, and a former chair of the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission.

The evidence available to the Examiner regarding the roles of Lay, Skilling and
the Outside Directors in Enron’s SPE transactions was limited. Lay submitted to a one-
day interview with the Examiner, but Skilling invoked his Fifth Amendment privilege
and refused to provide either testimony or an interview. Skilling has provided some
sworn testimony to other parties investigating Enron, but Lay has not. None of the
Outside Directors invoked a Fifth Amendment privilege in response to the Examiner’s
request for testimony, but many of the officers at Enron who worked with Lay and
Skilling and who attended virtually all of the Board meetings have invoked their Fifth
Amendment privileges. Also, with respect to documentary evidence, both Lay and
Skilling were infrequent users of email, and they also apparently did not retain many
documents. They produced very little relevant written material in response to the
Examiner’s subpoenas.

Although limited by the lack of sworn testimony from certain key officers, and by

the small amount of relevant documents, the evidence is sufficient to show that Lay,

-57-

=== PAGE 61 ===
Skilling and the Outside Directors were actively engaged in performing their monitoring
functions. Lay and Skilling were hands-on managers involved in the daily operation of
Enron’s business. The Outside Directors on the Board and its committees were not
involved in the day-to-day operations, but they were generally engaged in activities
designed to fulfill their supervisory roles.

The evidence shows that, as a result of their day-to-day involvement at the
company, Lay and Skilling knew or should have known their subordinate officers
misused the SPE transactions in a manner that resulted in the dissemination of materially
misleading financial information. Both Lay and Skilling failed to respond to indications
of potential problems related to the use of SPE transactions. For example, Lay and
Skilling apparently ignored repeated inclusions of the Prepay Transactions on interest
rate exposure charts presented by Fastow, even though, as Lay admitted in his interview
with the Examiner, a prepay that was a commodity transaction would not cause Enron to
have interest rate exposure. Had Lay and Skilling inquired as to why the Prepay
Transactions were included on those charts, they may have been told that Enron was
engaging in circular Prepay Transactions that were substantively debt, with no disclosure
of that fact in the company’s published financial statements. There were similar
indications of problems with other SPE transactions.

With respect to the SPE transactions that Enron entered into with LJM1 and
LJM2, entities in which Fastow had a personal interest and from which he received

substantial compensation, there is evidence that Skilling ignored red flags regarding the

-58-

=== PAGE 62 ===
lack of arm’s length negotiation of those transactions and regarding Fastow’s
compensation.'™

The Outside Directors, however, may not have recognized the same red flags
regarding the SPE transactions as indicators of the wrongful conduct of the senior
officers. They did not have the intimate knowledge of Enron’s day-to-day operations that
Lay and Skilling shared. In addition, although Enron officers often provided voluminous
information to the Outside Directors, helping the Outside Directors understand fully the
financial activities at Enron apparently was not a high priority for Enron management.
The officers often presented information to the Board and its committees in ways that
obfuscated the facts, and there are several instances of apparent intentional
misrepresentations by officers.

The Outside Directors, however, together with Lay and Skilling, authorized Enron
to enter into the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and certain of the LJM2/Raptors
Hedging Transactions, none of which had a rational business purpose. In these
transactions, Enron transferred substantial value for non-economic hedges, meaning the
value of each hedge to Enron was based solely on the value of securities and cash that
Enron itself had transferred to the hedging vehicles, providing Enron no economic value
but only a financial statement benefit. There is evidence that Lay, Skilling and the

Outside Directors were in possession of facts necessary to conclude that the transactions

lacked a rational business purpose before approving the transactions.

104 There is also evidence that in connection with a transaction called Chewco, Skilling failed to disclose to
the Board that an Enron employee, Kopper, was involved, which might have been a material fact to the
Board because it created a conflict of interest. Thus, there is evidence that Skilling breached his duty of
candor. See Report, Appendix D (Roles of Lay, Skilling and Outside Directors), Actions of Lay, Skilling
and Outside Directors Regarding SPE Transactions ~— Duty of Candor.

-59-

=== PAGE 63 ===
B. Potential Liability

The evidence available to the Examiner regarding the roles of Lay and Skilling in
Enron’s SPE transactions, and the reasonable inferences that may be drawn from such
evidence, is sufficient for a fact-finder to conclude that Lay and Skilling knew or should
have known that the senior officers were misusing the SPE transactions to disseminate
materially misleading financial information. Thus, the evidence and the reasonable
inferences that may be drawn therefrom are sufficient for a fact-finder to conclude that
Lay and Skilling, as officers, were at least negligent in fulfilling their duty of oversight.
Lay and Skilling, acting in their capacities as officers of Enron, are not entitled to
exculpation from liability for their breach of fiduciary duty.

The Outside Directors, because they had less knowledge of and involvement in
Enron’s day-to-day operations, may not have recognized the same red flags regarding the
SPE transactions as indicators of the wrongful conduct of the senior officers. Although
the Outside Directors may properly be criticized for failing to inquire about aspects of
Enron’s financing activities that might have led them to more knowledge of the senior
officers’ wrongful conduct, the evidence does not support a conclusion that the Outside
Directors failed to act in good faith, or acted with a conscious disregard for known risks,
in failing to recognize and respond to red flags. Thus, based on the evidence available to
the Examiner, and the reasonable inferences that may be drawn from such evidence, the
Examiner cannot conclude that there is sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could
conclude that the Outside Directors failed to fulfill their duty of oversight.

Lay, Skilling and the Outside Directors, however, approved the LJM1/Rhythms

Hedging Transaction and certain LJM2/Raptors Hedging Transactions. None of those

-60-

=== PAGE 64 ===
transactions had a rational business purpose, which means the approval decisions are not
protected from judicial scrutiny by the business judgment rule. There is evidence that
Lay, Skilling and the Outside Directors were in possession of facts necessary to conclude
that the transactions lacked a rational business purpose and that they acted in bad faith in
approving the transactions. Thus, the evidence, and the reasonable inferences that may
be drawn from such evidence, is sufficient for a fact-finder to conclude that Lay, Skilling
and the Outside Directors breached their fiduciary duty of good faith in approving the
- LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and certain LJM2/Raptors Hedging Transactions.
Enron’s director exculpation provision does not protect a director from liability for
actions not taken in good faith.

Cc. Lay’s and Skilling’s Use of Enron Stock to Repay Corporate Loans

Between May 1999 and October 2001, Lay repeatedly borrowed the full amount
of his $4 million Enron line of credit and repaid it with shares of his Enron stock. In
total, he borrowed and repaid with stock over $94 million. Skilling had a $4 million term
loan from Enron, and in May 1999, he repaid $2 million of that amount with shares of his
Enron stock. The Compensation and Management Development Committee (the
“Compensation Committee”) of the Board granted each officer the right to make the
repayments with stock, but Enron’s Board apparently never approved the repayments or

ratified the approval granted by the Compensation Committee.’ It does not appear that

105 Outside Director John Duncan testified about a conversation he had with Lay after the Petition Date,
after he had learned about Lay’s use of the line of credit:

Now I get a call from Ken Lay. And how are you doing? I said not — something like,
Not doing too weil.

And why?
And I said, The magnitude of the trades of stock against your credit.

-6]-

=== PAGE 65 ===
any of the Outside Directors were aware of Lay’s repeated borrowings and repayments,
or the substantial aggregate amount that Lay borrowed and repaid, until the fall of 2001.
As described in Annex 1 to Appendix D (Roles of Lay, Skilling and Outside
Directors) to this Report, the Compensation Committee did not have authority under
Oregon law to approve the repayments of these loans with Enron stock, which were
effectively the same as Enron repurchasing the shares. Because the Board apparently
neither approved nor ratified the approval of the repayments by Lay and Skilling, such
repayments are voidable at the election of Enron. Upon such event: (i) Enron would
retum to Lay 2,131,282 shares of common stock, and Lay would be liable to repay loans
in the amount of $94,267,163, plus any applicable interest; and (ii) Enron would return to
Skilling 26,425 shares of common stock, and Skilling would be liable to repay his loan in

the amount of $2,000,042, plus any applicable interest.

And he said, Well, something like you know, my contract permitted that.

And I said, Ken, in the nuances of life, I don’t think any lawyer’s been born that can
write all the variables, so even if your contract said that, do you think in your wildest
dreams that the compensation committee would have approved that loan if you would
have said what you could do with it and maybe would do with it?

Then I added, Especially in the light of the company finding out it’s [sic] in financial
trouble, and may be aiming for bankruptcy?

And his reply was: Bankruptcy is not in the contract.
And the conversation was over, because there wasn’t too much to talk about at that point.

Sworn Statement of John H. Duncan, former Director, Enron, to John L. Latham, A&B, Nov. 26, 2002, at
90.

-62-

=== PAGE 66 ===
Vi. ROLE OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS IN  ENRON’S’ SPE
TRANSACTIONS AND THEORIES OF LIABILITY

A. Theories of Potential Liability
In this Report, the Examiner analyzes the participation of three Financial
Institutions in Enron’s SPE transactions and measures each Financial Institution’s
conduct against two legal theories:
e Aiding and abetting a breach of fiduciary duty — whether there is
sufficient evidence for a fact-finder to conclude that a Financial
Institution aided and abetted wrongful conduct of Enron’s officers that
constituted a breach of fiduciary duty such that the Financial
Institution may be liable for damages to Enron, assuming Enron has
standing to pursue such a claim; and
e Equitable subordination — whether there is sufficient evidence for a
court to conclude that the claims of that Financial Institution should be
equitably subordinated to the claims of other creditors.
Aiding and Abetting
For a Financial Institution to be liable for aiding and abetting, a fact-finder must
first determine that there has been a breach of fiduciary duty by one or more Enron
officers. If the fact-finder concludes there has been such a breach, the fact-finder may
then conclude that a Financial Institution is liable to Enron for aiding and abetting such a
breach if the evidence shows that: (i) the Financial Institution had actual knowledge of
the wrongful conduct giving rise to the breach; (ii) the Financial Institution gave
substantial assistance to the wrongdoer; and (iii) injury to the Debtors was the direct or
reasonably foreseeable result of such conduct. While there is some authority to the
contrary, the actual knowledge standard is strict — “should have known” or “suspicion”

will not suffice. Also, “routine” services provided by a Financial Institution will not

constitute substantial assistance. With regard to injury to the Debtors, a fact-finder could

-63-

=== PAGE 67 ===
conclude that Enron suffered damages as a result of the officers’ improper use of the SPE
transactions, consisting of, among other things, the cost of governmental investigations,
the administrative costs of a bankruptcy proceeding and other losses caused by Enron’s
“deepening insolvency.”

Equitable Subordination

A Financial Institution’s claims filed in the Bankruptcy Case may be equitably
subordinated to the payment of other claims filed in the case if (@) the Financial
Institution engaged in inequitable conduct and (ii) that conduct resulted in harm to other
creditors. In the case of creditors that are not insiders or fiduciaries of the debtor, the
standard of inequitable conduct is high and has been said to require a breach of a
recognized duty. Several cases stand for the proposition that a creditor’s participation in
the debtor’s misrepresentation of its financial condition to other creditors may constitute
inequitable conduct that will justify the equitable subordination of the creditor’s claim.'”

If a Financial Institution engaged in inequitable conduct by participating in
Enron’s misrepresentation of its financial condition, a court could conclude that other
creditors were injured by this conduct because they relied on this information in

extending (or continuing to extend) credit to Enron.

B. Potential Defenses to Aiding and Abetting Claims and Equitable
Subordination

In assessing whether a fact-finder could determine that a Financial Institution has

any liability under an aiding and abetting theory or should have its claims equitably

16 See Third Interim Report, Appendix B (Legal Standards), at 75-78.
107 Td. at 85-95,

-64-

=== PAGE 68 ===
subordinated, the Examiner has considered defenses available to the Financial
Institutions. The Examiner has considered potential defenses to equitable subordination
by reference to the elements of aiding and abetting. The facts and circumstances
surrounding each Financial Institution’s potential liability must be considered
independently, and Appendices E through G to this Report analyze these issues in more
detail. The Examiner has reviewed a substantial amount of evidence, including
documentary and testimonial evidence, and has noted the reasonable inferences that could
be drawn from the evidence. A fact-finder may draw alternative or contrary inferences
from the same evidence. Whether a Financial Institution will succeed on one or more
defenses to any of these causes of action will depend upon the fact-finder’s resolution of
the facts.

Parts B and C of Section IV of the Third Interim Report set forth a discussion of
the various defenses available to the financial institutions reported on in the Third Interim

Report!

All of those defenses, including those based on the wrongful conduct of
Enron’s officers, such as standing issues and in pari delicto defenses,!° would be

available to the Financial Institutions.

108 Third Interim Report, at 36-50.
10° Third Interim Report, Appendix B (Legal Standards), at 54-79.

-65-

=== PAGE 69 ===
VIN. SPECIFIC ROLES OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND

POTENTIAL LIABILITY
A. RBS

RBS and its predecessor, National Westminster Plc (“NatWest”), had extensive
dealings with Enron prior to RBS’s takeover of NatWest in March 2000. Prior to the
takeover, NatWest was one of Enron’s Tier 1 banks. After the March 2000 takeover,
RBS became a Tier 1 bank, and the merged bank continued to work closely with Enron
until the Petition Date. NatWest and RBS participated in Enron transactions known as:

| e the LIM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction;'!°
e the Sutton Bridge FAS 140 Transaction;
e the ETOL J, Il and IN] FAS 140 Transactions; and
e the Nixon Prepay Transaction.

Examiner’s Conclusions

As set forth in Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Officers) to the Third Interim
Report, the Examiner has concluded that there is sufficient evidence for a fact-finder to
determine that certain of Enron’s officers breached their fiduciary duties by causing the
Debtors to enter into the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and certain other SPE
transactions, including the RBS FAS 140 Transactions and the Nixon Prepay
Transaction, that were designed to manipulate the Debtors’ financial statements and
resulted in the dissemination of financial information they knew to be materially

misleading. In addition, the LIM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and other transactions

" Tn addition to the LIM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction, RBS assisted certain Enron officers with other
transactions involving LJM1 and affiliated entities.

-66-

=== PAGE 70 ===
relating thereto present facts sufficient to support the conclusion that Fastow and other
Enron officers engaged in self-dealing in violation of their duty of loyalty.

In Appendix E (Role of RBS and its Affiliates), the Examiner discusses RBS’s
involvement in the SPE transactions. The Examiner concludes that there is evidence that:
(i) RBS had actual knowledge of the wrongful conduct in these transactions giving rise to
the breaches of fiduciary duties; (ii) RBS gave substantial assistance to certain of the
Debtors’ officers by participating in the transactions; and (iii) injury to the Debtors was
the direct or reasonably foreseeable result of such conduct. This evidence is sufficient for
a fact-finder to conclude that RBS aided and abetted certain of the Debtors’ officers in
breaching their fiduciary duties. In addition, there is sufficient evidence of inequitable
conduct that RBS’s claims, totaling approximately $537 million, may be equitably
subordinated to the claims of other creditors.

The Examiner’s findings are based upon a review of testimony and documentary
evidence that is set forth in Appendix E (Role of RBS and its Affiliates), which the reader
should review for a more complete understanding. Transactions considered by the
Examiner in which RBS participated include the following:

The LJMI/Rhythms Hedging Transaction. A fact-finder could conclude that
RBS’s conduct in the formation and funding of LJM1 assisted Enron in the formation of
the LJMI1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction, through which Enron inappropriately
recognized $95 million of income in 1999, representing 10.6% of its originally reported
net income for that year. A fact-finder could also conclude that RBS’s conduct in the
LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and other transactions related thereto enabled

Fastow improperly to enrich himself and other Enron officers in violation of their

-67-

=== PAGE 71 ===
fiduciary duties to Enron. The evidence would allow a fact-finder to conclude that RBS,
as a result of the restructuring of LJM1, including a series of Total Return Swaps between
RBS and American International Group (“AIG”), assisted Fastow in investing and
profiting from approximately $25 million, which circumvented (i) restrictions in the
LJMI1 partnership agreement, (ii) Fastow’s representations to the Enron Board and (iii)
transfer and hedging restrictions placed on the Enron shares transferred to LJM1 upon
which PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (“PWC”) relied in issuing its fairness opinion in
connection with the formation of LJM1.

Fastow formed LJM1, with the approval of the Enron Board, to engage in
transactions with Enron, including the LIM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction. Fastow, as
the owner of the general partner of LJM1, controlled LJM1, and RBS and CSFB, through
their affiliates, were the only limited partners.''’ The RBS affiliate purchased its
partnership interest for $7.5 million (the same price paid by CSFB’s affiliate for its
partnership interest) and Fastow contributed $1 million, for total capital contributions of
$16 million.

Enron transferred to LIM1 6,755,394 shares of Enron stock, with an aggregate
stock price of $276 million, in exchange for the LIM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and
two promissory notes totaling $64 million.

The Enron Board approved the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction with the
understanding that Fastow could not profit from or have any direct pecuniary interest in
the Enron stock held by LJM1. Instead, Fastow could only profit from the capital

contributions from LJM1’s partners and proceeds from LJM1’s other investments. In

"1 See Second Interim Report, Appendix L (Related Party Tranasctions).

-68-

=== PAGE 72 ===
addition, the Enron Board understood that a fairness opinion would be obtained with
respect to the consideration received by Enron in exchange for the Enron stock. A
fairness opinion was obtained from PWC, but only after hedging and transfer restrictions
were placed on the Enron stock transferred to LJM1, thereby permitting Enron to assign a
value to the stock that was significantly below its aggregate stock price.

When Enron first presented RBS with the opportunity to participate in LJM1, a
senior RBS manager who was the lead banker on the proposed transaction, characterized
it as follows:

The fact is that a two bit LLC called Martin [the original name for LJM1],

owned by a couple of Enron employees, will all of a sudden be gifted

$220m of Enron stock. It could never bother about the borrowing base,

sell the stock in the market, pack up [its] bag and disappear off to Rio. If

you owned it, wouldn’t you? Now I’m beginning to understand why these
guys are so keen to get in onit....

There needs to be consideration given to the Enron group.'!”
KPMG Audit Plc, engaged by RBS to analyze the bank’s internal accounting for the
transaction, noted that:

the nature of the transaction is highly unusual. The role of the CFO of
Enron and the use of its own shares, raises significant concerns as to the
potential reputational risk to the bank if the transaction is not disclosed
appropriately by Enron or shareholders claim to have been
disadvantaged.!

12 Email from David Bermingham, RBS, to Kevin Howard and Mike Ellison, RBS, May 28, 1999
(emphasis in original) [RBS 4016410]. Ironically, Bermingham ultimately was indicted and charged with
wire fraud for his role in allegedly improperly profiting from LJM1 and allegedly is evading authorities.
Indictment, United States v. Bermingham, Cr. No. H-02-0597 (S.D. Tex. filed June 27, 2002) (the “RBS
Bankers Indictment”); see also Criminal Docket, United States v. Bermingham, No. 02-CR-0597-ALL
(S.D. Tex. filed June 27, 2002) (claiming David Bermingham is a “fugitive”.

"3 Letter from Iain Cummings, KPMG Audit Pic, to Chris Learmonth, RBS, ef al., June 23, 1999 (the
“KPMG Letter, June 23, 1999”), at RBS 3030570 [RBS 3030569-RBS 3030570]; see also Memorandum
from P.E. Commons, Head of Credit Risk, RBS, to William Martin, Group Risk Director, RBS, regarding

-69-

=== PAGE 73 ===
Besides the prohibition against Fastow sharing in any value from the transferred
Enron stock, the hedging and transfer restrictions on the Enron shares transferred to
LJM1 were set forth in a “lock-up agreement.” RBS took actions that circumvented these
restrictions and, as a result, generated substantial profits for each of the partners,
including Fastow. It did so through the Total Return Swaps with AIG, despite
recognizing that the effect of the Total Return Swaps was to produce results counter to
the conditions upon which LJM1 was approved. RBS noted in internal correspondence
that a competing CSFB proposal was aimed at providing Fastow with “[l]iquidity of (net)
$66m, which is entirely windfall (it was NEVER the intention in the original deal).”"!

While continuing to derive substantial profits from its interest in LIM1, RBS in
March 2000 sold its interest in a subsidiary of LIM1 to a number of Enron insiders. The
sale allegedly was planned by Fastow, Kopper and three RBS bankers and timed so as to
allow these and other insiders to profit personally from an imminent termination fee to be
paid by Enron to the LJM1 subsidiary. RBS did not, however, receive the full sale price
of $20 million that Enron was told would be paid to RBS for its interest in the subsidiary.
Instead, RBS received $1 million because its three key bankers on the transaction
allegedly siphoned off the remaining $19 million of the represented purchase price for

themselves personally, Fastow, Kopper and the other Enron insiders who were invited to

contribute to the purchase of the subsidiary.'°

Project LIM, June 29, 1999 (the “Project LIM Memorandum”), at RBS 3030461 [RBS 3030461-RBS
3030463].

"4 Email from David Bermingham, RBS, to Kevin Howard, et al., RBS, Aug. 6, 1999, at RBS 4016350
(emphasis in original) [RBS 4016350-RBS 4016351].

5. See RBS Bankers Indictment.

-70-

=== PAGE 74 ===
RBS profited considerably from its participation in LIM1. One of the means by
which it did so was by completing the Total Return Swaps with AIG. It also profited
through receipt of distributions declared by Fastow and through proceeds of Enron’s
repurchase (at a premium) from LJM1 of its interest in a Brazilian electric generation
facility. On August 31, 2001, with no assets remaining in LJM1, RBS calculated that it
had received in the aggregate from the LJM1 transactions, “a total return on our $7.5m
investment of approx [sic] $22.7m or in excess of 1200% IRR. This is a most
satisfactory result and underlines the way Enron supports its Tier 1 banks.”!!

The FAS 140 Transactions. RBS repeatedly received verbal assurances from top
Enron officials, including Fastow, of repayment of the bank’s equity investment in each
of the FAS 140 Transactions.!!7 RBS understood this equity needed to be “at risk” and
understood that these verbal assurances could neither be “formally documented for

0118

accounting reasons nor publicly disclosed''? if Enron was to derive the accounting

46 Email from Kevin Howard, RBS, to Iain Robertson, et al, RBS, Aug. 31, 2001, at RBS 6021378
[RBS 6021378-RBS 6021379].

"7 Credit Application, Sept. 18, 2000 (the “ETOL I Credit Application”), at RBS 3141124 and RBS
3141129-RBS 3141130 [RBS 3141118-RBS 3141165]; Credit Recommendation by Chris Clarke, Senior
Manager, RBS, Sept. 19, 2000 (the “ETOL I Credit Recommendation”), at RBS 3141116 [RBS 3141115-
RBS 3141117]; Memorandum from Konrad Kruger, Chief Executive, et al., Greenwich NatWest, regarding
Enron Sutton Bridge Ltd., undated, at RBS 3038535 (referencing the handwritten comments) [RBS
3038532-RBS 3038535]; RBS CBFM Credit Committee Minutes, Sept. 20, 2000 (the “CBFM Credit
Committee Minutes, Sept. 2000”), at RBS 3121434 [RBS 3121434-RBS 3121436]; RBS Group Credit
Committee Minutes, Sept. 22, 2000 (the “Group Credit Committee Minutes, Sept. 2000”), at RBS 3121150
[RBS 3121150-RBS 3121151]; Credit Application, Mar. 15, 2001, at RBS 3124939 [RBS 3124926-RBS
3124949]; Credit Recommendation by Chris Clarke, Senior Manager, RBS, Mar. 16, 2001, at RBS
3124953 [RBS 3124952-RBS 3124953]; RBS Group Credit Committee Minutes, Mar. 20, 2001, at RBS
3120874 [RBS 3120874-RBS 3120875].

"8 ETOL I Credit Recommendation, at RBS 3141116 (“We are therefore looking to verbal undertakings
(they cannot be formally documented for accounting reasons) from Enron that they will ensure that RBS is
kept whole through the exit strategy.”).

"° ETOL I Credit Application, at RBS 3141124; ETOL I Credit Recommendation, at RBS 3141116; The
Royal Bank of Scotland: Proposed Transaction with Enron, Author unknown, undated, at 1 [RBS
3104222-RBS 3104226]; see also Sworn Statement of Susan Milton, Director, RBS, to John E. Stephenson,
Jr., A&B, Sept. 9, 2003, at 73, lines 7-13, and at 163, lines 22-25.

-71-

=== PAGE 75 ===
benefits that it sought from these transactions. RBS also knew that Enron booked
accounting gains not permitted in view of the existence of such assurances.'”” In each of
the FAS 140 Transactions, RBS placed “significant reliance” on Enron’s verbal assurance
to “make the Bank whole” regardless of the cash generated by the underlying asset in the
transaction.!21_ RBS did not disclose the existence of these verbal assurances of
repayment of the equity plus stated yield, which RBS referred to as its “required return,”
to any third party. Within the bank, however, RBS officials characterized the FAS 140
structure through which RBS facilitated Enron’s booking of purported gains on sales and
cash flow from operations as “21 Century Alchemy.’

Nixon Prepay. The Nixon Prepay, which also involved Citigroup, Barclays and
Toronto Dominion (as a conduit between each of the three other banks and Enron),
provided Enron with $110 million of funding from RBS in December 1999, which Enron
improperly recorded as cash flow from operating activities. The RBS credit committees
were informed by an RBS senior research analyst that the proposed transaction was
“effectively a window dressing request” that Enron would employ “to reduce [its]

99123

reported year-end net debt position. RBS also recognized that the transaction’s

“whole structure [was] set up to remove the commodity risk for all parties, [so] all

120 Memorandum from Nicola Goss, RBS, to Peter Whitby, RBS, et al., regarding ETOL equity purchase,
Sept. 6, 2000, at RBS 3141015 [RBS 3141015-RBS 3141017]; Memorandum from Janis Wallis, Associate
Director, RBS, regarding ETOL, Sept. 26, 2001, at RBS 3089524 [RBS 3089524-RBS 3089527}; ETOL I
Credit Application, at RBS 3141124; Memorandum from Nicola Goss, Associate Director, Project and
Export Finance, RBS, to Iain S. Robertson, ef al., RBS, regarding additional ETOL funding, Mar. 1, 2001,
at RBS 3141241 [RBS 3141241-RBS 3141243]; see also Email from Chris Clarke, Senior Manager,
Structured & Specialised Credit, RBS, to Thomas Hardy, et al., RBS, Mar. 9, 2001 [RBS 3141245].

12) CBEM Credit Committee Minutes, Sept. 2000, at RBS 3120874.
22 Group Credit Committee Minutes, Sept. 2000, at RBS 3121150.

3 ARD Memorandum from A.W. McAlister, Senior Analyst, RBS, Dec. 6, 1999 (the “ARD
Memorandum, Dec. 6, 1999”), at RBS 3118972 [RBS 3118972-RBS 3118973].

-72-

=== PAGE 76 ===
payments against commodity price moves are exactly off-set by receipts from the party
on the other side.”!* Indeed, RBS personnel believed that the Nixon Prepay “raise[d]

issues over the absolute level of manipulation undertaken by Enron in its financial

125

statements. RBS understood that Enron accounted for proceeds from transactions

such as the Nixon Prepay as cash flow from operating activities.'*° RBS nonetheless
provided Enron with the funding that it sought, then extended the maturity date at
Enron’s request, having internally noted in connection with another Enron transaction in
the same time period that “[b]ecause this is balance sheet management, it pays better than
straight Enron corporate risk.””*’ RBS agreed to the extension of the Nixon Prepay
maturity date despite an internal credit analysis at the time of the proposed extension that
reflected increasing alarm regarding “financial period manipulation” by Enron:

{t]he scale of financial period manipulation [by Enron] is exceedingly
worrying and I don’t yet understand it, nor am I sure that anyone in the
bank does... . Such concern has been a theme of all our discussions for a
while. We have twice increased exposure since doing this deal, [including]
another manipulation when we joined in the JM Trust [i.e., Ghost] 18
month bridge... .

Ican see from a relationship/business perspective that there is a temptation
to write another income generating transaction on the basis of the comfort
we are drawing from it being very short term, but the concern must
obviously be that if lots of counterparties are doing this then any bad news
(or shortage for whatever reason of counterparty capacity) will cut
refinance ability dramatically and/or end Enron’s ability to manipulate

4 Application for Facilities Requiring Credit Committee/Board Approval, Dec. 6, 1999, at RBS 3118966
[RBS 3118960-RBS 3118984}.

"5 ARD Memorandum, Dec. 6, 1999, at RBS 3118973.

6 Email from Wilson McAlister, RBS, to Derek Weir, et al., RBS, Feb. 1, 2000, at 1 (“Other income
includes unrealised gains and losses from price risk management activities .... These activities are
reported as part of operational cash flow, boosting the reported position by $550M over the last two years .
. .and representing 30% of reported operating cash flow in that period.”) [RBS 3112211-RBS 3112213].

27 mail from Derek Weir, RBS, to Alan Dickinson, RBS, and copy to Brian McInnes, Relationship
Manager, RBS, et al., Jan. 31, 1999, at RBS 3112212 [RBS 3112211-RBS 3112213].

-73-

=== PAGE 77 ===
thus leading to a horrendous on-balance sheet position which would
further exacerbate the position. The question is when do we stop ... .'

B. CSFB
CSFB was one of Enron’s most valued investment banks and by mid-1999
consistently achieved Tier 1 status. CSFB regarded Enron as “one of [its] top accounts, if
not the number one relationship.”!?° Enron paid CSFB more in fees in 1999 — over
$23 million — than any other of its Tier 1 banks.'*° In early 2001, Enron rated CSFB its
“Best Bank” in North America, and recognized, in particular, CSFB’s strength in debt
capital markets. '*!
CSFB played important roles in several of Enron’s SPE transactions, including
the following:
e the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction;!*
e the CSFB Prepay Transaction; and
e the Nile FAS 140 Transaction.
Examiner’s Conclusions

As set forth in Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Officers) to the Third Interim

Report, the Examiner has concluded that there is sufficient evidence for a fact-finder to

8 Email from Alex Sinclair, RBS, to Brian McInnes, ef al., RBS, Mar. 10, 2000 [RBS 3118862].

%° Email from James Moran, Director, CSFB, to Geoff Smailes, CSFB, Dec. 14, 2000
[CSFBCO 000044034]; see also Memorandum from James Moran, Director, CSFB, to David Maletta,
Managing Director, and Ed Devine, Managing Director, CSFB, Dec. 11, 2000, at 3 (describing Enron as a
“Priority 1 client”) [CSFBCO 000044755-CSFBCO 000044758]; Sworn Statement of Osmar Abib,
Managing Director, CSFB, to Frank G. Smith, A&B, May 6-7, 2003, at 299, lines 18-19 (“Enron was a
priority one client.”).

30 Enron Relationship Review January 2000, at AB000538544 [AB000538536-AB000538624].

31 Enron Debt Investor Relationship Review Highlights January 2001, at ABO911 1958, ABO911 1962
[AB0911 1956-AB0911 1964].

82 Tn addition to the LIM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction, CSFB assisted certain Enron officers with other
transactions involving LJM1 and affiliated entities.

-74-

=== PAGE 78 ===
determine that certain of Enron’s officers breached their fiduciary duties by causing the
Debtors to enter into the LIM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and certain other SPE
transactions that were designed to manipulate the Debtors’ financial statements and
resulted in the dissemination of financial information that such officers knew to be
materially misleading. In addition, the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and other
transactions related thereto present facts sufficient to support the conclusion that Fastow
and other Enron officers engaged in self-dealing in violation of their duty of loyalty.

. In Appendix F (Role of CSFB and its Affiliates), the Examiner discusses CSFB’s
involvement in the SPE transactions. The Examiner concludes that there is evidence that:
(i) CSFB had actual knowledge of the wrongful conduct in these transactions giving rise
to the breaches of fiduciary duties by certain Enron officers; (i) CSFB gave substantial
assistance to certain of the Debtors’ officers by participating in the transactions; and
(iii) injury to the Debtors was the direct or reasonably foreseeable result of such conduct.
This evidence is sufficient for a fact-finder to conclude that CSFB aided and abetted
certain of the Debtors’ officers in breaching their fiduciary duties. In addition, there is
sufficient evidence of inequitable conduct that CSFB’s claims, totaling at least $417
million, may be equitably subordinated to the claims of other creditors.

The Examiner’s findings are based upon a review of testimony and documentary
evidence that is set forth in Appendix F (Role of CSFB and its Affiliates), which the
Teader should review for a more complete understanding. Transactions considered by the

Examiner in which CSFB participated include the following:
The LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction. A fact-finder could conclude that

CSFB’s conduct in the formation and funding of LJM1 assisted Enron in entering into the

-75-

=== PAGE 79 ===
LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction, described above in connection with RBS’s
participation in that transaction, and through which Enron inappropriately recognized $95
million of income in 1999 (10.6% of its originally reported net income for that year). A .
fact-finder could also conclude that CSFB’s conduct in the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging
Transaction and other transactions related thereto enabled Fastow improperly to enrich
himself and other Enron officers in violation of their fiduciary duties to Enron.

For example, through a transaction known as the SAILS transaction, CSFB
effectively monetized its interest in the Enron shares held by LJM1 and then contributed
$45.1 million in cash to LJM1. The parties treated the proceeds of the transaction as an
additional capital contribution to LJM1, from which Fastow could profit, rather than
proceeds resulting from the Enron stock, from which he could not profit, pursuant to
representations made to the Enron Board in connection with its approval of LJM1.
LJM1’s other limited partner made a similar contribution. A fact-finder could conclude
that, as a result of these transactions, an additional $25 million was contributed to LIM1
and recharacterized by the parties so that Fastow could profit directly from these funds.
CSFB was aware of this restriction on Fastow’s ability to profit from the Enron stock
because certain terms of LJM1’s Partnership Agreement, to which CSFB’s affiliate was a
party, provided that distributions and allocations with respect to the shares of Enron stock
transferred to LIM1 were to be made only to the limited partners and not the general
partner.

From LJM1’s formation in June 1999 through its dissolution just over two years
later in October 2001, CSFB received distributions and other payments on its LJM1

investment in excess of $38 million.

-76-

=== PAGE 80 ===
CSFB Prepay. In the CSFB Prepay Transaction, CSFB loaned funds to Enron in
the amount of $150 million. As in other Prepays, and as acknowledged by a CSFB

2133 which Enron

employee at the time, the transaction was “an obvious loan transaction,
accounted for as a commodity transaction. As Enron officers were aware, a $150 million
Prepay Transaction would enable Enron to improperly record $150 million of cash flows
from operating activities and understate the debt by the same amount on its December 31,
2000 balance sheet. The evidence would allow a fact-finder to conclude that CSFB
assisted Enron in completing the CSFB Prepay Transaction, even though CSFB knew
that Enron’s accounting for this transaction, with no other meaningful related disclosure,
would contribute to materially misleading financial presentation.

FAS 140 Transactions. CSFB also funded a FAS 140 Transaction known as Nile
in the aggregate amount of $25 million. The Nile transaction monetized shares of
common stock in an Enron subsidiary called ServiceCo Holdings, Inc. CSFB funded the
debt portion of the transaction and provided the 3% equity necessary for Enron to take
the position that it was not required to include that debt on its balance sheet. CSFB’s
equity investment was, however, supported by Enron’s agreement to repurchase the
equity at par, thereby precluding the accounting treatment that Enron adopted. As
reflected in a contemporaneous internal CSFB memorandum, Enron’s agreement resulted

in CSFB’s credit risk on its equity investment in Nile being “100% Enron via put.”"**

133 Rmail from Ian Emmett, CSFB, to Steven Wootton, Director, CSFB, Dec. 12, 2000 (“‘Is it ok for us to
be entering into such an ‘obvious’ loan transaction?”) [AB0507 00064].

134 Memorandum from Brian McCabe, Vice President, David Koczan, Assistant Vice President, and James
Moran, Director, CSFB, et al., to Robert O’Brien, Chief Credit Officer, David Maletta, Managing Director,
and Ed Devine, Managing Director, CSFB, Sept. 24, 2001, at 5 [CSFBCO 000043589-CSFBCO
000043609].

-77-

=== PAGE 81 ===
Cc. Toronto Dominion

Although it engaged in a variety of transactions with Enron, ranging from
traditional commercial loans to underwritings, Toronto Dominion’s most prominent role
was in Enron’s Prepay Transactions. From December 1998 through December 2000,
Toronto Dominion participated in six Prepay Transactions with Enron, with total
proceeds of approximately $2 billion.

Examiner’s Conclusions

As set forth in Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Officers) to the Third Interim
Report, the Examiner has concluded that there is sufficient evidence for a fact-finder to
determine that certain of Enron’s officers breached their fiduciary duties when they
caused the Debtors to enter into certain SPE and related transactions, including the
Prepay Transactions, that were designed to manipulate the Debtors’ financial statements
and that resulted in the dissemination of financial information such officers knew to be
materially misleading.

In Appendix G (Role of Toronto Dominion and its Affiliates), the Examiner
discusses Toronto Dominion’s involvement in the Prepay Transactions. The Examiner
concludes that there is evidence that: (i) Toronto Dominion had actual knowledge of the
wrongful conduct in connection with these transactions giving rise to the breaches of
fiduciary duty by certain Enron officers; (ii) Toronto Dominion gave substantial
assistance to certain of the Debtors’ officers by participating in such transactions; and
(iii) injury to the Debtors was the direct or reasonably foreseeable result of such conduct.
This evidence is sufficient for a fact-finder to conclude that Toronto Dominion aided and

abetted certain of the Debtors’ officers in breaching their fiduciary duties. In addition,

-78-

=== PAGE 82 ===
there is sufficient evidence of inequitable conduct such that Toronto Dominion’s claims,
totaling approximately $57.8 million, may be equitably subordinated to the claims of
other creditors.

The Examiner’s conclusions are based upon a review of testimony and
documentary evidence that is set forth in Appendix G (Role of Toronto Dominion and its
Affiliates), which the reader should review for a more complete understanding.
Transactions considered by the Examiner include the following:

Prepay Transactions. The six Prepay Transactions that Toronto Dominion
completed with Enron between December 1998 and December 2000 (the “Toronto
Dominion Prepays”) totaled approximately $2 billion. Toronto Dominion knew that
Enron did not transfer any commodity or any associated price risk in the Toronto
Dominion Prepays and that the transactions were effectively debt. Toronto Dominion
also knew that Enron did not report the Toronto Dominion Prepays as debt. Evidence
exists from which a fact-finder could conclude that Toronto Dominion understood Enron
reported the proceeds from the Toronto Dominion Prepays as cash flow from operating
activities. Finally, Toronto Dominion knew that Enron’s accounting for the Toronto
Dominion Prepays, with no disclosure in the financial statement footnotes or MD&A, did
not provide an investor with any understanding of the amount of Enron’s repayment
obligations or the terms of such obligations.

Toronto Dominion was concerned that Enron used these transactions to

manipulate its balance sheet:

-79-

=== PAGE 83 ===
e “To address head office’s concern regarding balance sheet
manipulation, we have discussed the use of this structure with
Enron.”25

e “[W]e’ve been warned about the balance-sheet games at least twice in
the last few months .. . .”°°

e “Enron has approached us again to help them manage their balance
sheet for the rating agencies and the analysts. The Company is coming
to TD as we have demonstrated the ability to deliver, on a short-time
frame, the same prepaid structured transaction.”'*”

Toronto Dominion was also aware that Rating Agency pressure was an important
part of Enron’s motivation in doing Prepay Transactions. In the credit approval request
for the December 1998 prepay, it was noted that:

Based on conversations with Enron, the sole purpose of this facility is to

satisfy promises made to the rating agencies early this year about reducing

leverage. !*8

Despite this knowledge, and despite the knowledge that Enron did not adequately
disclose its prepay obligations, Toronto Dominion executed the Toronto Dominion
Prepays, likely because the Prepay Transactions were “highly profitable” for Toronto

139 During the two year period in which Toronto Dominion entered into

Dominion.
Prepay Transactions with Enron, Toronto Dominion’s Risk Adjusted Return on Capital

for the Enron relationship was 39%, nearly twice the return of 20% that Toronto

85 Toronto Dominion Corporate Credit Review for Enron, Firefly Trust and ENA, Dec. 10, 1999, at 20
[TDB-EX 002319-TDB-EX 002345].

36 Email from Cori Novellino, Toronto Dominion, to Robyn Zeller, Toronto Dominion, Nov. 7, 2000
[TDB-EX 001266].

37 Toronto Dominion Speedy Review, June 22, 1999, at TDB-EX 000040 [TDB-EX 000033-TDB-
EX 000042].

88 Toronto Dominion USA Division Speedy Review, Dec. 17, 1998, at TDB-EX(1) 015115 (emphasis in
original) [TDB-EX(1) 015111-TDB-EX(1) 015120].

13° Toronto Dominion Corporate Credit Review, Nov. 8, 2000, at 29 (“These Swaps are highly profitable
for us and well received by [Enron].”) [TDB-EX(1) 000054-TDB-EX(1) 000090].

-80-

=== PAGE 84 ===
Dominion targeted for its corporate customers. This 39% return stands in sharp contrast
to the return of 12% that the Enron relationship provided Toronto Dominion in 1997, just

prior to the period in which the Toronto Dominion Prepays were executed.

-81-

=== PAGE 85 ===
IX. HOW COULD THIS HAVE HAPPENED?

A. Overview

The Examiner has previously reported on: (i) the role of the SPEs in the collapse
of Enron; (ii) those SPE structures that are subject to legal challenge; (iii) Enron’s use of
SPEs to manipulate the financial information it reported to the public in violation of
GAAP and applicable law; and (iv) officers, directors, accountants, attorneys and
financial institutions involved in such transactions who may have liability under
applicable legal standards.

The Examiner previously concluded that a group of senior officers at Enron
adopted a strategy of using complex SPE transactions in order to manipulate Enron’s
financial statements. Specifically, through the use of six accounting techniques and
hundreds of transactions, these officers distorted Enron’s reported financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows. The “tangled web” created by the complexity and
magnitude of these structures was extraordinary. ,

The Examiner now addresses the question that many people have asked: how

9l41

could this have happened’ That is, how could the seventh largest company in the

40 “Oh what a tangled web we weave When first we practice to deceive!” Sir Walter Scott, Marmion,
Canto vi, Stanza 17 (1808).

1 The Examiner’s views concerning this question are limited by the scope of the April 8" Order and by
the refusal of over 20 witnesses, including several senior Enron officers, to provide testimony to the
Examiner by exercising their privilege against self-incrimination under the Fifth Amendment.

-82-

=== PAGE 86 ===
world, which had been a darling of Wall Street,!”? fall so quickly and disastrously?'? To
answer this question, the Examiner: (i) identifies certain factors that may have caused
Enron’s officers to adopt their fraudulent and ultimately unsuccessful strategy; (ii)
identifies several methods that appear to have been used by these officers to implement
their strategy; and (iii) discusses the checks and balances that could have been provided
by Enron’s professionals and the Enron Board, which, had they been present, might have
limited the misconduct.

B. Why Did Enron Officers Behave This Way?

At least two factors may explain the officers’ misuse of SPEs to manipulate
Enron’s financial statements. First was the inherent tension between two apparent Enron
goals: (i) seeking a high price/earnings multiple for its stock that was typical of high
growth company stocks; and (ii) seeking to maintain an investment grade credit rating

that was typical of mature companies with stable, recurring earnings. Second was

2 See, e.g., Hillary Durgin, Enron: Huge Growth from Unregulated Power, Fin. Times, Dec. 8, 1999, at
3 (“Today more than three-quarters of Enron’s earnings come from unregulated businesses,’ says
Raymond Niles, electric power analyst at Schroder & Co in New York. ‘They’re growing like wildfire.’”);
David Kirkpatrick, Enron Takes its Pipeline to the Net, Fortune, Jan. 24, 2000, at 127 (“Says Steven Parla,
an energy securities analyst at Credit Suisse First Boston: ‘For Enron to say we can do bandwidth trading
is like Babe Ruth’s saying, I can hit that pitcher. You tell him to get up there and take three swings. The
tisk is staggeringly low, and the potential reward is staggeringly high.””); Rebecca Smith, Enron Net
Nearly Tripled in Ist Period, Beating Estimate, as Revenue Rose 72%, Wall St. J., Apr. 13, 2000, at A4
(“The real story isn’t the earnings,’ said utilities analyst David Fleisher at Goldman, Sachs & Co. ‘It’s
what lies ahead. This isn’t your father’s natural-gas company.””); David Rynecki, 0 Stocks to Last the
Decade, Fortune, Aug. 14, 2000, at 114 (identifying Enron as one of a “buy-and-forget portfolio” of
“stocks that we think will be winners over the coming decade”); Business Center: Five Big-Cap Stocks
Near Their 52-Week Lows (CNBC television broadcast, June 18, 2001) (Cohn: “[Enron’s] stock price is
down 37 percent over the last year. . . . Energy analyst Raymond Niles at Salomon Smith Barney says
California’s energy woes and the risk of re-regulation growing out of federal energy hearings may make
investors nervous, but he says Enron’s future is bright.” Raymond Niles (Salomon Smith Barney): “We’re
pretty much pounding the table on Enron right now today. It’s a company with the best fundamentals in the
industry. But right now we think it also has compelling valuation at these levels.”).

8 Enron Corporation Stock Price History Report, undated (providing historical stock prices from January
1, 1996 to June 26, 2002) (showing Enron’s stock price growing from $40 per share in late 1999 to almost
$90 per share in late 2000, then falling to the $50s by April 2001, to the $30s by August 2001, and then
rapidly to less than $1 when Enron filed its bankruptcy petition) [AB000499873-AB000499904].

-83-

=== PAGE 87 ===
Enron’s compensation system which, coupled with readily accessible SPE transactions,

provided a tempting incentive to distort Enron’s reported financial results. Combined,

these factors fueled a competitive, deal-driven corporate culture that valued outward

appearances more than actual results. As Lay’s Chief of Staff observed in an August

2001 email to Lay, Enron would have been better served by focusing less on managing

financial statement presentation and more on getting economic results:

We should do the economically rational thing in every transaction and
business and let the chips fall where they may. Instead of tying ourselves
in a knot about managing earnings or write downs or avoiding an asset
sale because it’s on the books for more than the market, we should just
make the rational economic decision.... If we make the economically
rational decisions over and over, the stock price will come along.“

Impact of Conflicting Business Goals

Enron’s conflicting business goals are evident in two quotes from Enron’s 2000

Annual Report:

“Enron is laser-focused on earnings per share, and we expect to continue
strong earnings performance.”'*®

“Enron’s continued investment grade status is critical to the success of its
wholesale businesses as well as its ability to maintain adequate
liquidity.”"*°

Focusing on earnings performance, Enron’s 2000 Annual Report touted four

businesses with “tremendous opportunities for growth”:

e Wholesale services;

e Retail energy services;

4 Email from Steven J. Kean, Enron, to Kenneth Lay, Enron, Aug. 17, 2001 (the “Kean Email”), at 1
[AB0911 2880-AB0911 2881].

45 Boron Annual Report for 2000, at 2.

M6 Id. at 27.

-84-

=== PAGE 88 ===
e Broadband services; and
: + ag 147
e Transportation services.
Transportation services housed the pipeline business, which was perceived as a

48 Wholesale services was a major driver of Enron’s growth in

slower-growth business.
revenues, but actually produced relatively modest margins.’ Retail energy services and
broadband services were two of the start-up or speculative investments that Enron hoped
would provide growth opportunities. Enron’s prior experience with high growth/high
risk investments, however, had not been successful.
In prior years, Enron said that its investments in foreign power plants, water

0 only to have those

systems and other ventures provided growth opportunities,
investments result in significant losses. For example, in its 1998 Annual Report, Enron
highlighted its Dabhol power project in India by noting that “[u]pon achieving full
commercial operation in 2001, the 2,450 megawatt facility... will be the largest
independent power project in the world.”*! By September 30, 2001, Enron had spent
$1.2 billion on this investment and work on the project ceased following several major

setbacks. *?

M7 Td. at 2.

48 TBIT from transportation services increased 8% from 1988 to 1999 and 3% from 1999 to 2000. Id. at
21,

™% Wholesale services had operating income of 1.8% on revenues of $93.3 billion in 2000 and 2.5% on
revenues of $35.5 billion in 1999. Id. at 51.

5° Enron Annual Report for 1998, at 4, 14-16 and 20.
81 Id. at 16.

132 See Notes to Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Consolidated Financial Statements, 10-Q for 3Q/2001, at
Note 6 (Litigation and Other Contingencies) (noting that due to disputes with various India governmental
agencies, the project’s contractors had ceased work on Phase II of the construction, and the project’s
lenders had stopped funding and had assumed control of the project’s bank accounts).

-85-

=== PAGE 89 ===
Also, in its 1998 Annual Report, Enron stated that its Azurix water system
business “is poised to become a major global water company in a $300 billion market
that is ripe for third-party investment. ...”"*? By September 30, 2001, however, Enron
had spent over $1.2 billion on this investment and had been forced to take several
significant writedowns.’

Enron also sought earnings growth because it wanted its stock to trade at high
multiples similar to the high returns enjoyed by venture capital funds in the mid to late
1990s. Enron sought to apply its knowledge of certain energy trading markets to profit
from trading markets in other sectors. But, in order to gain the requisite knowledge to
create and profit from those other trading markets, in some instances Enron acquired
businesses, which also required capital.

For all these reasons, Enron made substantial capital investments. Although
Enron established a capital budget at the beginning of each year, it consistently exceeded
that budget by significant margins. For example, in 1998, Enron spent over $5.8 billion
on capital investments (compared to a budget of $772.5 million); in 1999, it spent $5
billion (compared to a budget of $1.1 billion); and in 2000, it spent $4.4 billion

(compared to a budget of just over $2 billion).'*°

‘83 Enron Annual Report for 1998, at 20.

'S4 Epron suffered impairment charges related to Azurix of $326 million in 2000 and $287 million in the
Third Quarter of 2001. This does not reflect recognition of its recourse liability in the Share Trust structure
of approximately $915 million of debt. See Notes to Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Consolidated Financial
Statements, 10-Q for 3Q/2001, at Note 2 (Recent Events).

185 See Appendix D (Roles of Lay, Skilling and Outside Directors), Actions of Lay, Skilling and Outside
Directors Regarding SPE Transactions — Duty to Inquire.

-86-

=== PAGE 90 ===
Enron could have financed its significant expenditures by issuing stock, but it was
reluctant to do so for fear that the dilution would harm its stock price.'*° Enron could not
have financed its capital expenditures with earnings because its reported earnings were
largely mark-to-market earnings, which generated little current cash flow.’ Another
option would have been to sell merchant assets. However, Enron’s merchant portfolio
contained a relatively high percentage of poorly performing and illiquid assets.!°*
Accordingly, the only viable option remaining was to finance these capital investments
with debt.

Debt, however, would have been harmful to Enron’s investment grade credit
rating, and the credit rating was key to wholesale services, Enron’s largest business.
Without an investment grade credit rating, Enron would have been required to post
collateral in favor of counterparties in its wholesale services business. Enron’s solution
was to obtain financing through SPE transactions without disclosing Enron’s obligation

to repay the amounts financed. In addition, in some of these transactions, Enron took the

position that it could treat the proceeds of the financings as cash flow from operations.

156 See Second Interim Report, at 15.

7 This quality of earings problem not only precluded Enron from financing its investments from
earnings, but drove it to use its Prepay Transactions and FAS 140 Transactions to generate operating cash
flow to address the focus on operating cash flow by the Rating Agencies. See Second Interim Report.

‘88 Enron Vice Chairman Mark Frevert (“Frevert”) told Enron employees that “[w]e may have been
‘smoking our own dope’ as we continued to build the asset portfolio domestically and we pushed a lot into
off-balance sheet vehicles.” Eric Thode, Enron Net Works, Typed Notes entitled “Enron Net Works
Employee Meetings,” Oct. 31, 2001 (the “October 2001 Net Works Meeting Notes”), at ABO786 02863
(notes record statements of Frevert, who led the meeting) [AB0786 02859-AB0786 02868]; see also
Deposition of Mark A. Frevert, former Vice Chairman, Enron, by William C. Humphreys, Jr, A&B, May
7, 2003, at 220. Similarly, in meetings with employees, Frevert informed employees that the problems
started in the early 1990s with international assets including India, South America and Asia, which were
intended to build a merchant portfolio in these areas. “It didn’t pan out that way.” Although Enron had
been trying to sell them, most of the international asset sales were small and the major assets had not been
sold. October 2001 Net Works Meeting Notes, at AB0786 02863.

-87-

=== PAGE 91 ===
One of Enron’s first uses of SPE transactions appears to have been the Prepay
Transactions. Structured to be part of Enron’s energy trading activities, the Prepay
Transactions generated cash and addressed the gap between mark-to-market earnings and
operating cash flow.'®? Enron next tumed to the FAS 140 Transactions. These were
initially used to “monetize” European power plant investments. Enron then began
using Minority Interest Transactions to show debt as “minority interest” in the mezzanine

161 Jn 1998, Enron used its first Share Trust Transaction,

section of its balance sheet.
known as Marlin, to finance the acquisition of the Azurix water system.

In 1999, when Enron’s merchant portfolio produced a big success, Enron officers
again tumed to SPE transactions to create a desired financial statement presentation.
Enron’s $10 million investment in the stock of Rhythms NetConnections, Inc.
(“Rhythms”) skyrocketed in value to approximately $500 million following the public
offering of the stock. The stock price was volatile, however, and Enron knew that mark-
to-market accounting would result in the increase being reported as current earnings.
Enron also knew that a later decline in the value of the investment would result in mark-
to-market losses, which Enron wanted to avoid. Due to the large percentage of Rhythms’

total equity represented by Enron’s investment — approximately 50% of Rhythms’

publicly traded shares — and the volatility of the stock price in the market, Enron was

189 See Second Interim Report, Appendix E (Prepay Transactions).

169 See Second Interim Report, Appendix M (FAS 140 Transactions). After a change in the accounting
tules in 1998, Enron could no longer finance power plants through FAS 140 Transactions. See Appendix B
(Role of Andersen).

161 See Second Interim Report, Appendix I (Minority Interest Transactions). In 1999, Enron also used the
Nahanni Minority Interest Transaction to recognize operating cash flow. See Second Interim Report, at 27-
28.

-88-

=== PAGE 92 ===
unlikely to find a third party willing to enter into a hedge on economic terms acceptable
to Enron.’

Consequently, Enron employed its non-economic hedging technique (in the
LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction) to mask the earnings impact of a decline in the
value of its investment. In 2000, when faced with a decline in value of many of its other
investments, rather than take charges against income, Enron again turned to its non-
economic hedging technique. In this instance, Enron used the Raptor SPEs (in the
LJM2/Raptors Hedging Transactions) to offset for financial statement purposes the
decline in value of a group of underperforming assets selected by the various business
units. Shortly thereafter, Enron confronted a major problem on several of these hedge
transactions — the decline in its own stock price and the continued devaluation of assets
that were being hedged. Because the assets providing credit capacity for the hedges were
falling in value, Enron ultimately terminated the Raptor hedging structure. This
termination, together with substantial write downs in its failed broadband and water
systems businesses, resulted in the $1.01 billion earnings charge on October 16, 2001.
Less than two months later, Enron filed for bankruptcy.

Compensation

The incentives created by Enron’s compensation system may also help explain the
behavior of certain of its officers. The combination of (i) readily accessible, highly-
structured, accounting-driven transactions that could be used to manipulate reported

financial results and (ii) a compensation system that was tied to Enron’s reported

'2 See Appendix C (Roles of Lay, Skilling and Outside Directors).

-89-

=== PAGE 93 ===
financial results, likely provided a strong influence on officer conduct. Lay’s Chief of
Staff described the effects of Enron’s compensation system on candor:
A near mercenary culture which encourages organizations to hide
problems (until those problems have become very big), discourages
cooperation and teamwork, and drives off people who demand at least a
modicum of civility in their work environment.

Enron’s system of compensation placed the highest emphasis on reported
financial results. Simply put, the higher Enron’s reported earnings or funds flow, or
the higher its stock price, the higher an officer’s compensation was likely to be.
Officers and employees understood this important nexus and emphasized their
involvement in transactions, even those that lacked economic substance, as they
lobbied for higher compensation.’

It is common for businesses to look to these financial metrics in setting officer
compensation as a means of aligning the interests of management with those of
shareholders. However, by using readily accessible, highly structured, accounting-

driven SPE transactions that produced reported results inconsistent with their

substance, Enron officers manipulated Enron’s reported net income and funds flow,

163 See Kean Email, at 1.

14 See generally Memorandum from Joe Deffner, Enron, to Dave Delainey, Enron, regarding Year End
Accomplishments and Overall Past Enron Accomplishments, undated [AB0971 00154-AB0971 00177];
Email from Schuyler Tilney, Merrill Lynch, to Dan Gordon, Merrill Lynch, et al, May 30, 2000, at 1
[MLBE 0370956-MLBE 0370957]. In addition, the Structured Transactions Group within Enron’s tax
department, led by R. Davis Maxey, prepared various PowerPoint presentations touting the net income
generated by his group, including one discussing pre-tax income from the Steele Transaction entitled
“Show Me the Money! Project Steele Earnings Benefits.” See Third Interim Report, Appendix C (Role of
Enron’s Officers), at 21 n.85. In the words of another Enron employee, Robert Hermann, Enron found the
transactions originating in the corporate tax department “kind of like cocaine—they got kind of hooked on
it.” In-Person Interview with Robert J. Hermann, former Vice President Tax, Enron Corp., by Philip C.
Cook, Partner, A&B, Aug. 8, 2002; see also Sworn Statement of R. Davis Maxey, former Vice President
Tax, Enron Corp., to Philip C. Cook, Partner, A&B, Dec. 11, 2002 (the “Maxey Sworn Statement”), at 148-
49.

-90-

=== PAGE 94 ===
factors that traditionally have had favorable influences on a company’s market value.
The evidence suggests that the compensation system provided what proved to be an
overpowering motivation for implementing SPE transactions that distorted Enron’s
reported financial results. Evidence further shows that flawed or aggressive
accounting for the SPE transactions enabled the Enron officers to obtain greatly
inflated bonuses and to realize substantial proceeds from the sale of Enron stock they
received as part of their compensation packages.’® In fact, during a three-year period
from 1998 through 2000, a group of twenty-one officers received in excess of $1 billion
in the form of salary, bonus and gross proceeds from sales of Enron stock. Lay and
Skilling received substantial compensation from Enron under effectively the same system
as the other senior officers, with Lay receiving compensation valued at over $33 million
and Skilling over $17 million in the year 2000 alone.'” A significant amount of that
compensation was based on Enron’s reported financial results.

The Compensation Committee had responsibility for establishing and
implementing Enron’s executive compensation philosophy and strategy. The expressed

purpose of executive compensation at Enron was to reward performance that created

165 See Email from Peter E. Weidler, Enron, to Ray Alvarez, Transredes, et al., Mar. 27, 2000, at 1
[AB0971 01871-AB0971 01878].

165 See Forms 4 and 5 filed by Enron’s officers with the SEC from 1998 to 2000. The stock proceeds
figure does not take into account the officers’ cost of such shares or any resulting tax liability arising from
such sales. Many of the shares included in these sales were obtained as part of long-term incentive awards
to these officers in 1998-2000. To avoid duplication, the $1 billion figure does not include the grant-date
value of such incentive awards, which would normally be considered part of an officer’s total direct
compensation for a given year.

167 See Enron Schedule 14A filed with the SEC on Mar. 27, 2001, at 19-21. This compensation was in
addition to proceeds from stock sales. For the four-year period from 1998 through 2001, Lay had gross
proceeds of over $209 million from selling shares of his Enron stock, and Skilling had gross proceeds of
over $96 million from his Enron stock sales. See transaction report filings made by Lay and Skilling with
the SEC during 1998 through 2001 pursuant to Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended; see also Appendix D (Roles of Lay, Skilling and the Outside Directors).

-91-

=== PAGE 95 ===
long-term shareholder value and to promote teamwork by tying a significant portion of
compensation to business unit and Enron performance.'®

Like many public companies, Enron’s compensation program for its senior
management team included three primary elements: base salary; annual incentive
awards; and long-term incentive pay. Base salaries of all employees, including officers,
were targeted at the median of competitive levels, thereby placing emphasis on variable
pay based on performance. According to the Compensation Committee’s report to
shareholders appearing in the proxy statement for the 1999 annual shareholders
meeting, approximately 75% of total executive compensation was “at risk” with a
strong weighting on long-term performance. Clearly, the Enron compensation structure
depended heavily on the reported financial performance of the company, with particular
emphasis on the achievement of goals for net income and cash flow.’

Overall, the Enron compensation program was not atypical in scope or design as

compared to programs of other large public companies at the time. If anything, it was

168 “Report from the Compensation and Management Development Committee regarding Executive
Compensation” appearing in Enron’s Schedule 14A filed with the SEC on Mar. 24, 1998, Mar. 30, 1999,
Mar. 21, 2000, and Mar. 27, 2001.

‘6° Enron’s annual incentive bonus plan was funded as a percentage of net income. Individual bonus
payments were approved by the Compensation Committee based on Enron’s performance against pre-
established goals, as well as business unit and individual performance. Key performance criteria
considered by the Compensation Committee reportedly included funds flow, return on equity, debt
reduction and earnings per share improvements, among others. See “Report from the Compensation and
Management Development Committee regarding Executive Compensation,” appearing in Enron’s Schedule
14A filed with the SEC on Mar. 21, 2000 and Mar. 27, 2001. Long-term incentive compensation was
provided through a variety of awards. Beginning in 1999, long-term awards were made one-half in market-
priced non-qualified stock options and one-half in restricted stock that generally cliff vested in four years,
with a performance accelerated vesting feature based on Enron’s annual cumulative shareholder return
relative to the S&P 500. See “Report from the Compensation and Management Development Committee
zegarding Executive Compensation” appearing in Enron’s Schedule 14A filed with the SEC on Mar. 30,
1999, Mar. 21, 2000 and Mar. 27, 2001. Stock options typically had a five-year term and time-vested over
three years, but in some cases they had performance accelerators based on Enron’s achievement of target
levels of compounded growth in earnings per share.

-92-

=== PAGE 96 ===
remarkable in the degree of “process” employed to design and implement the program
and to continually reassess it for market competitiveness. !”° However conventional the
Enron compensation program may have been for its time, it nevertheless motivated the
officers to post continually higher income and stock price targets and, in so doing,
provided a powerful incentive to manipulate earnings and cash flows to achieve these
results. Against this backdrop, it is not difficult to understand the allure of the SPE
transactions, which provided a powerful tool to report enhanced financial statement
results. Among other things, these readily accessible transactions generated
instantaneous earnings and cash flows that were not dependent upon the results of
operating businesses. One banker’s comments made in a 1999 email to a colleague are
insightful: “running a pipeline business can’t take much time — Enron seems to spend all
2171

its available man hours on various, convoluted financing schemes.

Cc. Methods Used by Officers to Implement Strategy

As noted in the Second Interim Report, the officers utilized six accounting
techniques designed to distort Enron’s financial statements. Through many of these
techniques, Enron took advantage of GAAP rules and ignored its obligation to make
transparent disclosures. In addition, in many of the SPE transactions, the terms required
by the financial institutions would have precluded Enron’s desired accounting treatment

under applicable GAAP rules. In these transactions, Enron officers continued to reflect

1‘ For example, in addition to its five regularly scheduled meetings per year, the Compensation
Committee met frequently in special session, for a total of fourteen meetings in 2001, ten meetings in 2000,
eight meetings in 1999 and seven meetings in 1998. The Compensation Committee relied heavily on third-
party executive compensation experts to assist with program design and market competitiveness analysis.
Towers Perrin provided at least nine written reports to the Compensation Committee during 2000 and 2001.

1 Email from Carmen Marino, Managing Director, CSFB, to Tim Bock, Managing Director, CSFB, July
28, 1999 [CSFBCO 000019283].

-93-

=== PAGE 97 ===
desirable, but incorrect, accounting treatment by entering into undisclosed side

agreements, arrangements with no business purpose and “hardwired” transactions that

violated GAAP!”

The Examiner now focuses on several methods used by these officers to facilitate

their use of the six accounting techniques. These methods include:

Justification of Desired Results. In many cases, Enron officers were
less concerned about making the correct or best decision, and more
concemed. with justifying a desired result. Evidence suggests that
Enron officers: (i) used accounting rules that did not directly address
the accounting question at issue but provided an argument to justify an
aggressive position; (ii) searched for reasons to avoid public
disclosure; and (iii) obtained professional opinions or advice merely as
a necessary procedural step.

Use of Economic Leverage on Third Parties. Evidence suggests that
by using Enron’s economic power, Enron officers were able to
pressure third parties, such as financial institutions and Enron’s
professionals, to accommodate Enron’s financial statement objectives.
In many instances, this economic pressure appears responsible for
overcoming concerns about reputational risk or other reservations by
these third parties.

Lack of Candor. There are many examples of incomplete disclosure
by these officers to the Enron Board and the public. In some cases, it
appears that officers provided hints or glimpses of facts suggesting
possible misuse of SPEs to the Enron Board. In other cases, Enron
officers’ frequent use of misleading terms and jargon in connection
with Enron’s SPE transactions appears to have obscured their
economic substance. Finally, evidence indicates that when
information was presented by the officers to the Enron Board, the
information was delivered in a manner not conducive to a full
understanding of the SPEs.

Justification of Desired Results

In many cases, the Enron officers appeared less concerned about making the

correct or best decision, and more focused on finding some justification for their desired

1. See Third Interim Report, at 27-30.

-94-

=== PAGE 98 ===
result. That is, their primary concern seems to have been to ensure that they had an
explanation if someone challenged their position, rather than to determine whether their
decision was correct or was justified in light of the risks assumed. Examples of this
strategy include: (i) using accounting rules that did not directly address the accounting
question at issue but simply provided an argument to justify an aggressive position; (ii)
searching for ways to avoid public disclosure; and (iii) obtaining professional opinions or
advice merely as a necessary procedural step.

Search for Plausible Accounting Support. Evidence suggests that Enron officers
often took aggressive accounting positions with little direct GAAP support. Rather than
using accounting principles to achieve a fair presentation of Enron’s financial condition,
both as a means of fulfilling their disclosure obligations and as an effective management
tool, it appears that Enron officers (often with the support of Andersen) focused their
efforts on using hyper-technical and strained accounting judgments to justify aggressive
and misleading financial presentation. For example:

e Prepay Transactions. Recognizing that Andersen required three
substantive parties to participate in Enron’s Prepay Transactions to
support Enron’s desired GAAP result, Enron employed Mahonia and
Delta, shell entities set up by JPMorgan Chase and Citigroup for use in
these transactions, or sometimes used a second bank as the
accommodation party. Enron’s officers knew that they were using
Mahonia, Delta and the accommodation banks as intermediaries in
order to satisfy Andersen. Andersen recognized that relevant GAAP
authority required that the separate legs of Enron’s Prepay
Transactions be collapsed and that the related obligations be reported
as debt if one of the parties was an SPE or an intermediary.'”

Therefore, it required Enron to obtain representation letters from Delta
and Mahonia and accepted the letters as evidence that Delta and

‘3 The relevant GAAP authority was Fair Value Hedges: Concurrent Offsetting Matching Swaps and Use
of One as Hedging Instrument, Derivatives Implementation Group Issue No. F6 (Financial Accounting
Standards Bd. 2000), an interpretation issued by the Derivatives Implementation Group of the FASB,
which had the force of GAAP.

-95-

=== PAGE 99 ===
Mahonia were substantive businesses, even though the facts as
represented were insufficient to support that conclusion. It may have
been Andersen’s discomfort with this approach that caused Andersen
to suggest that the Prepay Transactions be disclosed in Enron’s 1999
and 2000 financial statements. When management refused, Andersen
dropped the issue and did not take it to the Audit Committee.

e Nahanni Minority Interest Transaction. Enron officers and Andersen
knew that the primary purpose of the Nahanni Minority Interest
Transaction was to “[i]ncrease Funds Flows through the sale of
Merchant Investments held by a newly formed consolidated
subsidiary.”!4 Andersen also knew that this objective could not be
achieved through the Nahanni transaction unless Enron was permitted
to classify U.S. Treasury securities as “Merchant Investments.”!”
Accommodating Enron’s accounting objectives, Andersen determined
that Enron could classify U.S. Treasury securities as Merchant
Investments — even though Enron had never before sought to hold U.S.
Treasury securities as Merchant Investments - provided that Enron
modified its Merchant Activities footnote to reflect this expanded
definition of Merchant Investments.!”°

Searching for Reasons to Avoid Disclosure. The evidence suggests that in
numerous instances Enron’s officers and professionals worked to interpret facts in a
manner that avoided transparent public disclosure of its SPE transactions. Examples

include:

1% Nahanni Memo, at 1.

15 See Grutzmacher Sworn Statement, at 162; see also Sworn Statement of Debra A. Cash, Andersen, to
H. Bryan Ives, III, A&B, June 5, 2003 (the “Cash Sworn Statement”), at 94-96.

™ Nahanni Memo, at 1. Gary Peng (a member of the Corporate Accounting and Financial Reporting
Group who was familiar with the circumstances surrounding the Nahanni disclosure) said: “From a
company perspective, Project Nahanni is very sensitive — it has not been discussed in detail with any
outside parties. The disclosure found in the Annual Report, Footnote 6 and 8 were as much as management
was willing to disclose.” Email from Gary Peng, Enron, to Clint Freeland, Enron, May 8, 2000
[AB0971 01859].

-96-

=== PAGE 100 ===
SPE Transactions in General

e Swaps and Guarantees. Using a Total Return Swap rather than a
guarantee was one of Enron’s favorite techniques to avoid
disclosure.!” For example:

o When comparing the benefits of a Total Return Swap to a
guarantee in connection with a FAS 140 Transaction, Kevin Jordan
informed others that “[g]luarantees require additional unwanted
footnote disclosure.”!”

o Charles DeLacey explained that: “The answer is that there is a
[sic] obligation of ENE on the swap for $30.2MM but it is not on
the balance sheet. The total return swaps are buried in the
footnotes under price risk management activities . . . 7

o Joel Ephross, an in-house attorney, described a Total Return Swap
as “in essence a guaranty that is phrased as a swap. It has the
benefit to Enron of being reported by our accountants under price
risk management, and footnote disclosure.”!®°

o Causey’s concern about disclosure is captured in this email from
Cassandra Schultz who explained that: “Causey’s position on the
issue of whether we should bother with a swap if there is potential
it will be treated as a guarantee is we should still structure it as a
swap so we have more flexibility in how and where the support
mechanism/guarantee is ultimately disclosed — maybe in the
derivative footnote with a blurb about sovereign risk or
something.”"*!

177 Tn the “Price Risk Management Activities and Financial Instruments” footnote to its 2000 financial
statements, Enron described the Total Return Swaps used as guarantees as “price risk management services
to... customers,” and buried the obligation in a table depicting the “notional” amount of derivative
investments, and even stated that “notional amounts ...do not represent the amounts exchanged by the
parties to the financial instruments,” when in fact the notional amount represented the amount loaned to the
SPE and paid to Enron, which Enron was liable to repay in full. Enron Annual Report for 2000, at 38.

8 Email from Kevin D. Jordan, Enron, to Jas Somrah, Enron, and copies to Philippe Penet, Matthew
Landy, Treasa Kirby and Stephen Dwyer, Enron, Feb. 26, 2001, at AB0971 00234 [AB0971 00233-
ABO0971 00236].

1” Email from Charles Delacey, Enron, to Steve Pruett, Enron, May 2, 2001, at 1 [AB0971 02304-
ABO971 02305].

'89 Email from Joel Ephross, Enron, to Truman Bidwell and Mary Ward, Linklaters, Sept. 27, 2001
[AB0252 00913-AB0252 00914].

181 Email from Cassandra Schultz, Enron, to Raymond Bowen and David Chang, Enron, and copies to Bob
Butts, et al., Enron, Dec. 1, 1998, at AB0971 00432 [AB0971 00432-AB0971 00434].

-97-

=== PAGE 101 ===
e Prepay Transactions. Enron’s officers decided against using the
proposed disclosure on the Prepay Transactions recommended by
Andersen that would have made the nature of Enron’s Prepay
Transactions ascertainable by a user of Enron’s financial statements."

Related Party SPE Transactions

e Fastow’s Compensation/LJM2. Enron’s in-house attorneys, with
assistance from Vinson & Elkins, decided that Enron did not have to
disclose the amount of Fastow’s interest in LJM2 in the proxy
statement filed in 2001. That decision was based on the position that it
was not “practicable” to quantify Fastow’s interest, even though
Fastow had said that the amounts were so large that LIM2 would be
shut down if those amounts were told to Skilling.’

e Kopper/Chewco. Enron’s in-house attorneys decided that Enron did
not have to disclose Kopper’s involvement as the general partner in
Chewco. That decision was based on the position that Kopper, who
was a vice president, was not an “executive officer” of Enron as
defined under applicable SEC rules.

e Kopper/LJM. Jn considering the disclosure of Fastow’s sale of his
interest in LIM1 and LJM2 to Kopper (who resigned so he could buy
Fastow’s interest in LJM1 and LJM2 in the summer of 2001),
Fastow’s preference was for Enron to avoid mentioning that the
purchaser of these interests was a former Enron employee.'™* Gary
Peng, another Enron employee, agreed with Fastow. “How critical to
the disclosure is the phrase ‘...to a former employee of Enron...’?
The transformation of LJM to a true third-party would seem to be

18 Another Andersen client, Aquila Energy Corporation, included such a disclosure in its SEC filing, and
Andersen proposed that Enron include a similar disclosure in its financial statements. Aquila Energy
Corporation Form S-1 filed with the SEC on Dec. 13, 2000 (the “Aquila Form S-1”), at 42-43.

18 Sworn Statement of Ronald T. Astin, Vinson & Elkins, to Rebecca M. Lamberth, A&B, Aug. 12, 2003,
at 106-07. In a memorandum to Fastow regarding the obligation to disclose Fastow’s financial interests in
the LJM entities, Jordan Mintz (“Mintz”) indicated that the decision not to disclose “was a close call;
arguably, the more conservative approach would have been to disclose the amount of [Fastow’s] interest.”
Memorandum from Jordan Mintz, Enron, to Andy Fastow, Enron, regarding Related-Party Proxy
Disclosures, Apr. 6, 2001 (the “Mintz 4/6/01 Memo”), at AB0971 00646 [AB0971 00645-AB0971 00646].
As set forth in the Second Interim Report, Mintz placed enormous technical reliance on the word
“practicable” contained in the relevant SEC regulation. See Second Interim Report, Appendix D (Enron’s
Disclosure of Its SPEs), at 58-59. Going forward, Mintz observed, “[tJhis disclosure issue will continue to
be a challenge as transactions entered into between Enron and LJM2 settle and, as such, it becomes
‘practicable’ to quantify and, therefore, be required to disclose the amount of [Fastow’s] financial interest.”
Mintz 4/6/01 Memo, at AB0971 00646.

184 Email from Jordan Mintz, Enron, to Ron Astin, Vinson & Elkins, et al., Aug. 7, 2001 (the “Mintz-Astin
8/7/01 Email”), at 1 [EVE 543273-EVE 543274].

-98-

=== PAGE 102 ===
more complete if we could exclude the phrase.” Jordan Mintz, an
Enron attorney, suggested “that we provide the more ‘generic’
description.”!®° When asked about including a phrase describing
Kopper as a former Enron employee, Mark Koenig, Executive Vice
President of Investor Relations, replied, “If [it is] not absolutely
required — no.”!®”

e October 16th Disclosures. Even as late as fall 2001, in the October
16th earnings release, Enron described its $1.01 billion charge to
earnings as “non-recurring,” and did not disclose Enron’s $1.2 billion
write-down of shareholder equity primarily related to an earlier
accounting error for the LJM2/Raptors Hedging Transactions. The
reason given by Enron for not mentioning this write-down was that it
was a “balance sheet item” as opposed to an income statement item.

Using Professional Opinions Merely as Justification. Many times Enron officers
appear to have obtained opinions or advice from professionals merely as a necessary step
to justify questionable decisions rather than as a tool to assist them in reaching a
considered business decision based upon the risks. In these circumstances, it appears that
the fact that an opinion or advice was obtained was more critical to the officers than
whether the opinion or advice actually addressed the fundamental question at issue.
Examples include:

e LJMI/Rhythms Hedging Transaction Fairness Opinion. Enron’s
officers represented to the Board that a fairness opinion would be
delivered in connection with the LIM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction.
The analysis underlying the opinion logically arrived at the result that
the value given by Enron on day one was approximately equal to the
value received. The analysis did not, however, address the non-
economic nature of the hedge (i.e., the only assets used to support the

hedge were Enron’s own assets) and the officers did not address this
issue with the Board.'**

‘8 Email from Gary Peng, Enron, to Ronald T. Astin, Vinson & Elkins, et al., Aug. 5, 2001, at 1 [EVE
543322-BVE 543325].

185 Mintz-Astin 8/7/01 Email, at 2.
‘87 Email from Mark Koenig, Enron, to Gary Peng, Enron, Aug. 7, 2001, at 1 [EVE 543273-EVE 543274].

188 See Appendix B (Role of Andersen), Andersen’s Role in Enron’s SPE Transactions — Andersen's Role
in the Non-economic Hedges — Rhythms.

-99-

=== PAGE 103 ===
True Issuance Opinions. In nearly all of the FAS 140 Transactions,
Enron obtained opinions from its outside law firms that certain equity
interests issued by an SPE were legally isolated from Enron (i.e., a
“true issuance” opinion). No opinion was obtained as to whether the
assets transferred to that SPE (and which were the only source of any
value of the equity interest) were legally isolated from the transferor
(i.e., a “true sale” opinion). The “true issuance” opinion appears to
have had no significance unless a true sale opinion could also be given
~— which was not always the case — but Enron presented the opinions to
Andersen to justify treating the transfer of the asset as a sale.’®

Steele Tax Opinion. To obtain a tax opinion on the Steele Transaction,
Enron officers represented that Enron undertook the transaction for the
principal purpose of generating financial accounting benefits. In
contrast, Andersen’s audit team noted that Enron needed to
demonstrate a business purpose that did not involve the transaction’s
financial reporting impact. Despite the fact that Enron’s
representations in connection with the tax opinion, and the economic
substance of the Steele Transaction, were inconsistent with
demonstrating a business purpose apart from financial reporting
consequences, Andersen eventually accepted a representation from
Enron officers that recognition of the deferred credit arising from the

18 Ty notes from a meeting held on June 8, 1998, between Joe Dilg, a partner in Vinson & Elkins, and Jim
Derrick, General Counsel of Enron, Mr. Dilg expresses his concern about the true issuance opinion letters:

1. True Issuance opinions. We a [sic] unsure of how opinion rendered satisfies
requirements of FASB125. We are not asked to render accounting advice but

qualification we had to take in opinion could be inconsistent with 125 requirements. We
have not had direct contact with senior accounting personal [sic]. During Cornhusker we
pointed out the qualification to junior AA representative and discussed with (Lance
Schuler?) and they said OK. In connection with MidTexas David Keyes raised opinion
issue with Lance Schuler again last week. Lance reported back that he had discussed
with Ben Glissen [sic] and Ben said opinion in Cornhusker had been reviewed by top
levels of AA and they were satisfied. Point out qualification in opinion and difference
from Linx opinion in Sutton Bridge and discuss pg 67 of AA field directive.

Concerns: 1. Similar opinion in MidTexas may get focused upon by other
accounting types and if asked to remove qualification we cannot. Don’t want deal to
blow up at last moment and cause earnings surprise.

2. Possible review in context of MidTexas may cause AA to relook at
Cornhusker and cause issues.

3. Have raised issue with Lance and apparently everything is OK.
Since we have not had contact with AA don’t understand the reasoning.

Document entitled, “Notes for meeting with Jim Derrick,” undated, at EVE 1250750 [EVE 1250750-

EVE 1250751].

-100-

=== PAGE 104 ===
transaction, in advance of the recognition of tax benefits, was not
Enron’s sole reason for entering into the Steele Transaction.'”

e Watkins Investigation. In connection with the investigation of
accounting and related issues raised by Enron employee Sherron
Watkins (“Watkins”) in August 2001, Enron so limited the scope of
the investigation that it may have been more a matter of ensuring that
Enron’s corporate compliance policies were followed rather than a
genuine inquiry into whether any of the potential problems identified
in Watkins’ letters were true.!”!

Economic Leverage on Third Parties

Through the use of Enron’s economic power, it appears that Enron officers
frequently applied significant pressure on third parties to accommodate Enron’s financial
statement objectives. Examples include:

e In at least two instances, Enron officers made it clear to a financial
institution that its securities analyst covering Enron was not
sufficiently supportive of Enron. In these cases, these analysts were
either terminated or given the clear message that their analysis should

take into account the relationship between the financial institution and
Enron.!”?

9 See Third Interim Report, Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Officers), at 73-75. The former head of the
Structured Transactions Group within Enron’s tax department testified that “representations with respect to
the tax opinions were written from the standpoint of the Internal Revenue Code and, as a result, may not
have reflected management’s intent.” Maxey Sworn Statement, at 163-66.

91 See Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Attorneys), Attorneys’ Role in the Watkins Investigation.

12 For instance, in April of 1998, Enron excluded Merrill Lynch as a manager for an upcoming $750
million common stock offering because Enron’s senior management was angry with the reports and
comments of John Olson (“Olson”), Merrill Lynch’s equity analyst covering Enron. Merrill Lynch’s Chief
Executive Officer, Herb Allison, intervened with a call to Lay, and Enron then added Merrill Lynch as a
manager for the offering. One month later, Merrill Lynch fired Olson and replaced him with an analyst
with a better opinion of Enron’s stock. At the same time, Merrill Lynch’s revenues from Enron increased
from $3 million in 1998 to $40 million in 1999. See Third Interim Report, Appendix I (Role of Merrill
Lynch and its Affiliates), at 19-22. In addition, Jill Sakol (“‘Sakol”), a CSFB fixed income analyst assigned
to cover Enron’s debt securities in April 2001, testified that she perceived pressure from her superiors not
to issue negative public comments on Enron due to the importance of Enron as an investment banking
client of CSFB. Sakol also documented instances in which she was discouraged from publishing her
negative research on Enron to the investing public while CSFB bond traders were using that information to
their advantage. See Appendix F (Role of CSFB and its Affiliates), Role of CSFB’s Equity and Fixed-
Income Analysts.

-101-

=== PAGE 105 ===
In early 2001, Andersen was informed by an Andersen senior
executive that Enron’s Chief Accounting Officer, Causey, had
requested that Andersen remove Andersen partner Carl Bass from
further participation in the Enron engagement, and that Andersen
senior executives had agreed to that request. !%° A different Andersen
partner later testified:

[I] thought it was unprofessional for Enron to make such a
request or demand or whatever it was, and I was upset that
the firm had agreed to it.... [I] can’t speak for the whole
firm in terms of defining moments, but it was a defining
moment to me and me as part of the PSG and our
relationship [with Enron]. . . .’°

Commenting on Enron’s ability to exert pressure on Andersen, one
Enron in-house attorney commented:

We originally thought that Condor would be the source for
equity. However, a very junior person at AA in London
said no, that will not work. So, now we have LJM, which
is not in any way related to Enron (except that one of its
investors is an executive, but we will not talk about that)
making the equity investment. This will satisfy AA. We
will see if the junior person who has made this trouble is
employed with AA after January Ist; however, very few
people here are betting on that.!?°

There are several examples of financial institutions participating in
Enron transactions even though they acknowledged that these
transactions exposed them to “reputational risk,” including:

o Citigroup completed a FAS 140 Transaction in December 2000
called Project Bacchus. Despite concerns over “appropriateness”
of the transaction, “since there is now an earings dimension to

' 3 United States v. Arthur Andersen, LLP, Crim. A. No. H-02-121 (S.D. Tex. 2002), Transcript of the
Proceedings, May 6, 2002-June 5, 2002, at 1163 (testimony of Carl Bass, May 9, 2002). Even though he
moved from the Engagement Team to the PSG in December 1999, Mr. Bass spent considerable time as a
member of the PSG consulting with the Engagement Team on Enron matters in 2000. /d. at 1123-24
(testimony of Carl Bass, May 9, 2002). Moreover, even after Andersen agreed to his removal from Enron
matters in early 2001, he continued to consult on Enron. /d. at 1175 (testimony of Carl Bass, May 9, 2002).

1 Td. at 5537-38 (testimony of John Stewart, May 31, 2002).

8 See, e.g., Email from Joel Ephross, Assistant General Counsel, Enron, to Fernando Tovar, Attorney,
Vinson & Elkins, et al., Dec. 3, 1999 [EVE 522635].

-102-

=== PAGE 106 ===
this deal, which was not there before,”!”° Citigroup “made a lot of
exceptions to our standard policies” and closed the transaction.!%
A Citigroup employee wrote: “I am sure we have gone out of our
way to let them know that we are bending over backwards for them
. . . let’s remember to collect this iou when it really counts.”!*
Later, in June 2001, Citigroup participated in the Sundance
Industrial transaction that, in part, unwound the Bacchus FAS 140
Transaction. A Citigroup senior executive was concerned about
Enron’s accounting for Sundance Industrial: “The GAAP
accounting is aggressive and a franchise risk to us if there is
publicity (a la Xerox).”!°° :

© Merrill Lynch had concerns of reputational risk arising out of its
participation in the Nigerian Barge Transaction. This concern was
expressed in one Merrill Lynch employee’s notes indicating that
the transaction posed a “reputational risk, i.e., aid/abet Enron
income stmt. manipulation.””*’ Another Merrill Lynch employee
testified:

Well, I raised the matter of, you know, if Enron ever in
the future fell apart from a credit — just like a credit
meltdown or something, and we had been involved in
this transaction, in light of the fact that I had these
accounting concerns about [the Nigerian Barge
Transaction], would that somehow create a reputational
risk for us? Would we have our name in the press?*"!

o RBS’s concern about its participation in the LJM1/Rhythms
Hedging Transaction is illustrated in one of its internal
memoranda:

196 Email from Steve Baillie, Citigroup, to William Fox, Citigroup, et al., Nov. 24, 2000 [CITI-B 0289702-
CITI-B 0289703].

17 Email from Steve Wagman, Citigroup, to Amanda Angelini and copy to Rick Caplan, Citigroup,
regarding Enron/Bacchus, Dec. 27, 2000 [CITI-B 0279252].

198 Td.

1° Memorandum from Dave Bushnell, Citigroup, to Mike Carpenter, Citigroup, regarding Enron-Project
Sundance Transaction, May 30, 2001, at 2 [CITI-B 0302091-CITI-B 0302092].

20 Facsimile from Rob Furst, Merrill Lynch, to Jim Brown, Merrill Lynch, Dec. 21, 1999 [MLBE
0111739].

201 Sworn Statement of James A. Brown, Merrill Lynch, to Robb E. Hellwig, A&B, Apr. 28, 2003, at 77-
78.

-103-

=== PAGE 107 ===
The fundamental issue from my perspective is one I
raised when this transaction was first discussed
[internally] and which has, I know, been exercising the
minds of everyone concerned over the last two weeks.
This is the potential reputational risk given that Enron
assets are being transferred into the control of (and for
the future benefit of) third-parties, where the third-
parties are not necessarily valid ‘arms length’
counterparties, given the shareholding and control
exercised by Andy Fastow.”

RBS’s concern was shared by its accounting professionals,
who noted:

the nature of the transaction is highly unusual. The role
of the CFO of Enron and the use of its own shares,
raises significant concerns as to the potential
reputational risk to the bank if the transaction is not
disclosed appropriately by Enron or [if] shareholders
claim to have been disadvantaged.”

o CSEB, trying to mitigate any reputational risk, decided to include
in the documentation for the CSFB Prepay the firm’s standard

representations for accounting-driven transactions.

204

o Barclays also noted its concerns about “reputational issues”

associated with refinancing and extending the SO, transaction.””

Lack of Candor

5

Enron’s approach to incomplete disclosure also appears to have existed in certain

officers’ dealings with the Enron Board, its committees and the public. There are many

examples where these officers provided hints or glimpses of the possible misuse of SPEs,

22 Project LIM Memorandum, at RBS 3030461.
203 KPMG Letter, June 23, 1999.

204 Sworn Statement of Steven Wootton, Director, CSFB, to M. Russell Wofford, Jr., A&B, May 28, 2003,

at 42, lines 17-22 and 46, lines 17-23.

705 Minutes of Barclays Group Credit Committee Meeting, Oct. 26, 2001, at BRC000083218 (discussing
“reputational issues” associated with refinancing and extending the SO, transaction) [BRC 000083217-

BRC 000083219]; see also generally First Interim Report, at 135-46.

-104-

=== PAGE 108 ===
but the information provided appears not to have been presented in a manner that was
conducive to a full understanding of the SPEs. Furthermore, the use of misleading terms
and confusing jargon by Enron officers when they described SPE transactions
exacerbated their complexity. On many occasions, it appears that several groups of
persons, including the Enron Board and Rating Agencies, understood the meaning of
these terms and phrases in a materially different way than the meaning ascribed to them
by the Enron officers. Examples include:

SPE Transactions in General

e Total Debt Obligations. In an August 13, 2001 presentation to the
Enron Board, Fastow presented an analysis of $36.4 billion in
“Outstanding Financings and Debt” of Enron, including the nature and
extent of off-balance sheet financings. Since at least 1997, this
information had not been presented in this fashion to the Enron Board
or to any of its committees.?”

e Tax Strategy. The Enron Board was not informed that a critical
function of Enron’s tax department was to book earnings and that it
was customary for the tax department to generate the “stretch” at the
end of the year to meet Enron’s earnings targets.?°7

e Monetized Assets. Enron officers used the term “monetize” in

numerous presentations to the Enron Board. Enron also used this term
in its public filings.°* For example, Enron’s officers referred to its

206 Ironically, Fastow’s report actually overstated Enron’s outstanding financings and debt by double
counting $1.9 billion of Enron’s Yosemite Prepays. The Finance Committee received information, never
clearly explained or presented, showing that from August 2000 through August 2001, Enron’s interest
bearing obligations increased from $22.3 billion to $36.3 billion — a $14 billion increase in one year.
Compare Materials from Enron Finance Committee Meeting, Aug. 7, 2000, at AB0247 01363 (slide from
the CFO Report) [AB0247 01347-AB0247 01520] with Materials from Enron Finance Committee Meeting,
Aug. 13, 2001 (the “8/13/01 Finance Committee Materials”), at AB0247 02302 (slide from the CFO
Report) [AB0247 02285-AB0247 02359}.

207 ‘See Second Interim Report, Appendix J (Tax Transactions); see also Third Interim Report, Appendix C
(Role of Enron’s Officers), at 16-23.

208 See, e.g., Enron Form 10-Q filed with the SEC for the Quarter ended Sept. 30, 2001, at 22 (“Between
September 1999 and December 2000, LJM1 or LJM2 purchased equity or debt interests in nine Enron-
sponsored SPEs. LJM1 and LJM2 invested $175 million in the nine SPEs. These transactions enabled
Enron to monetize assets and generated pre-tax earnings to Enron of $2 million in 1999.”); EOG
Resources, Inc. Schedule 13D/A filed by Enron with the SEC, Apr. 5, 1999, at 4 (“Enron is currently

-105-

=== PAGE 109 ===
FAS 140 Transactions as “monetizations” of the underlying assets and
to its Prepay Transactions as “monetizations” of its price risk
management assets. Despite its widespread use by Enron, the term
does not have a precise definition.” It could mean a sale of the asset
with perhaps some limited retained recourse to Enron, or perhaps a
borrowing with assets serving as collateral but which is otherwise
nonrecourse or limited recourse to Enron. The FAS 140 Transactions,
however, were fully recourse borrowings in which the asset was in
substance not transferred at all since Enron retained at least 97% of the
risks and rewards as well as effective control over the asset. The
Prepay Transactions were fully recourse borrowings and involved no
assets at all. There is substantial evidence that the members of the
Enron Board had unclear or conflicting understandings of the meaning
of this term.”!° In addition, Standard & Poor’s analysts informed the

evaluating a number of alternatives [with respect to its EOG stake], including without limitation, whether
Enron should . . . monetize all or a portion of Enron’s investment pursuant to a leverage capitalization or
similar transaction.”) (Enron’s EOG shares were later the subject of a FAS 140 transaction known as
Cerberus, which the Examiner concluded in Prior Reports was likely not a “true sale”).

2 The testimony of several Vinson & Elkins attorneys demonstrates the vague and uninformative nature
of the word “monetize.” See, e.g., Sworn Statement of Joseph Dilg, Managing Partner, Vinson & Elkins, to
Rebecca M. Lamberth, A&B, Sept. 24, 2003, at 70 (“I recall in discussion that we had... some
conversations about the term monetization, whether anybody really knew what monetization meant. . . .”);
Sworn Statement of Scott Wulfe, Vinson & Elkins, to Rebecca M. Lamberth, A&B, Aug. 22, 2003, at 149
(“The word monetizing, to me in that context, would be a very broad term that would effectively be
probably any type of transaction in which funds are obtained through some transaction involving an asset.
Now, whether or not he [Baird] meant it in a more narrow case, I mean, he may have, but I don’t know.”),
at 150 (“I believe in the summer of ‘98, as best as I recall, my views about these terms was sort of evolving,
not having spent that much time thinking about it, so I think I, at different points, had different views about
monetization. I think that ultimately -- well, I think I believed that it encompassed a transaction in which
funds were obtained, but if you ask -- I’m not sure that I immediately had a definitive reaction to that
term.”), and at 151 (“I think -- synonymous with sale? I’m not -- I think, generally speaking, monetization
is probably a broader term, but could it -- certainly could encompass a sale. Is it synonymous? I’m not
sure I ever got to that fine of thinking about it.”).

210 For example, Chan, who was a Finance Committee member, testified that he believed “asset
monetizations” meant “just selling outright.” Chan Sworn Statement, at 169. LeMaistre, who often
attended Finance Committee meetings, testified that if an asset were underperforming, the company could
“monetize it in order to free up the money to reinvest it elsewhere at a better rate of return,” which would
“in most instances” mean selling or disposing of the asset in some fashion. Sworn Statement of Charles A.
LeMaistre, former Director, Enron, to William C. Humphreys, Jr., A&B, July 17, 2003 (the “LeMaistre
Sworn Statement”), at 142-43. Foy and Willison testified that “monetization” could include either selling
or borrowing against an asset. Foy Sworn Statement, at 113 (“In general it means either selling an asset or
borrowing up to its full market value.”); Sworn Statement of Bruce G. Willison, former Director, Enron, to
Jenna L. Moore, A&B, Sept. 3, 2003, at 88 (“Q. [Is monetization] different from a sale? A. No. I think
usually it probably is a sale, but in some cases, perhaps you might borrow against a commodity . . . .”).
Urquhart, a Finance Committee member, testified that “monetization” was “converting hard assets to
several vehicles.” Sworn Statement of John A. Urquhart, former Director, Enron, to Steven M. Collins,
A&B, Sept. 5, 2003 (the “Urquhart Sworn Statement”), at 57.

~106-

=== PAGE 110 ===
Examiner that they believed, based on discussions with Enron, that the
Prepay Transactions were sales of price risk management assets.”"!

e Off-Balance Sheet Debt. Through the use of various techniques
(including Total Return Swaps, share trusts, puts and calls and side
agreements) Enron incurred substantial so-called “off-balance sheet”
debt. However, off-balance sheet debt did not equate to non-recourse
debt.2? Again, there is substantial evidence that the members of the
Enron Board had unclear or conflicting understandings of the meaning
of this term.?”

¢ Cash Flow from Operations. Enron’s “cash flow from operations”
included significant amounts of cash flow generated through
financings that Enron was obligated to repay.!4

e Trading Activities. Certain of Enron’s “trading activities” (i.e., price
risk management activities) consisted of transactions where no risk
was ever transferred (or ever intended to be transferred) with respect to
the assets being traded.?!

211 Tnterview of Ronald Baron and Todd Shipman, S&P, by H. Bryan Ives, III, Oct. 8, 2003.

22 As noted in Prior Reports, through the use of a Total Return Swap, Enron or one of its affliates would
maintain substantially all of the risks and rewards of an asset even though the asset was purportedly “sold”
to a third party. See First Interim Report, at 58-59. Under the share trusts, Enron was the ultimate
guarantor of debt supporting assets that were transferred into the Whitewing structure. See, e.g., Second
Interim Report, Appendix G (Whitewing Transaction), at 54-55.

213 For example, Urquhart testified that the terms were synonymous, “because once you stop your balance
sheet, there is no recourse. Your debt is off your balance sheet, not something they have recourse to.”
Urquhart Sworn Statement, at 80; see also Sworn Statement of Frank Savage, former Director, Enron, to
Steven M. Collins, A&B, Aug. 13, 2003 and Sept. 4, 2003 (the “Savage Sworn Statement”), at 73 (stating
that “typically” off-balance sheet means non-recourse, with some exceptions). Belfer testified that “non-
recourse” financings would refer to outright dispositions, whereas “off-balance sheet” financings would
refer to structured financings in which Enron had continuing involvement. Sworn Statement of Robert A.
Belfer, former Director, Enron, to Steven M. Collins, A&B, July 31, 2003 (the “Belfer Sworn Statement”),
at 132. Chan testified that sometimes off-balance sheet debt was non-recourse, but that sometimes it was
recourse, depending on the situation. Chan Sworn Statement, at 53-54. Harrison said that he “most of the
time would equate” the terms off-balance sheet with non-recourse, but believed that there was a “technical
accounting difference” between the two. Sworn Statement of Ken L. Harrison, former Director, Enron, to
Steven M. Collins, A&B, Aug, 27, 2003 at 101.

214 See Second Interim Report, Appendix Q (Schedules Depicting Impact of Enron’s Six Accounting
Techniques), at 1 (showing that over $3 billion in Enron’s reported funds flow from operations during 2000
should not have been characterized as such, and that Enron should have reported over $4.5 billion more in
cash flow from financing activities during 2000).

215 See, e.g., Second Interim Report, Appendix E (Prepay Transactions), at 20-22.

-107-

=== PAGE 111 ===
e True Sales. Enron reported that “true sales” occurred even though the
transferor (or its affiliate) of the asset retained control and substantially
all of the risks and rewards of the asset conveyed to the purchaser.”!°

Related Party SPEs

e Asset Repurchases from LJM2. In a 2001 presentation to the Enron
Board regarding transactions between Enron and LJM2, Enron officers
did not disclose to the Enron Board transactions where Enron
repurchased assets from LJM2. Several directors have testified that
such transactions would have raised their suspicions.”'’ The officers
intentionally deleted the transactions from a draft of the Audit
Committee presentation, with the assistance of Enron in-house
attorneys.?"*

e Raptor Restructurings. In the spring of 2001, Enron restructured the
Raptor SPEs with the infusion of an additional twelve million shares
of Enron stock. The restructuring was consummated to cover a
shortfall in the credit capacity of the Raptor SPEs that arose because
the value of the hedged assets declined, as did the price of Enron’s
stock that constituted the primary asset providing the credit capacity.
Rather than seeking Board approval for this significant transaction,
Enron officers, working with the Enron in-house attorneys, reasoned
that this transaction fit within a previous Board resolution that
provided management with blanket authority to execute and settle
equity derivative transactions up to a specified share amount (fifty
million shares in the aggregate at any given time).”””

216 See, e.g. First Interim Report, at 67-146 (concluding that the Cerberus Transaction, the Nikita
Transaction, the Hawaii Transaction, the Backbone Transaction, and the SO, Transaction, were likely not
“true sales”).

27 See, e.g., Foy Sworn Statement, at 100; Sworn Statement of Norman P. Blake, Jr., former Director,
Enron, to John L. Latham, A&B, Dec. 13, 2002, at 174.

218 Email from Jordan Mintz, Enron, to Ron Baker, Enron, Feb. 2, 2001 [AB0911 2838-AB0911 2840];
Email from Jordan Mintz, Enron, to Tod A. Lindholm, Enron, and copy to George McKean, Gordon
McKillop, Ryan Siurek, Enron, Feb. 2, 2001 [AB0911 2841-AB0911 2843}; Email from Jordan Mintz,
Enron, to Ron Baker, Enron, Feb. 2, 2001 [AB0911 2838-AB0911 2840].

219 See Sworn Statement of Joel Ephross, Assistant General Counsel, Enron, to Rebecca M. Lamberth,
A&B, Sept. 19, 2003, at 133-34 (“I recall conversations about the authority to execute a derivative on
Enron common stock. I recall that the conclusion was reached that an existing board resolution allowing
for derivative transactions on Enron common stock was available to be used and that a decision was that
the derivative could be written utilizing the existing resolution, the standing resolution, on derivative
transactions.”). An email on this subject, dated March 22, 2001, began with a message from another Enron
attorney to Enron attorneys Joel Ephross and Rex Rogers, stating, “Per my voicemail to you, and Rex’s
request, here are the resolutions which were adopted by the Board relating to derivatives such as forwards”
and attaching a copy of such previously-adopted resolutions. Ephross forwarded the email and stated:
“George, as I read the attached, it is exactly what we are looking for, except that the capacity looks short,

-108-

=== PAGE 112 ===
e LJM2/Raptors Hedging Restriction. Certain officers failed to inform
the Enron Board that the Raptor SPE in Raptor I would not provide its
hedge until LJM2 received $41 million for its $30 million investment
in Talon, thereby leaving only Enron stock to hedge the notional
amount of $734 million”? Likewise, Enron in-house attorneys who
knew of Glisan’s and Kopper’s involvement appear to have taken no
action to advise the Enron Board of that fact.

e Other Enron Officer Involvement in LJM2. The Board was not
advised at its meeting discussing LJM2 that Glisan and Kopper (in
addition to Fastow) were involved in the management of LIM2.!

« Independent Third Party. Although it was the “independent” third
party in many of the SPE transactions, LIM2 was actually an entity
controlled and managed by senior officers of Enron.”” In addition, the
“special purpose vehicle not affiliated with the Company” that was
approved by the Executive Committee for the Chewco/CalPERS
transaction was known by the officers and in-house attorneys to be
controlled and managed by Kopper, who was present at that Executive
Committee meeting.”

e Arm’s Length Transactions. Enron reported “arm’s length
transactions” between Enron and LJM2™* even though in many

even if 100% of the shares are available.” Email from Joel Ephross, Enron, to George McKean, Enron,
Mar. 22, 2001 [EN01647576-EN01647580]; see also Appendix B (Role of Andersen); Appendix C (Role
of Enron’s Attorneys); Second Interim Report, Annex 5 to Appendix L (Related Party Transactions).

220 See Second Interim Report, Annex 5 to Appendix L (Related Party Transactions). Enron’s transaction
support accountant with responsibility for the Raptors also apparently concealed this fact from Andersen.
See Appendix B (Role of Andersen).

221 See LIM2 Co-Investment, L.P. Private Placement Memorandum, Oct. 13, 1999, at 2 [MLBE 0006895-
MLBE0006915].

222 T JM2 was involved in no less than twenty-one of Enron’s SPE transactions. Fastow and Kopper
controlled and managed LIM2. See Second Interim Report, Appendix L (Related Party Transactions).

223 See Minutes of Enron Executive Committee Meeting, Nov. 5, 1997, at 2 [AB000456818—
AB000456821]. The only public discussion of Chewco and Kopper is in the Related Party Transactions
section of Enron’s 1999 10-K which stated “In addition, an officer of Enron has invested in the limited
partner of JEDI and from time to time acts as agent on behalf of the limited partner’s management.” Enron
Form 10-K filed with the SEC for the Year ended Dec. 31, 1999 (the “10-K for 1999”), Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 16.

24 Minutes of Enron Audit Committee Meeting, Feb. 7, 2000 (the “2/7/00 Audit Committee Minutes”), at
3-4 (Causey “stated that in his opinion all of the transactions had been negotiated on an arms-length basis”)
[AB000201248-AB000201251]. Enron also made similar representations to the public. See 10-K for 1999,
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 16; see also Enron Form 10-K filed with the SEC for the
Year ended Dec. 31, 2000, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 16.

-109-

=== PAGE 113 ===
instances the negotiations were chilled by senior Enron officers who
managed LJM2 and were in a position to exert influence over other
Enron officers who were negotiating on behalf of Enron.”
Conclusion
Through the use of these and other methods, certain Enron officers implemented
their use of the six accounting techniques to distort Enron’s reported financial results. In
the following sections, the Examiner analyzes how Enron’s system of checks and
balances failed to prevent this misconduct. .
D. Failure of Professionals to Provide Checks and Balances
Enron’s professionals could have provided a check against the officers’
misconduct. To varying degrees, these professionals were involved in the structuring,
documentation and disclosure of these transactions. It appears that they had opportunities
to prevent or limit this misconduct at several points in time.
Andersen
As previously discussed, Andersen’s certification of Enron’s financial statements
was indispensable to Enron in accessing the capital markets. Andersen’s audits of
Enron’s financial statements should have provided a check against Enron’s misuse of the

SPEs. Moreover, Andersen had obligations under GAAS to alert the Audit Committee to

any material accounting and disclosure risks arising out of the SPE transactions. This

5 These issues were noted in testimony of McMahon, when describing his views of the LIM conflict
issues in March 2000 as follows:

[T]he LJM situation had gotten to basically a point that was just untenable for myself and
my group. We found ourselves negotiating against people who represented LIM. They
were Enron employees. Andy Fastow was the ultimate senior person that all those people
reported to. He set compensation and promotion.

Financial Collapse of Enron: Hearing before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, 107th
Cong. (Feb. 7, 2002), at 55 (testimony of Jeffrey J. McMahon, President and Chief Operating Officer,
Enron), available at http://energycommerce.house.gov/107/action/107-88.pdf.

-110-

=== PAGE 114 ===
was especially critical for Enron’s Audit Committee because of the risks presented by the
company’s highly structured accounting-driven SPE transactions. Technical and
undeveloped GAAP relevant to the accounting for SPE transactions significantly
increased the risk of accounting mistakes and the divergence of the economic substance
of a transaction from its accounting treatment and disclosure. Andersen’s compliance
with GAAS might have enabled the Audit Committee to serve as a more effective check.
Perhaps the primary explanation for Andersen’s failure was that it simply lost
sight of its duties. Andersen owed duties to the investing public,?”° as well as a direct
duty to the Audit Committee. SAS 61 “requires the auditor to ensure that the audit
committee receives additional information regarding the scope and results of the audit
that may assist the audit committee in overseeing the financial reporting and disclosure
process for which management is responsible.”””” Despite these fundamental precepts,
on many occasions, it appears that Andersen acted in a manner inconsistent with its
duties. Examples include:
e SAS 61 Violations. Under GAAS, Andersen was required to determine
whether the Enron Audit Committee was informed about the “effect of
significant accounting policies in controversial or emerging areas for

which there is a lack of authoritative guidance or consensus” and to
discuss “items that have a significant impact on the representational

26 Chief Justice Burger, writing for an unanimous Supreme Court in United States v. Arthur Young & Co.,
465 U.S. 805, 817-18 (1984) (emphasis in original), explained this duty as follows:

By certifying the public reports that collectively depict a corporation’s financial status,
the independent auditor assumes a public responsibility transcending any employment
relationship with the client. The independent public accountant performing the special
function owes ultimate allegiance to the corporation’s creditors and stockholders, as well
as to the investing public. This ‘public watchdog’ function demands that the accountant
maintain total independence from the client at all times and requires complete fidelity to
the public trust. To insulate from disclosure a certified public accountant’s interpretation
of the client’s financial statements would be to ignore the significance of the accountant’s
role as a disinterested analyst charged with public obligations.

227 SAS 61, at § 2 (AU § 380.02).

-111-

=== PAGE 115 ===
faithfulness, verifiability and neutrality of the accounting information
included in the financial statements.””"* The evidence would permit a
fact-finder to conclude that Andersen failed to perform this important
duty. For example, when evaluating the risks of retaining Enron as a
client in February 2001, Andersen analyzed the effect of Enron’s
mark-to-market accounting, fair value accounting, FAS 140
Transactions, LJM Transactions and Whitewing transactions on
Enron’s financial statements.””” One week later, Andersen met with
the Enron Audit Committee without sharing this type of clear
quantitative analysis with the Audit Committee concerning the effect
of these transactions on Enron’s financial statements.”°°

Related Party Risks. There were numerous occasions where Andersen
failed to advise the Audit Committee and the Enron Board of its
concerns regarding the Related Party Transactions. For example:

o LJMI/Rhythms Hedging Transaction. In an email dated May 28,
1999, one senior Andersen officer noted: “Setting aside the
accounting, idea of a venture entity managed by CFO is terrible
from a business point of view. Conflicts of interest galore. Why
would any director in his or her right mind ever approve such a
scheme? Plus, even if all the accounting obstacles below are
overcome, it’s a related party, which means FAS 57 disclosure of
all transactions. Would Enron want these transactions disclosed
every year as related party transactions in their financial
statements?””*!

o Raptors. In an email dated February 4, 2000, one senior Andersen
partner who was a member of the PSG noted in connection with
the development of what became the Raptor hedging structure: “I
believe this SPE is nonsubstantive.”**? In an email dated February
6, 2001, one senior Andersen partner who was a member of the
PSG noted: “Significant [internal Andersen] discussion was held
regarding the related party transactions with LJM including the
materiality of such amounts to Enron’s income statement and the
amount retained ‘off balance sheet.’... Ultimately the conclusion

228 Id. at § 7; SAS 90, at § 1 (amending SAS 61, at § 11) (AU § 380.11).
29 Retention Meeting Presentation, at 5.

30 Minutes of Enron Audit Committee Meeting, Feb. 12, 2001 (the “Audit Committee 02/12/01 Minutes”)
[AB000204423-4B000204428].

231 Neuhausen/Duncan 5/28/99 Email, at ELIB00003903-00001.

232 See Email from John E. Stewart, Andersen, to Carl E. Bass, Andersen, regarding Enron Derivative
Transaction, Feb. 4, 2000, at 1 [ELIB00003646-00001-ELIB00003646-00002].

-112-

=== PAGE 116 ===
was reached to retain Enron as a client.... Take away To
Do’s.... Suggest that a special committee of the BOD be
established to review the fairness of LJM transactions (or
alternative comfort that the transactions are fair to Enron, e.g.,
competitive bidding).”?°

o General Considerations. While an accountant is not responsible
for its client’s business decisions, there is no evidence that
Andersen ever discussed with the Audit Committee the extent of
its internally expressed concerns over these SPE structures.

Audit Committee Communications. Andersen may have affirmatively
misled the Audit Committee regarding the reason why certain of
Enron’s accounting and disclosure judgments had a high “risk
profile.” Specifically, there is evidence that Andersen’s
presentations to the Audit Committee were designed to and did have
the effect of creating the impression that Enron’s risky accounting
judgments and disclosure judgments were the natural result of Enron’s
“sophisticated business practices,”**° when in fact these risky
judgments were the result of the intentional use of SPE transactions
designed to manipulate Enron’s reported financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows.

Prepay Transactions. Andersen was aware of the type of disclosure
necessary to make the nature of Enron’s Prepay Transactions visible to
a user of Enron’s financial statements. Another Andersen client,
Aquila Energy Corporation, included such a disclosure in an SEC
filing,” and Andersen proposed that Enron include a similar
disclosure in its financial statements.7*’ When the officers refused,
Andersen acquiesced.

FAS 140 Transactions. Andersen understood that the Total Return
Swaps constituted unconditional promises to pay principal and
interest.“® However, Andersen was content to accept the Enron

233 Email from Michael D. Jones, Andersen, to David B. Duncan and Thomas H. Bauer, Andersen,
regarding Enron retention meeting, Feb. 6, 2001, at PSI00004467 [PS100004467-PS100004468].

4 Materials from Enron Audit Committee Meeting, Feb. 7, 1999, at AB0246 01067 [AB0246 01057-
AB0246 01167].

85 9/7/00 Audit Committee Minutes, at 2.
36 See Aquila Form S-1, at 42-43.
237 Cash Sworn Statement, at 70-75; Scardino Interview.

238 See, e. g., Memorandum from Kimberly R. Scardino, Andersen, to The Files, regarding Project Generic
- Sale of Enron’s Sub’s Financial Asset (2 Hawaii 125-O transaction), Apr. 9, 2000 [AB0911 1938-
ABO911 1943).

-113-

=== PAGE 117 ===
officers’ classification of these obligations as “derivatives,” even
though FAS 105 required that “the face, contract, or notional principal
amount”? of these obligations be separately disclosed, and FAS 140
specifically required that the recourse nature of the Total Retum
Swaps be disclosed.”

e Nahanni. Andersen was aware that in the Nahanni transaction Enron
obtained loan proceeds in the form of Treasury securities, sold those
securities before year-end and Tepaid the loan — all within a period of
days straddling year-end 1999." Despite this knowledge, Andersen
permitted the officers to report the proceeds of the Treasury securities’
sale as cash flow from operating activities.

Attorneys

By analyzing the structure of the SPE transactions and documenting them, and by
providing opinions in various transactions, Enron’s attorneys also played a vital role in
Enron’s access to the capital markets. These attorneys could have provided a check and
balance against the Enron officers’ wrongdoing. Among other things, these attorneys
could have apprised Derrick or the Enron Board when they knew of conduct that could
result in Enron disseminating materially misleading financial information, or they could

have refused to render legal services in connection with SPE transactions when they had

concerms about their propriety.

2° Disclosure of Information About Financial Instruments with Off-Balance-Sheet Risk and Financial
Instruments with Concentrations of Credit Risk, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 105
(Financial Accounting Standards Bd. 1990).

2 FAS 140, J 17(f)(2).

241 See Nahanni Memo, at 1 (“Objective[:] Increase Funds flow through the sale of Merchant Investments
held by a newly formed consolidated subsidiary.”); Email from Derek Claybrook, Andersen, to Patricia
Grutzmacher, Andersen, Dec. 6, 1999, at 1 (identifying purpose of transaction to “liquidate[] T-bills over
time resulting in an increase in Operating Cash Flow for Enron”) [PSI00006799-PSI00006800]. The
Nahanni Memo reflects Andersen’s awareness that the Treasury securities were sold prior to the end of
1999 and of the payment of the related debt in early 2000. It is noteworthy in that it contains information
that could not have existed as of the date of the memo, i.e., information regarding payment of the debt
subsequent to year-end 1999.

-114-

=== PAGE 118 ===
One explanation for the attorneys’ failure may be that they lost sight of the fact

that the corporation was their client. It appears that some of these attorneys considered

the officers to be their clients when, in fact, the attorneys owed duties to Enron. Another

explanation may be that some of these attorneys saw their role in very narrow terms, as

an implementer, not a counselor. That is, rather than conscientiously raising known

issues for further analysis by a more senior officer or the Enron Board or refusing to

participate in transactions that raised such issues, these lawyers seemed to focus only on

how to address a narrow question or simply to implement a decision (or document a

transaction). Examples include:

LJM1/Conflict of Interests. Although Derrick, Enron’s General
Counsel, advised the Enron Board on the conflict of interest issue
presented by Fastow’s involvement in the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging
Transaction, his advice was limited to whether Enron’s Code of Ethics

- applied and whether it could be waived. No advice or discussion

appears to have taken place about risks, areas of concern, or ways to
minimize risks.

Hiding Fastow’s LJM2-Related Compensation. Enron’s attorneys
worked to avoid disclosure of Fastow’s LJM-related compensation.
According to Mintz, the General Counsel of Enron Global Finance: “I
think the number one item on our list is to resolve the ‘where
practicable’ language in connection with AF’s interest in the
transactions engaged in with Enron by LJM1 and 2. I spoke, again,
with Andy about this earlier today and he believes (perhaps rightly so)
that Skilling will shutdown LJM if he knew how much Andy earned
with respect to the Rhythms transaction. ... We need to be ‘creative’
on this point within the contours of Item 404 so as to avoid any type of
stark disclosure, if at all possible."

Chewco/Tax Indemnification. Following Enron’s repurchase of
Chewco’s interest in JEDI, Mintz, then General Counsel of Enron
Global Finance, recognized that there was no contractual basis for
Enron to pay Chewco a $2.6 million tax indemnification payment.

7 Email from Jordan Mintz, Enron, to Ron Astin, Vinson & Elkins, and Rex Rogers, Enron, et al., Jan.
16, 2001, at 1-2 [AB0911 1156-AB0911 1158].

-115-

=== PAGE 119 ===
However, at the instruction of Fastow, Mintz had an amendment to the
agreement drafted to provide for the payment and never raised the
issue with Enron’s General Counsel, Derrick.”

In other cases, Enron’s in-house attorneys knew that the Enron Board did not have
all relevant facts before it, but took no action to correct that problem:

e Other Enron Officer Involvement in LJM2. Enron in-house attorneys
knew that the Enron Board was not informed that Glisan and Kopper,
in addition to Fastow, were involved in the management of LIM2.74

e LJM2 Concerns. Enron in-house attorneys never shared with the
Enron Board their concerns that there was no substantiation for the
conclusion that the Enron/LJM2 deals were “at arms-length” or that
Enron got the best price from the LIM2 transactions.

e Kopper’s Role in Chewco. Fastow characterized Chewco as an

' “naffiliated” entity to the Enron Board even though Kopper was the
managing partner. Enron in-house attorneys knew of Kopper’s role in
Chewco but never raised the issue with the Enron Board.”

e Raptor Manipulation Concerns. Enron in-house attorneys never
discussed their concerns about the Raptor SPEs with the Enron Board.
In a memorandum prepared by an in-house attorney, Stuart Zisman, to
several senior Enron in-house attorneys, Zisman stated:

Overall Book Manipulation. The Raptor structure is very
cleverly designed to reduce earnings volatility resulting
from the rules of fair value accounting. Our original
understanding of this transaction was that all types of
assets/securities would be introduced into this structure
(including both those that are viewed favorably and those
that are viewed as being poor investments). As it turns out,

73 See Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Attorneys), Attorneys’ Role in Related Party SPE Transactions —
Chewco — Attorneys’ Roles in Connection with Chewco Unwind and Tax Indemnity Issue.

244 Compare Email from Bob Baird, Vinson & Elkins, to Scott Sefton and Rex Rogers, Enron, Oct. 4, 1999
[AB0472 01453-AB0472 01455] with Minutes of Enron Board Special Meeting, June 28, 1999 (the
“6/28/99 Board Special Meeting Minutes”) [AB000196728-AB000196740].

45 See Memorandum from Jordan Mintz, Enron, to Rick Buy and Rick Causey, Enron, regarding “LIM
Approval Process — Transaction Substantiation,” Mar. 8, 2001 [AB0472 01933-AB0472 01937].

246 Facsimile from Carol St. Clair, Assistant General Counsel, Enron, to Richard McGee and Mark
Spradling, Vinson & Elkins, regarding Project Chewco Transaction Structure, Oct. 31, 1997
[AB000465826-AB000465830]; see also Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Attorneys), Attorneys’ Role in
Related Party SPE Transactions — Chewco.

-116-

=== PAGE 120 ===
we have discovered that a majority of the investments
being introduced into the Raptor Structure are bad ones.
This ... might lead one to-believe that the financial books
at Enron are being “cooked” in order to eliminate the drag
on earnings that would otherwise occur under fair value
accounting... 747

e Raptor Restructurings. In March 2001, Enron contributed an
additional 12 million shares of Enron stock, then worth in excess of
$600 million, to the Raptor SPEs. The contribution was necessitated
by the decrease in the value of the Enron stock initially contributed to
the Raptor SPEs and the decrease in the value of the assets that were
hedged. Enron’s in-house attorneys searched to find a way to avoid
having to obtain Board approval of this contribution. They concluded
that no Board approval was required because this transfer was
authorized by a previous resolution of the Enron Board that provided
management with blanket authority to execute and settle equity
derivative transactions up to a specified share amount.”

E. Failure of Lay and Skilling to Provide Checks and Balances

During the five years leading up to the Petition Date, Enron’s organization was
structured with the Office of the Chairman, which Lay and Skilling shared, as the top
management position. Thus, the senior officers who misused the SPE transactions to
disseminate materially misleading financial information reported either directly or
indirectly to Lay and Skilling. For example, Fastow and Causey reported directly to the
Office of the Chairman, and McMahon and Glisan reported to Fastow.

Lay and Skilling, as the CEO and COO of Enron, respectively, should have been
an important check in preventing or minimizing the impact of the subordinate officers’
conduct. Lay and Skilling were both actively involved in Enron’s day-to-day operations

and met at least weekly with the senior officers of the company. Lay and Skilling

247 Memorandum from Stuart Zisman, Enron, to Mark Haedicke and Julia Murray, Enron, regarding
Project Raptor, Aug. 31, 2000, at 1 (emphasis in original) [AB0417 03120-AB0417 03121).

248 See Appendix C (Role of Enron’s Attorneys), Attorneys’ Role in Related Party SPE Transactions —
Raptors — Attorney Role in Raptors and Board Approval.

-117-

=== PAGE 121 ===
participated meaningfully in Enron’s annual budgeting process, and they regularly
monitored the financial performance of Enron. Before the end of each quarter, they met
with Causey to discuss an estimate of Enron’s performance and help allocate resources to
complete transactions that would help Enron meet Wall Street’s expectations.

Given Lay’s and Skilling’s intimate knowledge of and involvement with Enron’s
affairs, it is reasonable to infer that they understood the widespread use of the SPE
transactions and the significant impact of those transactions on Enron’s publicly-reported
financial condition. There is evidence with respect to certain of the SPE transactions,
including the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction and the LJM2/Raptors Hedging
Transactions, that at least Skilling met with and encouraged officers and other employees
of the company to complete those transactions. In addition, Fastow, Causey, McMahon,
Glisan and others routinely provided detailed information about Enron’s financing
activities at meetings of the Finance Committee, which Lay and Skilling always attended.

Lay and Skilling should have used their knowledge of the company to help the
Outside Directors understand the information being presented. Lay and Skilling had the
opportunity to provide meaningful interpretation of the presented information, as they
attended almost every meeting of the Enron Board and its committees. They also set the
agendas for the meetings and reviewed and helped shape in advance the presentations
that other Enron managers would provide. However, the senior officers continued to
provide information to the Outside Directors, particularly the Finance Committee, using
misleading terms and confusing jargon, resulting in obfuscation rather than clarity.

There is evidence that Lay and Skilling sometimes participated with their

subordinate officers in providing information to the Outside Directors about SPE

-118-

=== PAGE 122 ===
transactions.”

There is also evidence showing that at least Skilling failed to tell the
Outside Directors important information about SPE transactions that might have changed
the outcome of Board decisions, even though he was present at the Board or committee
meetings during which these matters were reviewed.?°°

While the justification for their actions is not clear from the evidence, it is clear
that Lay and Skilling failed to respond to red flags that, had they inquired, would have led
them to the knowledge that senior officers were misusing SPE transactions and
disseminating materially misleading financial information. It also appears that Lay and
Skilling did little to help the Outside Directors serve effectively as a check on the

wrongful conduct.

FE. Failure of Enron Board to Provide Checks and Balances

The Enron Board could have been the ultimate check in preventing or minimizing
the impact of the officers’ misconduct. The Board had the authority to stop the
misconduct by, for example, terminating the employment of these officers, refusing to
approve Enron’s financial statements, and other disclosures in its 10-Ks and other public
filings or notifying the SEC of wrongdoing. In practice, however, particularly in

circumstances involving complex matters and obfuscation by officers of a company, there

© For example, with respect to the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction, both Lay and Skilling
“answer[ed] questions from the Directors regarding Mr. Fastow’s involvement in the partnership and the
economics of the transaction.” 6/28/99 Special Board Meeting Minutes, at 6.

250 For example, in December 1997, Skilling failed to tell the Enron Board that Kopper was involved in
Chewco. In addition, despite several opportunities at Board and committee meetings in which LJM2
transactions were discussed, he failed to disclose that he was not receiving information about Fastow’s
LJM2 compensation.

-119-

=== PAGE 123 ===
are limitations to a board serving as an effective check in the area of oversight.2"! This
may help to explain why director liability for breach of the duty of oversight is rare
absent egregious facts.”

The Enron Board did not serve as an effective check on the officers’ misuse of
Enron’s SPE transactions. There are several factors that might explain this failure. Some
of these factors were not within the control of the Enron Board. Other factors, however,
were within the control of the Enron Board and, if handled differently, might have
resulted in the Board limiting the harm caused to Enron.

The Enron Board generally was not asked to, and did not, approve Enron’s SPE

transactions other than the LJM1/Rhythms Hedging Transaction, certain LJM2/Raptors

Hedging Transactions and a few other SPE transactions involving Enron stock (such as

751 Courts have acknowledged that actively engaged boards will not always be able to detect and prevent
misconduct occurring within the corporation. See, e.g., In re Caremark Int’l Inc. Derivative Litig., 698
A.2d 959, 970 (Del. Ch. 1996) (“And obviously too, no rationally designed information and reporting
system will remove the possibility that the corporation will violate laws or regulations, or that senior
officers or directors may nevertheless sometimes be misled or otherwise fail reasonably to detect acts
material to the corporation’s compliance with the law.”).

232 As noted in Annex 2 to Appendix D (Roles of Lay, Skilling and Outside Directors), the law regarding
board oversight divides oversight responsibility into two principal components: a duty to monitor and a
duty to inquire. A failure to discharge the duty to monitor, where found actionable by the courts, has
typically been characterized by abdication or sustained inattention, while actionable failures (assuming they
are not barred by an exculpation provision) to satisfy the duty to inquire (i.c., failing to recognize and
respond to red flags) occur in cases of ordinary negligence. If a director exculpation provision applies,
however, as it would in Enron’s case, a director’s failure to satisfy either component of oversight must
amount to conduct “not in good faith” or must involve “intentional misconduct” or “a knowing violation of
law” in order to establish liability. Thus, director liability in the oversight area is rare absent egregious
facts. There have been several policy reasons advanced by commentators and courts supporting a high
threshold for liability. These include: (i) the desire by companies to attract qualified directors; (ii) the need
to provide incentives for boards to permit the corporation to take considered risks as opposed to taking the
most conservative approach; and (iii) the expense of a different legal framework, whether such expense
results from increased insurance premiums for D&O insurance coverage or from the resources a director
would require to fulfill a more proactive oversight role. See generally In re Caremark Int’l Inc. Derivative
Litig., 698 A.2d 959 (Del. Ch. 1996); American Law Institute, Principles of Corporate Governance:
Analysis & Recommendations § 7.19 cmt. c (1994). Despite a high threshold for the imposition of liability,
the Examiner believes that understanding the Enron Board’s role and conduct is essential in addressing the
question of how Enron’s financial demise could have happened.

-120-

=== PAGE 124 ===
the Share Trust Transactions). As a result, the Board’s role for most of these transactions
consisted primarily of providing oversight and being alert for signals or red flags of
wrongdoing. The following discusses Enron’s policies relating to its transaction approval
process and the conduct of the two committees most responsible for monitoring the SPEs:
the Finance Committee and the Audit Committee.

Enron Board's Transaction Approval Policies

The Enron Board did not approve most of the SPE transactions. There were
several policies established by the Enron Board that were relevant to determining whether
a transaction could be consummated without Board approval. These included: (i)
Enron’s Risk Management Policy;”*> (ii) Enron’s Guaranty Policy;?™* and (iii) Enron’s

asset divestiture policy.”° Because of the way in which many of the SPE transactions

253 Enron’s risk management policy set authorized limits on net open position, maturity gaps and value-at-
risk for activities Enron designated as being within its commodity groups. Under this policy for most
periods, there were generally no value-at-risk limits on the merchant portfolio commodity group. See
Enron Corp. Risk Management Policy, Oct. 1, 1996, as amended through May 2, 2000 (the “Risk
Management Policy”) [AB0247 01276-AB0247 01283]. There is evidence that there may have been a
value-at-risk limit applicable to the merchant portfolio when it first received separate designation under the
Risk Management Policy in 1998. Draft Enron Corp. Risk Management Policy, Dec. 8, 1998 (the “Draft
12/8/98 Risk Management Policy”), at Appendix II [AB0245 03302-AB0245 03322]. However,
subsequent versions of the Risk Management Policy do not reflect a value-at-risk limit for the merchant
portfolio. Under the Risk Management Policy, “value-at-risk” or “VAR” meant Enron’s potential
exposure, using statistical methods for measuring likely outcomes. “Potential exposure” meant change in
value resulting from changes in market prices, interest rates, currency rates, counterparty credit risk,
liquidity risk, etc. Because VAR limits were set based on a statistical degree of confidence, they were
expected to be breached and the Risk Management Policy required that breaches be reported to different
levels of management and eventually to the Board, depending upon the size and other circumstances of the
breach.

°54 Enron’s guaranty policy permitted Enron, among other things, to guarantee debt or enter into Non-Debt
Support Arrangements for the obligations of a subsidiary that was at least 75% owned by Enron upon
approval by the Office of the Chairman, Chief Financial Officer, Treasurer or (for certain guaranties and
certain periods) a Deputy Treasurer, regardless of amount (the “Guaranty Policy”). See, e.g., Exhibit “A”
to Enron Board Minutes of Aug. 10, 1999, “Amended Policy for Approval of Guarantees, Letters of Credit,
Letters of Indemnity, and Other Support Arrangements” [AB000473946-AB000473951].

55 Enron’s asset divestiture policy required that the divestiture of merchant assets valued at “$75 million
or more, raised to $500 million by May 2000, had to be approved by the Board. “See Enron Corp.
Transaction Approval Process, revised Feb. 1, 1999 and May 2, 2000 (collectively, the “Transaction
Approval Process”) [AB000193935-AB000193936, AB0247 01266].”

-121-

=== PAGE 125 ===
were structured, these policies effectively permitted Enron’s officers to incur a virtually
unlimited amount of debt through the SPE transactions, without prior approval of the
Enron Board. For example, on September 30, 2001, Enron had $4.8 billion of Prepay
_ Transaction debt and $2.1 billion of FAS 140 Transaction debt.” It does not appear that
the Enron Board approved any of the transactions in which this debt was incurred. The
way these policies worked in the context of Enron’s SPE transactions can be illustrated
through their application to Enron’s Prepay Transactions and its FAS 140 Transactions.
Enron’s Prepay Transactions primarily involved Enron’s Risk Management
Policy and Guaranty Policy. Under the Risk Management Policy, Enron and any entity
directly or indirectly controlled by Enron could enter into a Prepay Transaction in any
amount so long as the limits on Enron’s net trading positions and exposure risk (including
value-at-risk) set under its Risk Management Policy were not breached. A Prepay
Transaction with a creditworthy bank did not increase Enron’s net trading position or
create any material exposure risk because the commodity risk and delivery times under
the forward contract pursuant to which Enron received the financing proceeds were
exactly mirrored by the commodity swap into which Enron entered to eliminate the
commodity risk. Thus, under the Risk Management Policy, Enron or any of its
subsidiaries could engage in a virtually unlimited amount of Prepay Transactions, and
under the Guaranty Policy, if the Prepay Transactions were executed by a 75% owned
subsidiary, the subsidiary’s obligations could be guaranteed by Enron, all without

obtaining Board approval.”*’

256 Bank Presentation, at 42.

257 The Board received periodic reports on the credit ratio components relevant to Enron’s credit rating. If
Prepay Transactions caused price risk management liabilities to exceed price risk management assets, the

-122-

=== PAGE 126 ===
Enron’s FAS 140 Transactions involved the Risk Management Policy, the
Guaranty Policy and the Transaction Approval Process. A typical FAS 140 Transaction
included three fundamental features: (i) a “sale” by an Enron subsidiary of a merchant
investment to an SPE that had borrowed 97% of the purchase price to fund the purchase
(the “Loan”); (ii) an Enron subsidiary’s obligation, through a Total Return Swap, to pay
the principal and interest due under the Loan; and (iii) Enron’s guarantee of its
subsidiary’s obligations under the Total Return Swap.

With respect to the “sale” of a merchant investment, although there is a question
of whether “sales” in these transactions constituted asset divestitures requiring Board

258

approval,” as a practical matter there were very few FAS 140 Transactions in which an

asset sold had a value in excess of the threshold amounts.”
Under Enron’s Risk Management Policy, while the Total Return Swap provided
by the subsidiary may have technically been considered an asset in Enron’s merchant

portfolio commodity group, there were no value-at-risk or other limits on the merchant

portfolio commodity group applicable to FAS 140 Transactions.” In addition, under the

excess would be treated as debt for credit rating purposes. See Second Interim Report. Thus, this was the
only practical limitation on the Enron officers in incurring debt related to Prepay Transactions.

258 Enron’s asset divestiture policy required “divestitures” of merchant assets valued at “$75 million or
more, raised to $500 million by May 2000, had to be approved by the Board. See Transaction Approval
Process. Because a FAS 140 Transaction may be viewed as simply converting one asset in Enron’s
merchant portfolio “commodity group” into another asset ~ the Total Return Swap in the same “commodity
group” — FAS 140 Transactions may not have been viewed as divestitures for this reason (except perhaps to
the extent of 3% of the purchase price).

259 ‘The Cerberus FAS 140 Transaction was valued at approximately $517 million but, for reasons not clear
in the evidence, this transaction was not presented to the Enron Board for review and approval. See First
Interim Report.

260 See Risk Management Policy. In addition to the value-at-risk limit for the merchant portfolio under the
1998 version of the policy noted above, the 1998 version also contained a net open position limit for the
merchant portfolio. Compare Draft 12/8/98 Risk Management Policy with-Risk Management Policy. The
net open position limit may also have been eliminated as to the merchant portfolio as it does not appear in
numerical form in subsequent versions of the Risk Management Policy. In any event, net open position

-123-

=== PAGE 127 ===
Guaranty Policy, the Enron Board had delegated to officers the ability to approve Enron’s
guarantee of the Total Return Swap. Accordingly, no Board approval was required.

The Enron Board apparently devoted significant attention to these policies, as
evidenced by seven amendments to the Risk Management Policy from December 1998
through May 2000. Given the broad parameters of the Guaranty Policy, the Enron Board
apparently put significant emphasis on its ability to manage risk under the Risk
Management Policy. While these controls may work well in managing true trading
activities involving assets that have publicly quoted prices and substantial market
261

liquidity,’ they did not allow the Board the opportunity to prevent the incurrence of debt

through SPE transactions (structured as trading activities).?”

limits did not provide a meaningful constraint on management’s ability to enter into FAS 140 Transactions
because FAS 140 Transactions would not increase the net open position in the merchant portfolio.

261 See Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Risk Management of Financial Derivatives,
Comptroller’s Handbook (Jan. 1997).

2 Testimony from Herbert Winokur, Chair of the Finance Committee, with particular reference to the
Prepay Transactions, illustrates his view of how these controls operated:

A. Well, my understanding of the transactions was that the other party was paying
us and we were agreeing to deliver something and we had a number of controls
in place. We had the RAC group looking at the value-at-risk exposures and
measuring them. We had the four debt ratios we discussed yesterday where we
were looking at where were we and where would we be including funds flow
obligations. So we had other controls; we just didn’t need the transaction
approval control on top of the other controls that we had.

Q. That’s fine. And the reason was from your perspective as the Finance
Committee member what?

A. The reason was because once we were monitoring the finance plan, including
funds flow, and once we knew that these transactions would be picked up in the
value-at-risk control and the price risk management book, we believed that those
were the only controls that would be required on those.

And as for issuance of debt, again, the controls related to our looking at the
ratios that related to balance sheet debt coverage.

Sworn Statement of Herbert S. Winokur, Jr., former Director, Enron, to John L. Latham, A&B, Nov. 21,
2002 (the “Winokur 11/21/02 Sworn Statement”), at 73-74 (second day of testimony).

-124-

=== PAGE 128 ===
Finance and Audit Committees

Finance Committee. Jn the area of SPE transactions and off-balance sheet finance
transactions, the Finance Committee failed to serve as an effective check. It should be
noted that in the area in which its members had an interest and concern, e.g., the value-at-
risk status reports about the trading activities (to the extent they related to true trading
activities), the Finance Committee appears to have performed well in its oversight
function. Perhaps because of this interest and attention on the part of the Finance
Committee, this process worked effectively to prevent trading losses at Enron.

The Finance Committee did not do as well in the SPE transactions and the
structured finance areas. In its presentation to the banks on November 19, 2001, Enron
listed the debt maturities of its on and off-balance sheet financing activities through 2002.
Obligations maturing in the last quarter of 2001 and during 2002 totaled $11.1 billion,
with $2.5 billion due in the last quarter of 2001 and the first quarter of 2002. From at
least 1997 until August 2001, the Finance Committee apparently neither requested nor
received a schedule of the total amount and maturities of Enron’s on- and off-balance
sheet obligations. Although the Audit and Finance Committees were provided a list of all
obligations (without maturities) of Enron as of September 1997, at a meeting on February
9, 1998, they apparently did not see or ask for any similar list again until August 2001.
In August 2001, lists of Prepay Transactions and FAS 140 Transactions were provided to

the Finance Committee without discussion.?°

263 8/13/01 Finance Committee Materials, at AB0247 02309-AB0247 02310 (part of CFO Report).

-125-

=== PAGE 129 ===
The Finance Committee Charter required that this committee:

review and monitor [the Company’s] liquidity, including debt maturities,

and its contingent liabilities, including its counterparty and currency risk,

exposure under outstanding letters of indemnity, letters of credit and

corporate guarantees, and review and approve for recommendation to the

Board of Directors, if appropriate, the Company’s policies with regard

thereto.”

Instead of monitoring the amounts and maturities of Enron’s obligations,
however, the Finance Committee focused on the ratios that guided the credit agency
ratings. The problems with relying solely on this system of monitoring Enron’s
obligations were twofold. First, Enron’s use of many of its SPE transactions was
designed to have no adverse impact on the ratios. For example, $5 billion of Prepay
Transactions did not adversely impact these key financial metrics. Second, the maturities
of these SPE off-balance sheet transactions were not apparent from those ratios.
Therefore, the $11 billion of obligations coming due from October 2001 through
December 2002 were not disclosed in the ratios. Liquidity analyses were presented to the
Finance Committee, but not in juxtaposition to the maturities or amount of the
obligations. Equally important, these liquidity reports always included a significant
amount of funds that could be raised through “merchant portfolio monetizations.”’® As
the Prior Reports regarding the FAS 140 Transactions demonstrate, these

“monetizations” were merely financing activities that produced more obligations for

Enron.

264 Enron Finance Committee Charter, undated (the “Finance Committee Charter”), at 1 [AB1114 00003-
AB1114 00004].

265 See, e.g., Materials of the Enron Finance Committee Meeting, May 1, 2000, at 34 (part of Treasurer
Report) (listing $8.4 billion of liquidity, of which $3.98 billion is from “merchant portfolio monetizations”)
[AB0247 01210-AB0247 01327].

-126-

=== PAGE 130 ===
Management failed to present clearly Enron’s SPE transactions and the total
amount and maturities of its off-balance sheet debt to the Finance Committee. Similarly,
management failed to disclose these transactions adequately in its financial statements.”
The Finance Committee, however, is subject to criticism for failing to recognize that they
were not getting adequate information from management on this increasingly important
part of Enron’s financial structure. This criticism is not meant to imply that there was not
any information being supplied to the Board. In fact, in some circumstances it appears
that there was so much information presented that it inhibited any meaningful discussion.
For example, some of the reports provided to the Finance Committee were so detailed
that, according to one director’s description of a 1998 capital status report, “the level of
detail is numbing rather than elucidating.””°”

The Finance Committee received hints and signals of the magnitude of Enron’s

SPE transactions, including:

e $2.8 billion of financing transactions at the end of 1999 including a
“$300mm structured prepay.”

e four “monetizations” of assets and investments totaling $1.6 billion
and the Nahanni minority interest transaction totaling $400 million.

e a report proclaiming that major finance initiatives for 1999 included
executing over $21 billion of funding transactions and over $5 billion
of “balance sheet management activities.”?

266 See Second Interim Report, Appendix D (Enron’s Disclosure of Its SPEs).

287 Belfer Sworn Statement, at 123. The chart Belfer referred to was a list that identified many types of
Enron’s on- and off-balance sheet liabilities, listing Prepays under the heading “Debt Classified as Non-
Debt Liabilities.” Draft Enron Capital Management Capital Activity Report, Jan. 27, 1998, at
AB0246 00815 [AB0246 00725-AB0246 00846]; Agenda for Joint Audit and Finance Committee Meeting,
Feb. 9, 1998 [AB000473540].

268 Materials from Enron Finance Committee Meeting, Dec. 13, 1999 (the “12/13/99 Finance Committee
Materials”), at 26 (part of Treasurer Report) [AB0247 00947-AB0247 01075].

26 Id. at 18 (part of CFO Report).

-127-

=== PAGE 131 ===
e alist of the largest financing transactions between June and December
2000 including a $500 million Chase prepay, a $1 billion add on to
Osprey described as an “off-balance sheet acquisition vehicle, allows
for positive funds flow.”
It is not the use of SPE off-balance sheet transactions per se that should have

d,7” their use is

concerned the Finance Committee. As the Examiner has observe
acceptable if accounted for and disclosed properly. The question is whether these
presentations to the Finance Committee should have caused its members to ask additional
questions. A full discussion of questions as simple as the following may have elicited
some useful information:

e How many transactions?

e How much cash was raised?

e What are Enron’s obligations under these transactions?

e When are these obligations due?

¢ How is Enron reporting them?

e Why don’t these transactions adversely affect Enron’s investment
grade credit rating ratios?

Audit Committee. The Audit Committee also did not serve as an effective check.
It had many items to watch and devoted too little time to watching them. The Audit
Committee meetings in February 2000 and 2001 illustrated the shortcomings. In each of
these meetings, the committee had three major items to consider. First, it received, and
should have had a full discussion and consideration of, Andersen’s SAS 61 report.

Second, it was to discuss and approve the annual financial statements for the preceding

270 See, e.g., First Interim Report, at 22; Second Interim Report, at 49-50.

-128-

=== PAGE 132 ===
year. Third, it was to review the LJM transactions and make any comments it had on
them to the full Board. In addition to these three items, it was to consider any other
matters brought before it. In February 2000, these other matters included: (i) a report on
final New York Stock Exchange and SEC rules regarding audit committees; (ii) a report
on the 2000 Internal Audit Plan; (iii) a report on the significant reserves in the financial
statements; (iv) a report on market risk including the 1999 profit and loss and value-at-
risk by commodity group; (v) an executive session to consider the appointment of
independent auditors for 2000; and (vi) an executive session with Andersen to discuss
any problems or disagreements with management. The February 2000 Audit Committee
meeting lasted one hour and ten minutes.?”! That amount of time does not appear to be
sufficient for meaningful reports, much less full and complete questions and discussion of
those matters presented.

There was little discussion of the three major items. The committee received a
list of LJM transactions with amounts involved, and assurances by Causey that the
transactions were negotiated at arm’s length. However, there were no explanations of
what those transactions were or why they were done or whether efforts were made to sell
the assets to a third party.

Andersen reported that “the Company’s sophisticated business practices
introduced a high number of accounting models and applications requiring complex
interpretations and judgments and that the broadness of the SEC business-related

disclosure requirements added to the complexity of the Company’s financial

271 3/7/00 Audit Committee Minutes, at 1.

-129-

=== PAGE 133 ===
reporting.”””” Again, a full discussion of questions as simple as the following may have
elicited some helpful information:

e What were some of the disclosure issues in the financial statements
that are before us and that we are being asked to approve at this
meeting?

e What are some of the areas on the financial statements that required
complex interpretations and accounting judgments so that I can see
how much is at stake if others were to reach different judgments than

you?

e Is there anything we should be doing to make those accounting
judgments easier or the disclosures more transparent and complete?

© What is the likelihood that these judgments could be incorrect? If so,
what are the consequences?

¢ What alternative accounting treatments exist and why did management
select and you concur in the treatments used in these financial
statements?

There is no record of whether or to what extent any meaningful discussion took
place in which Andersen was asked to explain the accounting and disclosure judgments
or the magnitude of their impact on Enron’s financial statements. In the Audit
Committee’s defense, however, it did not have the benefit of the concerns that Andersen
had expressed internally and it was told that a “clean” opinion would be delivered.
Nonetheless, asking questions like those described above may have provoked meaningful
discussion of some of these issues.

In February 2001, the Audit Committee meeting lasted one hour and thirty-five

minutes plus an additional ten minutes the following morning when the Audit Committee

went into executive session to recommend the approval of Andersen as the company’s

22 Materials from Enron Audit Committee Meeting, Feb. 12, 2001 [AB0246 01755-AB0246 01881].

-130-

=== PAGE 134 ===
independent accountants for the following year. In addition to the three major items the
Audit Committee was to consider and discuss — Andersen’s SAS 61 report, approval of
the 2000 financial statements and the LJM transactions — there were six other items: (i) a
presentation by Enron’s General Counsel, Derrick, on the legal matters in the footnotes to
the financial statements; (ii) the required report of the committee to be included in the
proxy statement; (iii) the revised Audit and Compliance Committee Charter; (iv) the
_ annual report on executive and director use of company aircraft; (v) a report on the 2001
Internal Control Audit Plan; and (vi) a report on the company’s polices and practices for
management’s communications with analysts.?”
The minutes of the meeting do not indicate the time spent on individual issues.
The length of the meeting, however, raises a question as to whether there could have been
meaningful consideration and discussion on any of them. Andersen reminded the Audit
Committee, although somewhat obliquely, that “the Company continued to utilize highly
structured transactions, such as securitizations and syndications, in which there was
significant judgement required in the application of GAAP. [Enron also used] mark-to-
market and fair value model accounting in the areas of trading and derivative contracts
and stated that these also required significant judgement regarding the applicability of
certain models to specific products or transactions.””* Yet again, a full discussion of
questions as simple as the following may have elicited some helpful information:

e What transactions?

e How much money is involved?

273 Id.
274 Audit Committee 02/12/01 Minutes, at 2.

-131-

=== PAGE 135 ===
e Should we consider other products and transactions?
e Should we consider alternative accounting treatments or models?
e What happens if these judgments are wrong?

e Which transactions or judgments are the most risky and what are the
primary issues?

Possible Explanations for the Enron Board’s Failure

Many of Enron’s Outside Directors had skills and talents that likely were
beneficial to Enron in the operation of its business, and these contributions should not be
underestimated. It appears from the evidence, however, that the Outside Directors did
not understand important aspects about Enron’s use of SPE transactions.

There may be several possible explanations for the Board’s failure to understand
these transactions. As discussed above, Enron officers often used misleading terms and
confusing jargon, and they presented information to the Enron Board and its committees
in a manner that obfuscated the substance of the SPE transactions. In addition, the length
of Board and committee meetings, given the complexity and the number of agenda items
covered, raises questions of whether sufficient time was devoted to allowing the Outside
Directors to understand the transactions. Finally, Enron’s Board was unusually large,
which may have increased the tendency for individual directors not to feel personally
responsible for understanding complex matters. Despite the large number of directors,
however, the Board did not appear to have sufficient expertise in the kinds of
complicated structured financings in which Enron engaged.

Time. In addition to being large and complex, Enron changed its business

strategy dramatically during the late 1990s, requiring the Outside Directors to learn and

~132-

=== PAGE 136 ===
adjust to the company’s transition from a “pipeline company” to a “trading company.”””°

Board meetings typically lasted a total of about four to five hours, and committee
meetings were generally not more than ninety minutes each. With the large number of
significant agenda topics presented at each meeting, these circumstances raise questions
of whether the Outside Directors had sufficient time to discuss and understand the
matters fully. Although none of the Outside Directors admitted in testimony that they felt

276

the Board or committee meetings were too short,”"” several directors provided such

criticism in a Board self-assessment they completed in 2001 (the “2001 Board
Assessment”):

e “This is a great board (in my opinion). And, if anything, more meeting
time (especially committees) would be nice. It is a working board and
lots going on in the company!”

e “We may need to meet beyond noon more often, to allow for in-depth
briefings, and to leave sufficient time for the special reports to present
risks, hurdles, alternative scenarios, and requests for specific
advice.”””*

e “T think I would support a move to six meetings a year (but not too
strongly.)?””

275 Soe, e.g., Enron 2000 Annual Report, at 2-5; Savage Sworn Statement, at 61-62; Urquhart Sworn
Statement, at 13.

2% See, e.g., Sworn Statement of Jerome J. Meyer, former Director, Enron, to Steven M. Collins, A&B,
Aug. 29, 2003, at 45-46 (“Q. With respect to the board meetings, did you feel that the time that was
allotted to the board meetings was sufficient for you to have all your questions answered about the matters
that were brought before the board? A. Yes. I never felt like we were without time to address everything
that needed to be addressed. I’m comfortable with that. Again, time is a commodity you’d always like
more of.”).

277 Materials from Enron Nominating Committee Meeting, Feb. 12, 2001 (the “2/12/01 Nominating
Committee Materials”), at AB000467840 (part of 2001 Board Assessment) (emphasis in original)
[AB000467834-AB000467851].

278 Td.
279 Td.

-133-

=== PAGE 137 ===
Reliance on Other Board Members. The Enron Board was unusually large. A
recent survey of public companies reported an average board size of 9.4 total directors,
with an average of 6.9 “independent” or outside directors,”®° less than Enron’s 15 to 19

81 A consequence of the large size can be a tendency for the individual

directors.”
directors not to feel personal responsibility for understanding complex matters. Several
of the Outside Directors testified that they might not have understood an area of the
company’s operations or a particular matter, but they were not concerned because they
expected that someone else on the Board did. For example, Chan, who served on both
the Audit and Finance Committees, testified that he relied on other Audit Committee
members Jaedicke, Gramm and John Duncan to understand whether it was appropriate
for Andersen to provide both external and intemal audit functions at Enron: “For
something like that, I do rely on my colleagues at the audit committee — such as Bob
Jaedicke was much more qualified in this regard, and certainly he has, you know,

mentioned about — these concepts, and that’s how I learned about it.””*”

280 Financial Executives Intemational Survey of Corporate Governance Best Practices, May 2002,
available at http://www.fei.org/download/feigovsur.pdf#xml=http:/fei.org.master.com/texis/master/search/
mysite.txt?q=corporatet+ governance&order=1&id=3860184834ad7a56&cmd=xml (last visited October 24,
2003).

281 Several of the directors noted that the Board was too large in the “2001 Board Assessment.” See
2/12/01 Nominating Committee Materials. Comments in the 2001 Board Assessment included: “Board too
large”; “Need to reduce the size of the board. . . .”; “Board slightly too big.” 2/12/01 Nominating
Committee Materials, at AB000467839.

282 Chan Sworn Statement, at 208. Chan also testified that he considered the Audit Committee to have
“experts on this field” and said John Duncan and Gramm were “very qualified” when asked to name those
experts. Chan Sworn Statement, at 210. Gramm, however, testified:

A. I took accounting in, one accounting course in undergraduate school.

Q. Other than that course and just sort of a normal knowledge you picked up reading
financial statements and balance sheets, did you have any other particular expertise in
dealing, or knowledge, I should say, about accounting and auditing issues?

A. No.

Gramm Sworn Statement, at 34.

-134-

=== PAGE 138 ===
Lack of Structured Finance Expertise. The Board did not include a large number
of Outside Directors who had hands-on experience in the types of sophisticated
financings employed by Enron. In the 2001 Board Assessment, the directors
acknowledged this lack of depth on the Board. A summary of the self-assessment
responses quoted the directors’ responses, but without attributing the quotes to individual
directors. Regarding this lack of financial expertise, the directors wrote:

e “Board is too large, but missing skills in technology and very
sophisticated finance.”

e “Need more technology/risk management and finance skills.””4

e “Add expertise in derivatives/hedging/trading.””*°

e “Another person with strong background on financial derivatives may
also help.””8

e “Need to reduce the size of the board and add more expertise in
finance, technology and possibly entertainment/media.””*”

Enron’s use of securitizations and derivatives was so significant that the Enron
Board may have been a more effective check if it had considered some of the oversight
guidance applicable to U.S. banks. Much has been written about the importance of
effective board of director and senior management oversight of securitization and
derivatives activities from the standpoint of U.S. banks, because banks have been among

the most active participants in these markets. U.S. bank regulatory agencies have issued

283 9/12/01 Nominating Committee Materials, at AB000467839 (part of 2001 Board Assessment)
[AB000467834-AB000467851].

284 Td.
285 Id.
286 Td.
287 Td.

-135-

=== PAGE 139 ===
detailed guidance on effective risk management of securitization and derivatives
activities and continued to refine this guidance over the years. This guidance requires the
board to have a general understanding of the risks that these complex activities create for
their institutions and, where necessary, to obtain access to auditors and experts external to
the organization, including independent legal advice."

Conclusions

For several reasons, the Enron Board did not function as an effective check and
balance. This failure may have resulted from (i) a carefully orchestrated strategy of
Enron’s senior officers, (ii) the failure of Lay and Skilling, in their capacities as executive
officers, to assist the Outside Directors, (iii) inadequate assistance from Enron’s

289 (iv) inattention by the Enron Board to its oversight function or

professionals,
(v) insufficient understanding of how the SPE transactions were being used by Enron’s

officers.

288 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Evaluating the Risk Management and Internal
Controls of Securities and Derivative Contracts Used in Nontrading Activities, SR 95-17 (Mar. 28, 1995);
Board of Govemors of the Federal Reserve System, Rating the Adequacy of Risk Management Processes
and Internal Controls at State Member Banks and Bank Holding Companies, SR 95-51 (Nov. 14, 1995).

28 For example, Mintz, General Counsel of Enron’s Global Finance Group, testified regarding the decision
of Enron officers, including him, not to tell the Audit Committee of the Board in February 2001 about
transactions in which Enron had repurchased assets from LJM2. When Mintz was asked why the officers
did not disclose those transactions, he said: “I felt that there was a substantial opportunity for the board to
ask questions, perhaps as we as lawyers are trained, Is there anything else that we should be aware of, and I
don’t recall them doing that....” Deposition of Jordan Mintz, former Vice President and General
Counsel, Enron Global Finance, by Rebecca M. Lamberth, A&B, Sept. 29, 2003, at 130. However,
Outside Director Herbert Winokur testified, when asked if he had been interested in learning the identity of
the person who purchased Fastow’s interest in LIM1 and LJM2: “[I]t’s management’s responsibility to tell
me what I should know.... I didn’t inquire because I assumed somebody would tell me if I needed to
know.” Winokur 11/21/02 Sworn Statement, at 240.

-136-

=== PAGE 140 ===
Xx. FINAL REPORT

This Report is the Examiner’s final report under the terms of the April 8" Order.
Absent further order of the Court, the Examiner has completed his investigation.

The Examiner acknowledges the assistance provided by certain of Enron’s
officers and employees throughout the course of the investigation. They have provided
the Examiner with a substantial amount of documents and information and have been
helpful in arranging for interviews of numerous witnesses. The Examiner appreciates
their efforts in support of the examination.

Dated: November 4, 2003
Respectfully submitted,

/s/ Neal Batson
Neal Batson
Examiner

ALSTON & BIRD LLP
One Atlantic Center

1201 West Peachtree Street
Atlanta, Georgia 30309
404 881-7000

-137-
