
=== PAGE 1 ===
     Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 1 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




           IN THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
                    FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT  United States Court of Appeals
                                                    Fifth Circuit

                                                 FILED
                                                                             April 6, 2011

                                        No. 06-20885                        Lyle W. Cayce
                                                                                 Clerk

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

                                                    Plaintiff–Appellee
v.

JEFFREY K SKILLING,

                                                    Defendant–Appellant




                     Appeal from the United States District Court
                          for the Southern District of Texas


                   ON REMAND FROM THE SUPREME COURT
                         OF THE UNITED STATES


Before SMITH and PRADO, Circuit Judges, and MOSES, District Judge.*
EDWARD C. PRADO, Circuit Judge:
      Former Enron Corporation CEO Jeffrey K. Skilling was convicted of
conspiracy, securities fraud, making false representations to auditors, and
insider trading.        After we affirmed his convictions, the Supreme Court
invalidated one of the objects of the conspiracy charge—honest-services
fraud—and remanded, instructing us to determine whether the error committed
by the district court in submitting the honest-services theory to the jury was


      *
          District Judge of the Western District of Texas, sitting by designation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
    Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 2 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                   No. 06-20885

harmless as to any of Skilling’s convictions. Because we find that the error was
harmless, we affirm the convictions. In addition, for the reasons stated in our
previous opinion, we vacate the sentence and remand for resentencing.
                              I. BACKGROUND
      In May 2006, Skilling was convicted by a jury of one count of conspiracy,
twelve counts of securities fraud, five counts of making false representations
to auditors, and one count of insider trading. The indictment alleged several
possible objects of the conspiracy, including securities fraud and honest-services
fraud, and the district court’s jury instructions permitted the jury to convict on
any of the alleged theories of guilt. The jury returned a general verdict of guilty
on the conspiracy charge without identifying the specific object of the conspiracy.
The district court sentenced Skilling to 292 months of imprisonment and three
years of supervised release, and assessed $45 million in restitution.
      Skilling appealed, arguing, among other things, that his conspiracy
conviction was premised on an improper theory of honest-services fraud. We
affirmed the convictions, holding that the Government’s honest-services theory
was proper under Fifth Circuit case law. See United States v. Skilling, 554 F.3d
529, 595 (5th Cir. 2009), vacated in part, 130 S. Ct. 2896 (2010). We also vacated
the sentence and remanded for resentencing because the district court had
incorrectly applied a sentencing enhancement for substantially jeopardizing a
“financial institution.” See id.
      On appeal, the Supreme Court reduced the scope of the honest-services
fraud statute and invalidated the Government’s honest-services theory in this
case. See Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at 2907 (“Because Skilling’s alleged misconduct
entailed no bribe or kick-back, it does not fall within [the honest-services fraud


                                         2

=== PAGE 3 ===
     Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 3 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                    No. 06-20885

statute]’s proscription.”). The Court did not, however, reverse any of Skilling’s
convictions, but remanded the case to us to determine whether the honest-
services instruction amounted to harmless error. Id. at 2934–35.
                         II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
      In Hedgpeth v. Pulido, 129 S. Ct. 530 (2008) (per curiam), the Supreme
Court recently confirmed that an alternative-theory error—i.e., where a jury
rendering a general verdict was instructed on alternative theories of guilt and
may have relied on an invalid theory—is subject to harmless-error analysis “so
long as the error at issue does not categorically ‘vitiat[e] all the jury’s findings.’”
Id. at 532 (alteration in original) (citation omitted); see Skilling, 130 S. Ct. at
2934 n.46 (extending the holding of Pulido, which was a case on collateral
review, to this case and other cases on direct appeal).          The Court did not
specifically identify the harmless-error standard that is applicable to alternative-
theory errors, but it cited to a string of cases that apply a common harmless-
error standard to other types of instructional errors. See Pulido, 129 S. Ct. at
532 (citing Neder v. United States, 527 U.S. 1 (1999) (omission of an element of
an offense); California v. Roy, 519 U.S. 2 (1996) (per curiam) (erroneous aider-
and-abettor instruction); Pope v. Illinois, 481 U.S. 497 (1987) (misstatement of
an element of an offense); Rose v. Clark, 478 U.S. 570 (1986) (erroneous burden-
shifting as to an element of an offense)). The Court declared that “[a]lthough
these cases did not arise in the context of a jury instructed on multiple theories
of guilt, one of which is improper, nothing in them suggests that a different
harmless-error analysis should govern in that particular context.” Pulido, 129
S. Ct. at 532.




                                          3

=== PAGE 4 ===
     Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 4 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                       No. 06-20885

       Consistent with this line of cases, there are two ways to prove the
harmlessness of an alternative-theory error. First, as set forth in Neder v.
United States (which is the most recent of the line of cases cited in Pulido), an
error is harmless if a court, after a “thorough examination of the record,” is
able to “conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that the jury verdict would have
been the same absent the error.” 527 U.S. at 19. If the defendant “raised
evidence sufficient to support a contrary finding,” then the error was not
harmless. Id. Thus, under the so-called Neder standard, a reviewing court,
“in typical appellate-court fashion, asks whether the record contains evidence
that could rationally lead to [an acquittal] with respect to the [valid theory of
guilt].” 1 Id.
       Second, as we held in United States v. Holley, 23 F.3d 902 (5th Cir. 1994),
and United States v. Saks, 964 F.2d 1514 (5th Cir. 1992), an alternative-theory
error is harmless if the jury, in convicting on an invalid theory of guilt,
necessarily found facts establishing guilt on a valid theory. See United States
v. Howard, 517 F.3d 731, 738 (5th Cir. 2009) (stating that Holley and Saks stand
for the proposition that “legally erroneous jury instructions [are] harmless in
fraud cases when the inevitable result of the fraudulent activity proved at trial


       1
         Before Pulido, we often applied an “impossible to tell” harmless-error standard to
alternative-theory errors. See United States v. Howard, 517 F.3d 731, 736 (5th Cir. 2009)
(cataloguing cases). This standard had its origins in Yates v. United States, 354 U.S. 298
(1957), which states that a general verdict should be set aside when it “is supportable on one
ground, but not on another, and it is impossible to tell which ground the jury selected.” Id. at
312 (emphasis added). The impossible-to-tell standard is more stringent than the Neder
standard; it is closer to the “absolute certainty” standard that the Supreme Court invalidated
in Pulido. See Pulido, 129 S. Ct. at 533 (holding that the absolute-certainty standard is
similar to “a finding that no violation had occurred at all, rather than that any error was
harmless”). Because the impossible-to-tell standard is inconsistent with harmless-error
review, we hereby abandon it.

                                               4

=== PAGE 5 ===
     Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 5 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                       No. 06-20885

established that the defendants participated in the scheme that justified their
convictions on legally correct instructions”). Our rulings in Holley and Saks pre-
date the Supreme Court’s decision in Pulido, but they apply a harmless-error
test that is consistent with the Neder standard, and therefore we affirm their
continuing vitality in our case law.2
                                     III. ANALYSIS
A.     The Conspiracy Conviction
       The Government asserts that the invalid honest-services instruction was
harmless with respect to the conspiracy conviction. Specifically, it argues that
the evidence presented at trial proved that Skilling participated in a scheme to
deceive the investing public about Enron’s financial condition in order to
maintain or increase Enron’s stock price.             If so, then we would be able to
conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that absent the honest-services instruction,
the jury would have convicted Skilling under a valid theory of guilt—conspiracy
to commit securities fraud.3
       Before examining the evidence presented at trial, however, we must
address two nonevidentiary arguments raised by Skilling. First, Skilling argues
that the district court’s jury instructions, by permitting the jury to convict on


       2
         Skilling argues that to prove harmlessness, the Government must show “complete
factual identity” between the valid and invalid theories of guilt. This argument is not
consistent with Neder, which permits a court to find harmlessness based solely on the strength
of the evidence supporting the valid theory, regardless of the evidence presented in support
of the invalid theory. Further, Skilling provides absolutely no support for his erroneous claim
that, to succeed, the Government must show that the valid theory was the only factually
supportable basis on which the jury could have convicted.
       3
         The Government’s harmless-error argument is consistent with the indictment, which
focused primarily on securities fraud and did not emphasize any act of honest-services fraud
that is not also an act of securities fraud.

                                              5

=== PAGE 6 ===
    Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 6 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                  No. 06-20885

either the honest-services theory or the securities-fraud theory, are dispositive
evidence of the harmfulness of the error. We disagree. The instructions were
clear and easy to understand, and they did not contain any statement that gave
a preference to one theory over another. Moreover, the fact that the jury may
have relied upon an invalid theory of guilt shows only that an alternative-theory
error occurred, not that the error was not harmless. See Paredes v. Thaler, 617
F.3d 315, 318 (5th Cir. 2010) (confirming that a jury instruction on alternative
theories of guilt, one of which is invalid, is not a fatal “structural” error, but
instead is “subject to harmless-error analysis”).
      Second, Skilling contends that the Government’s opening and closing
statements made it more likely that the jury would rely on the honest-services
theory rather than on the securities-fraud theory. Again, we disagree. The
Government’s opening and first closing statements both mentioned honest-
services fraud only in relation to Skilling’s co-defendant, Ken Lay, who, unlike
Skilling, was charged with several counts of honest-services wire fraud. With
respect to Skilling, both statements focused exclusively on conduct that
constitutes securities fraud. In its rebuttal closing statement, the Government
made reference to the honest-services allegations against both defendants,
but it mentioned the honest-services theory in relation to Skilling only once.
Further, it never argued that the jury should convict Skilling solely on the
honest-services theory, nor did it tell the jury that it should disregard the
evidence of securities fraud in reaching a conviction. This single reference to
Skilling’s honest services, in light of the Government’s extensive argument on
securities fraud, merely permitted the jury to decide the case on the wrong




                                        6

=== PAGE 7 ===
     Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 7 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                        No. 06-20885

theory. It did not force or urge it to do so, and therefore, it shows only that an
alternative-theory error occurred, not that the error was not harmless.
       Having disposed of these two preliminary arguments, we next turn to the
crux of the matter: whether, under the Neder standard, the evidence presented
at trial proves that Skilling conspired to commit securities fraud. Based on our
own thorough examination of the considerable record in this case, we find that
the jury was presented with overwhelming evidence that Skilling conspired to
commit securities fraud, and thus we conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that
the verdict would have been the same absent the alternative-theory error.4
       First, the evidence overwhelmingly proved that Skilling and his co-
conspirators transferred losses and the risk-management books from Enron’s
struggling retail division, Enron Energy Services (“EES”), to Enron’s Wholesale
division, which accounted for most of Enron’s revenue, so that EES would appear
to be more profitable than it really was. The testimony at trial established that
under the mark-to-market accounting rules that EES professed to follow, it
should have booked hundreds of millions of dollars in losses in the first quarter
of 2001. These losses arose from bad-debt write-offs, errors in how EES had
originally booked the value of its retail contracts, and unanticipated expenses
that could not be passed on to EES’s retail customers.                     According to the



       4
         We do not rely on the harmless-error test set forth in Holley and Saks. At trial, the
Government introduced evidence that Skilling made misleading statements to Enron’s Board
of Directors. Some of these statements were not communicated to the investing public. This
evidence would prove honest-services fraud, but not securities fraud, and so we cannot say
that a conviction on honest-services grounds in this case would necessarily find facts
establishing guilt on securities-fraud grounds. Nonetheless, the fact that the jury had the
option to rely on a pure honest-services theory to convict Skilling has no effect on the strength
of the evidence going to the other alleged fraudulent schemes and on whether that evidence
satisfies the Neder standard.

                                               7

=== PAGE 8 ===
    Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 8 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                 No. 06-20885

testimony, Skilling knew about the extent of the losses attributable to EES
and approved a plan to (1) shift the losses and EES’s risk-management books
(and therefore most of EES’s money-losing components) to Wholesale, even
though the losses arose from EES’s own retail contracts, not from Wholesale’s
business; and (2) justify this “resegmentation” as an operational change, even
though it resulted in no efficiencies, Wholesale had no experience in handling
retail contracts, and Wholesale and EES had different contracting procedures,
origination policies, risk assessments, and marketing efforts. Dave Delainey,
the CEO of EES at the time, testified that he warned Skilling that the
resegmentation was fraudulent because it had no real business purpose and
was designed to hide EES’s losses from investors, and that Skilling approved
the resegmentation anyway.
      In his brief, Skilling argues that he “established through each of the
government witnesses, as well as his own, that the accounting for this
transaction was ‘rock solid’ and complied with the disclosure rules.” His record
citations, however, do not substantiate his claim. In fact, his argument relies
almost exclusively on his own testimony at trial, which was that he has been
told that the EES resegmentation adhered to generally accepted accounting
principles and that he had not been told that it might be illegal. The jury, by
finding him guilty, necessarily determined that his own self-serving testimony,
in which he contested his liability under any theory of guilt, including the
honest-services theory, was not worthy of belief. Therefore, we too decline to
give Skilling’s testimony any weight in our harmless-error review when
unsupported by other evidence or testimony in the record.




                                       8

=== PAGE 9 ===
    Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 9 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                  No. 06-20885

      Skilling also argues that he presented evidence at trial that EES’s losses
“had either not occurred, had not occurred in the way the government’s
witnesses described, or were only speculative losses that had to be reserved
against, and that proper reserves had been taken on all accounts.” The record
also proves that this claim is false. The testimony at trial clearly showed that
EES’s losses were real, recognizable under mark-to-market accounting rules,
and due to be booked. Skilling points to no evidence, other than his own say-so,
that disputes this finding.
      Second, the evidence overwhelmingly proved that Skilling and his co-
conspirators falsely portrayed Wholesale to the investing public as a low-risk
company that made sustainable profits by delivering gas and electric power to
customers (i.e., a “logistics company”), even though they knew that Wholesale
actually made most of its profits from its highly volatile trading operations. The
evidence presented at trial proved that the majority of Wholesale’s earnings in
2000 and early 2001 came from trading activities, especially from speculative
trading during the California energy crisis. This trading activity created huge
gains (as much as $485 million in a single day) and losses (as much as $551
million in a single day).     Witnesses testified that Skilling knew about the
riskiness of Wholesale’s business, but falsely represented to investors and
analysts that Wholesale was a “logistics company,” not a “trading company.”
      In addition, from 1999 to the analysts conference during the first quarter
of 2001, Skilling repeatedly prohibited other Enron managers from calling
Wholesale a “trading company” or referring to any of Wholesale’s employees as
“traders,” often citing the negative effect such language would have on Enron’s
stock price. That is, if the market perceived Wholesale to be a trading company,


                                        9

=== PAGE 10 ===
    Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 10 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                  No. 06-20885

it would lead to a decrease in Enron’s price–earnings multiplier, which, in turn,
would drag its stock price down. The managers obeyed Skilling and referred to
Wholesale as a “logistics company” at their own engagements with investors and
analysts.
      Skilling argues that he presented sufficient contradictory evidence at
trial proving that Wholesale actually was a “logistics company” because it owned
one of the largest pipeline and energy distribution systems in the world, which
allowed Wholesale to meet supply and demand for its energy customers and
cover its trading positions. Yet again, this evidence is from Skilling’s own self-
serving testimony. Moreover, even if we were to believe Skilling’s assertions,
they do not undermine the Government’s proof at trial, which showed that
Skilling fraudulently kept from the investing public the reality that Wholesale
was driving up its profits through highly risky and volatile trading operations,
not through its energy distribution system.
      Third, the evidence overwhelmingly proved that Skilling and his co-
conspirators used LJM and LJM2, which were two partnerships run by Andy
Fastow, who also served as Enron’s CFO at the time, to hide Enron’s
nonperforming assets and book earnings to meet its earnings targets.
Specifically, the testimony showed that Skilling was intimately involved in the
Enron–LJM “Cuiaba” deal involving the sale of Enron’s interest in a power plant
in Brazil and the Enron-LJM “Nigerian Barges” deal involving the sale of
Enron’s interest in power-generating barges off the coast of Nigeria. In both
cases, Fastow testified that Skilling personally asked him, on behalf of LJM, to
buy money-losing assets at a price that no third party would be willing to pay
and, in “secret” oral side deals, guaranteed that LJM would make a certain rate


                                       10

=== PAGE 11 ===
    Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 11 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                  No. 06-20885

of return (or at least not lose any money) while it owned the assets. Skilling also
agreed that Enron would buy the assets back from LJM if a permanent buyer
could not be found, which it was eventually forced to do because both assets
continued to deteriorate in value. For both deals, Enron booked gains on the
sales of the assets to LJM, thereby allowing Enron to meet its earnings targets,
even though neither transaction was a true sale because Skilling’s “secret”
guarantee eliminated any risks LJM might have suffered in the transactions.
This caused Enron’s financial statements to be false and misleading.
      Skilling makes a number of arguments about the proof at trial, none of
which are especially relevant. He argues that the Government’s theory at trial
was (1) that the very creation of the partnerships was fraudulent; (2) that the
conflict of interest inherent in the formation of the partnerships was illegal;
(3) that by creating and using these partnerships Skilling was opening Enron
up to excessive risk and was therefore not doing his job properly; and (4) that
the deals themselves made no business sense and therefore Skilling was not
doing his job properly. We disagree with Skilling’s characterizations of the
Government’s case, although we do not need to discuss them since we do not
rely on them. Rather, we find that the evidence is overwhelming that Skilling
was personally involved in the Cuiaba and Nigerian Barges deals and that he
used those deals to cause Enron to book fake profits and hide money-losing
assets from its investors.
      Nonetheless, the Government’s other arguments (as characterized by
Skilling) are supported by strong evidence, and this evidence, in turn, bolsters
the assertion that Skilling engaged in the two deals on which we rely. Likewise,
we do not rely on any of the other dozen transactions that LJM and LJM2


                                        11

=== PAGE 12 ===
    Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 12 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                  No. 06-20885

executed with Enron, although there is also strong evidence that Skilling and his
co-conspirators committed securities fraud in relation to those transactions as
well. Such evidence further bolsters the assertion that Skilling engaged in the
Cuiaba and Nigerian Barges deals. For all of Skilling’s many counterarguments,
his personal involvement with respect to those two deals is not controverted.
      Fourth, the evidence overwhelmingly proved that Skilling and his co-
conspirators underreported the projected losses of Enron’s broadband division,
Enron Broadband Services (“EBS”), and when those losses became too large to
hide within EBS, merged EBS into Wholesale. Enron had marketed EBS to the
investing public as an important part of its future growth strategy, but the
evidence presented at trial showed that EBS lost money in every quarter of its
existence and only met its earning targets in 2000 by engaging in a series of
transactions that fell outside of its core businesses: (1) the sale of part of its
fiber-optic network to LJM2 at a price that no third party would pay; (2) the
hedging of a gain on its investment in Avici, an Internet start-up, into the
Raptor special-purpose entity, which allowed EBS to recognize the gain as
earnings under mark-to-market accounting; and (3) the “monetization” of a
video-on-demand contract with Blockbuster, which allowed EBS to book
anticipated future earnings from the contract. Skilling knew about all of these
transactions, but failed to tell investors about their impact on EBS’s bottom line.
      During the first quarter of 2001, EBS’s managers informed Skilling that
EBS was making almost no revenue from its core businesses and would likely
suffer a loss of $146 million, which was well short of its first quarter target of a
loss of $30 million. After remarking that Enron was getting pressure from
analysts to improve its return on invested capital, Skilling refused to adjust the


                                        12

=== PAGE 13 ===
    Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 13 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                 No. 06-20885

unrealistic earnings target. Instead, he authorized a second monetization of
EBS’s contracts and approved a cost-cutting plan that included the dismissal a
number of EBS employees. Again, Skilling, while selling investors on the growth
potential of EBS, failed to disclose that EBS had almost no revenue from its core
businesses. When EBS continued to deteriorate during the second quarter of
2001 (EBS was due to report a loss of $102 million), witnesses testified that
Skilling approved a plan to merge EBS with Wholesale, knowing that, as a
result, the losses attributable to EBS would be untraceable.
      Again, Skilling’s counterarguments are unavailing. It is not true, as
Skilling claims, that the Government’s theory at trial was that Skilling made
bad business decisions; its argument was that Skilling hid those bad business
decisions from investors.     Moreover, we disagree with Skilling that the
Government’s case relied upon the selective editing of his statements. The
record shows that Skilling’s comments to investors were more than just hopeful
views about a troubled new venture. Rather, given that EBS was sinking and
Skilling knew it, his comments were deceitful. There was no reason for hope
about EBS’s prospects, and Skilling failed to disclose fundamentally important
facts about EBS’s problems.
      Fifth, the evidence overwhelmingly proved that Skilling and his co-
conspirators manipulated Enron’s accounting reserves for contingent liabilities
in order to hit specific earnings targets (known as “consensus estimates”). The
evidence showed that Skilling knew that missing the consensus estimate by
even a small amount would have a significant negative effect on Enron’s stock
price and, conversely, that exceeding the consensus estimate would have a
significant positive effect on the stock price. Toward the end of the fourth


                                       13

=== PAGE 14 ===
    Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 14 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                  No. 06-20885

quarter of 2002, Delainey told Skilling that Wholesale, which was making huge
profits from its speculative trading, “had a couple of quarters [of reportable
earnings] in its pocket.” Skilling was pleased to hear this news and later said
at an Enron management committee meeting that Enron had significant
reserves that were available to meet its earnings targets for 2000. In fact,
Wholesale set aside $873 million in trading income as reserves for contingent
liabilities, which the testimony showed was a significant over-reservation. After
the end of the accounting year, but before Enron had reported earnings,
Wholesale told Richard Causey (Enron’s Chief Accounting Officer at the time),
who then told Skilling, that Wholesale had extra reserves available. Skilling,
through Causey, communicated to Wholesale that it should shift as much
reserves to earnings as was necessary to report 41 cents per share, which was
7 cents more than the fourth quarter earnings target of 34 cents per share.
Wholesale shifted the money from a “gas and power valuation” contingent-
liabilities reserve account, even though there had been no changes in the
circumstances associated with the reserve account. Enron then produced a
document for its outside auditors that falsely stated other reasons for the reserve
transfer. Enron’s stock price went up after Enron reported earnings for that
quarter.
      In response, Skilling argues that there was extensive evidence at trial
that the final reserve amount accurately reflected contingent liabilities and
that any differences were immaterial from an accounting perspective.           We
disagree that the record shows this. A Wholesale accountant testified that, on
Skilling’s command, he released money from the reserve account in order to
make earnings go up, without consideration of the correct reserve amount.


                                        14

=== PAGE 15 ===
    Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 15 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                       No. 06-20885

Such an act is fraudulent: when a company establishes reserves based on the
earnings it wants, its investors do not know if the reserve accounts accurately
reflect the contingent liabilities facing the company, and they do not know that
the company is meeting or exceeding its earnings targets only by moving
reserves from one bucket to another.5 Further, the amount transferred from
reserves to earnings was not immaterial, since the transfer allowed Enron to
exceed its earnings targets and caused Enron’s stock price to increase.
       Lastly, we note that we do not rely on the Government’s allegation that
Enron fraudulently misstated earnings for the fourth quarter of 1999 and
fraudulently transferred contingent-liability reserves to beat the consensus
estimate for the second quarter of 2000. Although there is strong evidence for
a conviction on these allegations, there is not sufficient evidence to find
harmlessness. Nonetheless, both allegations show that Enron executives had
a pattern of manipulating earnings targets.
       These five fraudulent schemes, which formed a large part of the basis for
the Government’s proof at trial, all represent efforts by Skilling and his co-
conspirators to manipulate Enron’s reported earnings or conceal Enron’s losses
from the investing public with the intent and result of affecting Enron’s stock




       5
         In fact, the testimony at trial showed that Enron’s outside auditor told Skilling that
it was inappropriate to transfer reserves to earnings after the end of the accounting period.
Moreover, although at least one accounting expert (who testified on Skilling’s behalf) said that
it was permissible to pick a reserve number based on an earnings target so long as the reserve
number is a reasonable estimate of the contingent liability, he admitted that this rule (which
we find dubious) only applied before the accounting period was complete. Here, the change
was made after the end of the quarter. Further, Skilling’s own accounting expert at trial
admitted that the release of reserves to achieve an earnings target would be wrong, as did
another auditor who testified.

                                              15

=== PAGE 16 ===
     Case: 06-20885 Document: 00511437412 Page: 16 Date Filed: 04/06/2011




                                      No. 06-20885

price. Because they are supported by overwhelming evidence, we find that the
honest-services instruction was harmless error beyond a reasonable doubt.
B.     The Other Convictions
       Skilling also challenges his other convictions for securities fraud, making
false statements to auditors, and insider trading. He argues that because the
district court gave the jury a Pinkerton instruction—which permitted the jury
to hold Skilling vicariously liable for the securities-fraud charges if they found
him guilty of the conspiracy charge—the alternative-instruction error on the
conspiracy charge also taints the other convictions. At oral argument, however,
counsel for Skilling conceded that this challenge is predicated on the existence
of a harmful error that invalidates the conspiracy conviction. Because we find
that the alternative-instruction error in this case was harmless with respect
to the conspiracy conviction, it follows that Skilling has no basis on which to
challenge the remaining convictions.6
                                  IV. CONCLUSION
       The alternative-instruction error in this case was harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt. Accordingly, we AFFIRM the convictions on all counts, and,
for the reasons set forth in our previous opinion, we VACATE the sentence and
REMAND for resentencing.




       6
         Even if the alternative-instruction error in this case was not harmless with respect
to the conspiracy conviction, we would still find that the error was harmless with respect to
most of the other charges. The evidence presented at trial proved beyond a reasonable doubt
that Skilling personally committed many of the fraudulent acts that form the basis for the
other charges. Thus, most—if not all—of the other convictions rest on Skilling’s own conduct,
not on the Pinkerton instruction.

                                             16
