
=== PAGE 1 ===
                               UNIT
                                SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF TEXAS
                                    HOUSTON DIVISION
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
                                              §§
        V.                                     §      Cr.No. H-04-25
                                               §
JEFFREY K.SKILLDING and                        §      Violations; 15 U.S.C. §§ 78j(b), 78m(a),
RICHARD A. CAUSEY,                             §      78m(b)(2), 78ff; 18 U.S.C. §§ 371,1343,
                                               §      2 and 3551 et seq.
                        Defendants.            §

                                  SUPERSEDING lNDICTMENT

The Grand Jury charges:

                                         INTRODUCTION

             At all times relevant to this Superseding Indictment:

             1.         Enron Corp. (”Enron”) was an Oregon corporation with its headquarters in

Houston, Texas. Among other businesses, Enron was engaged in the purchase and sale of natural

gas and power, construction and ownership of pipelines, power facilities and energy-related

businesses, provision oftelecommunications services, and trading in contracts to buy and sell

various commodities. Before it filed for bankruptcy on December 2,2001, Enron was the

seventh largest corporation in the United States.

             2.         Enron was a publicly traded company whose shares were listed on the

New York Stock Exchange and were bought, held, and sold by individuals and entities
throughout the United States and the world. Enron and its directors, officers, and employees

were required to comply with regulations of the United States Securities and Exchange

Commission (“SEC”).Those regulations protect members of the investing public by, among

other things,requiring that a company’s financial information is fully and accurately recorded

=== PAGE 2 ===
and fairly presented to the public. The regulations require, among other things, that a company

submit filings to the SEC in Washington, D.C.that include fair and accurate financial statements

and management discussion and analysis of a company’s business.

           3.          The price of Enron’s stock was influenced by factors such as Enron’s

reported revenue, earnings, debt, cash flow, and credit rating, as well as its growth potential and

ability to meet consistently revenue and earnings targets and forecasts. Enron’s management

provided guidance to the investing public regarding anticipated revenue and earnings for

upcoming reporting periods. Such guidance was communicated inpresentations and conference

calls to securities analysts and in other public statements by Enron executives, Relying in part

on the company’s guidance, securities analysts disseminated to the public their own estimates of

the company’s expected performance. These earnings estimates, or analysts’ expectations, were

closely followed by investors. Typically, if a company announced earnings that failed to meet or

exceed analysts’ expectations, the price of the company’s stack declined.

           4.          It was critical to Enron’s ongoing business operations that it maintain an

investment grade rating for its debt, which was rated by national rating agencies, An investment

grade rating was essential to Enron’s ability to enter into trading contracts with its counterparties

and to maintain sufficient lines of credit with major banks. In order to maintain an investment

grade rating, Enron was required to demonstrate that its financial condition was stable and that

the risk that Enron would not repay its debts and other financial obligations was low. The credit

rating agencies relied on, among other things, Enron’s public filings, including its financial

statements filed with the SEC,in rating Enron’s debt. In addition, members of Enron’s senior

management met regularly with, and provided financial and other information to, representatives


                                                  2

=== PAGE 3 ===
of credit rating agencies. Two primary factors influencing Enron’s credit rating and the

willingness of banks to extend loans to Enron were Enron’s total amount of debt and other

obligations and its cash flow.

                                  PRINClPAL CONSPIRATORS

            5.         Defendant JEFFREY K.SKILLING was employed by or acted as a

consultant to Enron from at least the late 1980s through early December 2001. From 1979 to

1990, SKILLING was employed by the consulting firm of McKinsey & Co., where he provided

consulting services to Enron. In August 1990, Enron hired SKILLING. SKILLING held various

executive and management positions at Enron and in January 1997,Enron promoted SKILLlNG

                                               of the entire company, reporting directly to
to President and Chief Operating Officer (“COO”)

Enron’s CEO and Chairman.

            6.         In February 2001, SKILLING was named President and CEO of Enron.
On August 14,2001, with no forewarning to the public, SKlLLING resigned from Enron. As

COO and CEO of Enron, SKILLING was the senior manager of the company’s commercial
operations and finances and one of its principal spokespersons with the investing public.

SKILLING closely supervised on a day-today basis the activities of each ofEnron’s business
units and the heads of those business units, as well as the activities of the senior Enron managers

who conducted the company’s financial and accounting activities. He routinely led and

participated in presentations and conference calls with securities analysts and in other

communications in which Enron provided the public with guidance concerning the company’s

performance. SKILLING signed Enron’s annual reports filed on Farm 10-Kwith the SEC and

he signed quarterly and annual representation letters to Enron’s auditors.


                                                 3

=== PAGE 4 ===
            7.         Defendant RICHARD A. CAUSEY was a certified public accountant and

was an employee ofEnron from 1991 through early 2002, From 1986 to 1991, while an

employee of the accounting firm Arthur Andersen LLP (“Andersen”),CAUSEY sold audit

services to Enron on behalf ofAndenen, which served as Enron’soutside auditor. In 1991,

Enron hired CAUSEY as Assistant Controller ofEnron Cas Services Group From 1992 to

1997, CAUSEY served in various executive level positions at Enron. In 1998, CAUSEY was

made Chief Accounting Officer (”CAO”) of Enron and an Executive Vice-president.

            8.         As Enron’s CAO,defendant RICHARD A. CAUSEY managed Enron‘s

accounting practices, CAUSEY reported to Enron‘s Chairman and CEO, including to defendant

JEFFREY K. SKILLING Together with SKILLING, Enron’s Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”)

Andrew S.Fastow, its Treasurer, and others, CAUSEY was a principal manager ofEnron’s

finances. CAUSEY was also a principaI manager of Enron’s disclosures and representations to

the investing public. He routinely participated in presentations and conference calls with

securities analysts and in other communications in which Enron provided the public with

guidance concerning the company’s perfomance. CAUSEY signed Enron’s annual reports filed

on Form 10-Kand its quarterly reports on Form 10-Qwith the SEC and he signed quarterly and

annual representation letters to Enron’s auditors.

           9.          Defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY

conspired with numerous Enron executives and senior managers in the scheme to defraud

described in this Superseding Indictment. The coconspirators included, but were not limited to,

former Enron CFO Andrew S. Fastow, who was a supervisor of such matters as Enron’s
structured finance, cash flow, and debt management activities; former Enron Treasurer Ben F.


                                                4

=== PAGE 5 ===
Glisan, Jr., who reported to SKILLING and, at times, Fastow and also was a supervisor of

Emon’s structured finance, cash flow and debt management activities; former Enron North

America (‘ENA’’)and Enron Energy Services (“EES”)CEO David W. Delainey, who reported to

SKILLING and was a supervisor of the largest part of Enron’s wholesale energy business and,

later, of its retail energy business; former ENA CAO Wesley Colwell, who reported to CAUSEY

and Delainey and managed the accounting for Enron’s wholesale energy business; former Enron

Global Finance Managing Director Michael Kopper, who reported to Fastow and conducted

structured finance activities for Enron; and others.

                                      SCHEME TO DEFRAUD

            10.         From at Ieast 1999 through late 2001, defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING

and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and their coconspirators engaged in a wide-ranging scheme to

deceive the investing public, the SEC,credit rating agencies and others (the ‘Victims”)about the

true performance of Emon’sbusinesses by: (a) manipulating Enron’s finances so that Emon’s

publicly reported financial results would falsely appear to meet or exceed analysts’ expectations;

and (b) making public statements and representations about Enron’s financial performance and

results that were false and misleading in that they did not fairly and accurately in all material

respects represent Enron’s actual financial condition and performance, and omitted to disclose

facts necessary to make those statements and representationstruthful and accurate.

            11.        The scheme‘s objectives were, among other things, to report recurring

earnings that falsely appeared to grow smoothly by approximately 15 to 20 percent annually; to

meet or exceed the published expectations of securities analysts forecasting Enron‘s reported

earnings-per-shareand other results; to conceal and avoid publicly reporting any large “write-


                                                  5

=== PAGE 6 ===
downs” or losses; to persuade investors through false and misleading statements that Enron’s

profitability would continue to grow; to deceive credit rating agencies in order to maintain an

investment-grade credit rating; to deceive the investing public about the true magnitude of

growing debt and other obligations required to keep the company’s varied and often unsuccessful

business ventures afloat; to increase artificially Enron’s reported cash flow in order to mask a

growing disparity between the company’s reported revenues and its actual earnings from

operations; and to artificially inflate the share price of Enron’s stock.

            12.         Due to the efforts of defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD

A. CAUSEY and their coconspirators, Enron’s publicly reported financial results and filings and

its public descriptions of itself, including in public statements mads by or with the knowledge of

SKILLING and CAUSEY, did not truthfully present the financial position, results from

operations, and cash flow of the company and omitted to disclose facts necessary to make the

disclosures and statements that were made truthful and not misleading. As a consequence, the

financial appearance of Enron that SKILLING, CAUSEY and their coconspirators presented to

the investing public concealed the real Enron.

           13,         Defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY were

among the principal architects and operators of the scheme to manipulate Enron’s reported

financial results and to present Enron in a misleading manner. Together with their

coconspirators, they set annual and quarterly earnings and cash flow targets (“budget targets”) for

the company as a whole and for each of Enron’s business units. In furtherance of the scheme to

defraud, SKILLING and CAUSEY, together with their coconspirators and others, predetermined

Enron’s budget targets and “backed into” those targets through, among other things, the use of

                                                  6

=== PAGE 7 ===
deceptive accounting devices.

            14.         Defendants JEFFREY K. SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and

their coconspirators set the targets by determining the numbers necessary for each Enron business

unit to produce in order to meet Enron's mandates for growth and analysts' expectations, rather

than by determining how much earnings and cash flow that a particular business unit could

reasonably be expected to generate. On a quarterly and year-end basis, SKILLING and CAUSEY

and others assessed Enron's progress toward its budget targets. When the budget targets were

not met through actual results from business operations, the desired targets were achieved

through the use of various earnings and cash flow “levers,” including but not limited to those

described in this Superseding Indictment. These levers were designed to manipulate Enron's

finances and prop up its stock price by, among other things, filling earnings and cash flow

shortfalls that were at times in the hundreds of millions of dollars. These shortfalls were referred

to within Enron variously as the “gap," "stretch"or “overview."

            15.         As described more fulIy in this Superseding Indictment, many of the levers

used by Enron to fill the shortfall between its budget targets and its actual performance were

complex transactions designed primarily to achieve specific accounting results. The structure of

many such transactions was inconsistent with the transactions' underlying economic substance.

Other transactions actually were to Enron's financial detriment but were completed because they

achieved desired accounting goals that could improve Enron's apparent performance. Often

these transactions were completed in haste near, and at times after, the close of a financial

reporting period.

           16.         From time to t h e , without regard to the actual performance of the


                                                 7

=== PAGE 8 ===
company, defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and their

coconspirators arbitrarily increased budget targets at or near the end of a quarter so that Enron

could exceed analysts’ expectations by falsely appearing to achieve and publicly reporting a

higher than projected earnings-per-share result. At times, SKILLING and CAUSEY caused these

revisions to earnings-per-share results even after the close of a quarter,when they knew that

Enron had not in fact achieved the reported results and again without regard to the company’s

actual business perfomance far that quarter, Instead, to meet the increased earnings-per-share

targets, Enron would employ one or more of the    leversdescribed in this Superseding Indictment.
            17.        The levers relied on by defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and

RICHARD A. CAUSEY and their coconspirators to manipulate Enron’s reported financial

results included fraudulent accounting devices, as well as the fraudulent use of accounting

techniques to create a false and misleading picture ofEnron’s business operations. In addition,

the conspiracy included, at times, intentionally false and misleading representations, and

omissions of material infomation, in Enron’s communications with its outside auditor in order t o

ensure that the conspiracy’s objectives were achieved. This combination of accounting

maneuvers, coupled With misleading public statements and omissions about Enron’s business

performance by SKILLING, CAUSEY and others, enabled Enron to appear as a healthy and

growing company that consistently met or exceeded its projected financial results through a

sound business plan. In fact, as SKILLING and CAUSEY well knew, beginning at least in the

fourth quarter of 2999, Enron consistently failed to meet budget targets through normal business

operations and was able to appear successful only because of the scheme described in this
Superseding Indictment.


                                                 8

=== PAGE 9 ===
            18.         For a time, the scheme of defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and

RICHARD A. CAUSEY and their coconspirators to inflate artificially the share price of Enron’s

stock and to maintain Enron’s credit rating at investment grade succeeded. The misleading

portrayal of Enron's financial condition supported Enron's stock price and its credit rating. In

early 1998, Enron’s stock traded at approximately $30 per share. By January 2001, even after a

1999 stuck split, Enron's stock had risen to over $80 per share and Enron had become the

seventh-rankedcompany in the United States, according to the leading index of the "Fortune

500." Until late 2001, Enron maintained an investment grade credit rating.

            19.         During this time, the rise in Enron's stock price enriched defendants

JEFFREY K. SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and their coconspirators through salary,

bonuses, grants of artificiallyappreciating stock and stock options, and prestige within their

professions and communities. Between 1998 and 2001, SKILLING received approximately$200

million from the sale ofEnron stock options and restricted stock, netting over $89 million in

profit, and was paid more than $14 million in salary and bonuses. Between 1998 and 2001,

CAUSEY received more than $14 milIion from the sale of Enron stock and stock options, netting

over $5 million in profit, and was paid more than $4 million in salary and bonuses.

Coconspirators, as well as other Enron executives and senior managers, sold hundreds of

millions of dollars worth ofEnron stock at artificially inflated prices.

           20.         In the end, the scheme ofdefendants JEFFREY K,SKILING and
RICHARD A. CAUSEY and their coconspirators collapsed. On August14,2001, SKILLING

suddenly resigned from Enron, according to SKILLING and Enron, for “personal reasons."

Enron's stock price, which had been declining since January 2001, fell sharply. On October 16,


                                                  9

=== PAGE 10 ===
2001, Enron announcedpurportedly “nonrecurring” losses of approximately $1 billion. Enron’s

stock declined further. On October 29 and November1,2001, the two leading credit rating

agencies downgraded Enron’s credit rating. On November 8,200 1, Enron announced its

intention to restate its financial statements for 1997 through 2000 and the first and second

quarters of 2001 to reduce previously reported net income by an aggregate of $586 million. On

November 28,200 1, Enron’s credit rating was further downgraded to “junk” status. On

December 2,2001, Enron filed for bankruptcy, making its stock, which less than a year earlier

had been trading at over $80 per share, virtuaIly worthless.

                      DEVICES EMPLOYED IN FURTHERANGE OF SCHEME

             21.        Defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD A, CAUSEY and

their coconspirators employed various devices in furtherance of the fraudulent scheme, including

but not limited to:

                        a.        manufacturing and manipulating earnings through fraudulent

use of reserve accounts to mask volatility in Enron’s wholesale energy trading earnings and

conceal and retain large amounts of those trading earnings for later use in order to achieve

desired earnings results;

                        b.        manufacturing earnings and artificiallyimproving Enron’s

balance sheet through fraudulent over-valuation of assets in Enron’s merchant investment

portfolio;

                        &.        concealing large losses and failures in Enron’s two highly-

touted new businesses, EES and Enron Broadband Services (”EBS’’), by manipulating Enron’s

“segment reporting” and using its reserved energy trading earnings to hide EES’s losses, and by


                                                10

=== PAGE 11 ===
manipulating expense accounting to hide the extent of EBS’s losses;

                       d.          manufacturing earnings by falsely touting Enron’s EBS

business in order to drive up Enron’s stock price, then misleadingly presenting earnings from the

resulting increase in Enron’s share price as recurring earnings from energy operations;

                       e.          structuring financial transactions in a misleading manner in

order to achieve earnings objectives, avoid booking of large losses in asset values, and conceal

debt, including through the fraudulent use of a purportedly third-party investment entity that in

fact was not truly independent from Enron and which was used to achieve Enron’s financial

reporting objective and to enrich Enron executives and senior managers; and

                       f.          structuring financial transactions in a misleading manner in

order to conceal the mount of Enron’s debt and to create the false appearance of greater cash

flows.

           22.         Through the use of these devices, as well as others, defendants JEFFREY

K. SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and their coconspirators presented and described

Enron’s financial results, which had been engineered to appear far more successful than they

actually were, in a false and misleading manner in conferences with securities analysts, press

releases, media statements, and other forms of communication with the investingpublic.

Manufacturing and Manipulating Reported Earnings through Improper Use of Reserves

           23.         Third Ouarter 2000 through Third Ouarter 2001: During 2000 and 2001,

the profitability of Enron‘s wholesale energy trading business, primarily based in its Enron

WhoIesale business unit, dramatically increased for reasons including rapidly rising energy prices

inthe western United States, especially in California. This sudden and large increase in trading

                                                11

=== PAGE 12 ===
    profits, which exceeded $1 billion, if disclosed to the public, would have made it apparent that

    Enron Wholesale's revenues were cIosely tied to the market price for energy, and that Enron

    therefore was exposed to the risk of a decline in such prices. Such disclosure would have

    undermined Enron's description and presentation of itself as the dominant "intermediator” in the

.   energy markets, rather than as a speculative (and therefore risky) trading company whose stock

    would trade at a much lower price-to-earnings ratio.

               24.         From the third quarter of 2000 through the third quarter of 2001,

    defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and their coconspirators

    fraudulently used reserve accounts within Enron Wholesale to mask the extent and volatility of

    Enron Wholesale's windfall trading profits, particularly its profits from the California energy

    markets, to avoid reporting large losses in other areas of its business, and to preserve the earnings

    for use in Iater quarters in which Enron could improperly use them to meet analysts'

    expectations. By early 2001,undisclosed reserve accounts within Enron Wholesale, which prior

    to mid-2000 had held only tens of millions of dollars of Enron's energy trading earnings,

    contained over $1 billion in unreported earnings. SKILLING, CAUSEY and their coconspirators

    improperly planned to and did use hundreds of millions of dollars of those undisclosed reserved

    earnings for, among other things, ensuring that budget targets were met and that hundreds of

    millions of dollars in losses within Enron's EES business unit were successfully concealed from

    the investingpublic.

               25.         Second Ouarter 2000: In mid-July 2000,well after the second quarter

    2000 was over, defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and others

    conceived and executed a plan artificiallyto support and inflate Enron’s share price by


                                                     12

=== PAGE 13 ===
fraudulently reporting an earnings-per-share figure of34 cents, as opposed to the 32 cents per

share that analysts predicted Enron would report. SKILLING arid CAUSEY were aware that

Enron’s perfomance for the quarter,even after Enron’s use of earnings levers and manipulation

of its budget targets, did not support an earnings per share figure of 34 cents,

            26.        In order to help achieve the earnings-per-share target that defendants
JEFFREY K. SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY wanted to report publicly, a senior Enron

executive improperly released into earnings millions of dollars from a ‘prudency” reserve

account in Enron’s energy trading business, which purportedly existed so that Enron would not

report more energy trading earnings than it actually expected to collect. This release of millions

of dollars from the prudency reserve account was not done for legitimate business or accounting

objectives. It was done solely to accomplish defendants SKILLING’s and CAUSEY’Sdesire to

publicly report a higher earnings per share number than expected by securities analysts for the

second quarter 2000,and thereby artificially inflate and support Enron’s share price.

Manufacturing Earnings by Fraudulently Manipulating: Asset Values

           27.         Enron executives and senior managers, including defendant RICHARD A,

CAUSEY, engaged in a pattern of fraudulent conduct designed to generate earnings needed to

meet targets by artificially increasing the book value of certain assetsin Emon’s large “merchant

asset portfolio.” This portfolio included interests in m   y energy-relatedbusinesses that were

not publicly traded and, therefore, were valued by Enron according to its own internal valuation

“models” Enron at times manipulated these models in order to product results desired to meet

earnings targets. For example, in the fourth quarter of 2000,under the direction of CAUSEY and

others, Enron personnel fraudulently increased the value of one of the largest of Enron’s


                                                 13

=== PAGE 14 ===
merchant assets, Mariner Energy, by $ 100 million in order to help close a budget shortfall.

 Concealing EES Failures

             28.        Inpresentations to the investing public, defendants JEFFREY K.

SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and their coconspirators heavily emphasized the

performance and potential of EES as a major reason for past and projected increases in the value

of Enron’s stock, at one time attributing as much as half of Enron’s total stock value to EES and
EBS combined. To support what Enron already had said about EES,SKILLING, CAUSEY and
their coconspirators concealed massive losses in EES‘sbusiness through fraudulently

manipulating Enron’s ”business segment reporting.”

             29.       They accomplished this at the close of the first quarter of2001 through a
reorganization designed to conceal the existence and magnitude of EES’s unexpectedly severe

business failure. Enron hid that failure from the investing public by moving large portions of

EES’s business - which defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and

others knew at the time otherwise would have to report hundreds o f millions of dollars in losses

into   Enron Wholesale, which was the Enron business segment housing most of the company’s
wholesale energy trading operations and income, As SKILLING, CAUSEY and others knew,

Enron Wholesale would have ample earnings, including in the massive reserve accounts

described above, to ensure that Enron WhoIesaIe could absorb the huge losses that in fact were

attributable to EES while at the same time continuing to meet Enron’s budget targets. In public

statements to securities analysts and others, SKILLING CAUSEY and others acting at their

direction explained the change in segment reporting solely as a means to improve efficiency.

They omitted to disclose that the purported “efficiency” maneuver in fact concealed from the


                                                14

=== PAGE 15 ===
public and other failures in the touted EES business Unit, including huge losses in that business.

Instead, SKILLING CAUSEY and others stated publicly that EES was continuing to perform

profitably and as expected.

Promoting EBS to Manufacture Earnings and Concealing Failure of EBS

            30.        ‘Rollout”of EBS: Beginning in 1999, defendant JEFFREY K.

SKILLING and others sought artificially to support and inflate Enron’s stock price by falsely

characterizing Enron as a company whose earnings and future prospects were determined to a

substantial extent by its telecommunications business, EBS. At that time, stocks of technology

sector companies, commonly known as “dot-coms,” generally traded at a significant premium on

public securities markets. SKILLING and others referred to this plan as giving “dot-corn luster”

to Enron’s share price. A centerpiece of this strategy to promote EBS as a major factor in

Enron’s earnings and share value was a dramatic presentation about EBS.

           31.         “Project Grayhawk”: Knowing that Enron’s presentation about EBS at its

January 20,2000 conference with securities analysts was designed to, and likely would, cause an
immediate increase in Enron’s stock price, defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD

A. CAUSEY and their coconspirators constructed and approved a scheme to allow Enron to

record and report as earnings from operations $85 million of what in reality was just the increase

in Enron’s share price caused by the EBS presentation. Through its energy trading and assets

business, Enron recorded earnings from a partnership interest it held in a large energy investment

named JEDI. JEDI’s capital consisted, in part, of Enron stock. When Enron’s stock price rose,

the value of JEDI rose. In September 1999, JEDI hedged its Enron stock through a transaction

with Enron that fixed the value of the Enron stock at a set price. Just before the January 20,2000


                                                15

=== PAGE 16 ===
analyst conference, Enron executed a series of transactions, in a project known as ‘‘Grayhawk,”

that temporarily removed the fixed hedge and replaced it with an open one that did not limit the

upside gain to JEDI from increases in value of the Enron stock. After the conference, the fixed

hedge was then reinstated at Enron’sthen higher share price. The purpose and effect of

temporarily removing the fixed hedge was to enable Enron to capture increased value of jEDI

from the dramatic increase in Enron’s stock price as a result of its January 20,2000 analyst

conference. Enron then improperly reported and publicly described this gain as recurring

operating income in its energy business and failed to disclose to the investing public the

manipulative manner in which it had been able to recognize as income the appreciation of its

own stock

            32,        January 20,2000 Analyst Conference: At the January 20,2000 analyst

conference, defendant JEFFREY K. SKILLING and his coconspirators knowingly made false

and misleading statements about EBS. SKILLING stated, among other things, that EBS “has

already established the superior broadband delivery network”; that EBS has “built this network , ,

. and we are turning on the switch”; that the critical ‘network control software” was in Enron’s
possession and incorporated and used in its network; and that Enron valued the business at $30

billion, which SKILLING called a “conservative”valuation, In SKILLING’s presence, EBS’s

GO-CEOJoseph Hirko stated that EBS possessed advance network control software and that it

was no “pipe dream.”   In reality, EBS had neither the claimed broadband network in place, nor
the criticaI proprietary network control software to run it. The claims about EBS remained only

unproven concepts and laboratory demonstrations that SKILLING was advised would take years

to complete and might never be realized. In addition, the valuation of the business was inflated


                                                16

=== PAGE 17 ===
by billions of dollars over what internal and external valuations had advised SKILLING might be

supportable.

            33.        First
                       Quarter
                       2000                Earnings: SKILLING’s and others’ plan to boost

Enron’s stock price by aggressively touting EBS and to record earnings from that boost

succeeded. On January 11 ,2000,the date on which Enron removed the fixed hedge on the Enron

stock in JEDI as part of “Project Grayhawk,” Enron stock traded at approximately $47 per share.

After the analyst conference on January 20,2000,Enron stock rose to approximately $57 per

share. The “Project Grayhawk” maneuver allowed Enron to recognize, through JEDI,

approximately $85 million in earnings as a result of the manufactured bounce in the stock from

the false and misleading presentation to analysts about EBS. Enron then misleadingly described

these earnings in later presentations to analysts and in SEC filings as ordinary and recurring

operating earnings from its energy business. Enron did not disclose its manipulation of the hedge

on the Enron stock in JEDI to the investing public, nor did it disclose that approximateIy 20-

percent of the earnings of Enron’s largest business segment and the unit in which major Enron

energy businesses were housed resulted not from business operations but solely from an increase

in Enron’s own stock price.
           34.         Concealment of EBS Failure: By late 2000,defendants JEFFREYK.

SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and others well knew that EBS was a struggling

business that was losing far larger than expected amounts ofmoney. However, they took steps to

ensure that EBS’s financial results did not publicly reflect its problems. For example, during

2000,Enron structured a series of misleading, one-time financial transactions in EBS that were

designed to manufacture earnings that Enron used to present the false impression that            EBS
                                                                                                 was


                                                17

=== PAGE 18 ===
progressing towards generating operating profits. Even with these transactions, EBS still was

facing much larger than expected losses during the first quarter 2001. In order to ensure that

EBS did not record in the first quarter 2001 losses that exceeded Enron’s annual budgeted loss
target for EBS,and in order to ensure that the quarterly budgeted loss target dictated by

SKILLING and CAUSEY for the first quarter 2001 was met, CAUSEY and others acting at his

direction fraudulently reduced, and caused to be fraudulently reduced, EBS’s expenses for t h e

first quarter of 200 1.

Use of Special Purpose Entities and,LJM Partnership to Manipulate Financial Results

            35.           Special Purpose Entities: One of the levers by which defendants

JEFFREY K. SKILLING and RICHARD A, CAUSEY and their coconspirators ensured that

Enron mat financial reporting targets was the creation and use of Special Purpose Entities

(“SPEs”). SPEs were used to achieve “off-balance-sheet” accounting treatment of assets and

business activities so that Enron could present itselfmore attractively as measured by criteria

favored by securities analysts, credit rating agencies, and others. Under applicable accounting

rules, if a company conducted a transaction with an SPE that included at least a three-percent

equity investment that was at risk and from an independent source, a company could, under

certain conditions, treat the results of such a transaction as “deconsolidated,”or excluded, from

its own financial results. This meant that a company could record the earnings and cash flow

from such a deal in its own results, but did not have to record liabilities such as debt in the

transaction on its own balance sheet.

            36.           Creation o f LJM Partnership: In June 1999,in order to have a purportedly

independent third party available to provide this outside equity funding so that Enron could more


                                                  18

=== PAGE 19 ===
easily create and use SPEs to achieve its desired financial reporting results, defendants JEFFREY

K. SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and others sought and obtained the approval of

Enron’sBoard of Directors (the “Board”) for CFO Fastow to create and serve as the managing

partner of an investment partnership named LJM1 that would invest in SPEs for Enron. The

Board later approved Fastow’s participation in another even larger entity used to fund SPEs by

Enron, LJM2 (the LJM entities are collectively referred to as “LJM” unless otherwise noted).

LJM’s business activity principally involved transactions with Enron and Enron affiliates.

           37.         As defendants JEFFREY K. SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY well

knew, LJM was not a legitimate third party acting independently from Enron. Instead, LJM was

controlled by Fastow acting simultaneously in his capacity both as Enron’s CFO and as the

general partner in LJM. SKILLING, CAUSEY, Fastow and others then exploited Fastow’s dual

role as a means to ensure that LJM did not act as a truly independent third party investor would

have, but rather as Enron’s own vehicle to achieve its financial reporting objectives and as a

means for Fastow and others to be heavily compensated for contributing to Enron’s success in

meeting its financial reporting objectives.

           38.         From approximately July 1999 through October 2001, Enron entered into

transactions with LJM that defrauded the Victims. The transactions with LJM enabled Enron,

among other things. to: (a) manipulate its reported financial results by readily and unobtrusively

moving poorly performing assets off balance sheet, when in fact such off-balance-sheet treatment

was improper; (b) conceal Enron’s poor operating performance by engaging in transactions

designed to close gaps between Enron’s actual,business results and its stated financial reporting

goals; (c) manufacture earnings through sham transactions when Enron was having trouble


                                                19

=== PAGE 20 ===
otherwise meeting its goals for a quarter or year; and (d) improperly inflate the value of Enron’s

investment portfolio by backdating documents when advantageous to Enron.

            39.        “Raftor” Hedges: Beginning in the spring of 2000, Enron and LJM

engaged in a series of financial transactionswith four SPES called Raptor I, Raptor II,Raptor III

and Raptor IV (collectively referred to as tbe “Raptors”). Defendants JEFFREY K. SKILLING

and RICHARD A. CAUSEY, Fastow, Enron Treasurer Ben F. Glisan, Jr., and their

coconspirators used the Raptors to manipulate fraudulently Enron’s reported financial results.

They designed and approved Raptor I, among other things, to protect Enron from having to report

publicly in its financial results decreases in value in large portions of its energy merchant asset

portfolio and technology investments by hedging the value of those investments with an allegedly

independent third party created by Enron and LJM, known as Talon.

           40          As defendants JEFFREY K. SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY well

knew,however, the Raptor I structure was invalid under applicable accounting rules because

Talon was not independent from Enron, and LJM’s investment in Talon was not sufficiently at

risk to qualifyas outside equity. CAUSEY and Fastow had an oral side deal that LJM would
receive its initial investment of $30 million in Talon plus a profit of $1 1million from Enron, all

prior to Talon engaging in any of the hedging transactions for which it was created. As a quid

pro quo for this payment to LJM, Fastow agreed with CAUSEY that Enron employees could use

Raptor I to manipulate Enron’s balance sheet including by allowing Enron employees, without

negotiation or due diligence on behalf o f LJM, to select the values at which the Enron assets

were hedged with Talon. Defendant JEFFREY K.SKILLING was informed of and approved

Fastow’s deal with CAUSEY in order to ensure that Enron achieved the financial reporting goals


                                                 20

=== PAGE 21 ===
for which Raptor I was designed, even though it was clear that the Raptor I structure was not

properly off Enron’s balance sheet.

           41.         The defendant RICHARD A. CAUSEY, Fastow, Glisan, and others

satisfied CAUSEY’s and Fastow’s side deal by manufacturing a transaction between Enron and

Talon that generated a $41 million payment to LJM but had no legitimate business purpose for

Enron. After satisfying the conditions of the side deal by providing LJM with a guaranteed

return on its investment, Enron began to use Raptor I to hedge the value of Enron’s assets. Enron

employees maniputatedthe book values of Enron assets, many of which were expected to decline

in value, before they were hedged, knowing that the Raptor I structure ensured that Enron would

not suffer the financial reporting consequences ofsubsequent declines or large fluctuations in the

value of those assets. CAUSEY and Fastow further used Raptor I fraudulently to promote

Enron’s financial position by back-dating a hedge to Enron’s advantage, capturing an inflated

stock value of one of the Enron assets at a time when they knew that value already had declined

The basic structure used in Raptor I, including CAUSEY’S and Fastow’s oral side deal, was

repeated in the three successor Fraudulent hedging devices k n o w as Raptors II, III and IV.

           42.         Manufacturing Earnings and Concealing Debt through Purported Sales to

LJM: In addition to the fraudulent Raptor hedging devices, defendants JEFFREY K. SKILLING
and RICHARD A. CAUSEY,and other Enron senior managers, used LJM to conduct other

transactions in order Eo achieve financial reporting objectives, usually purported asset sales that

yielded reported earnings and cash flow and moved poorly performing assets temporarily o f f

Enron’s balance sheet. SKILLING, CAUSEY, Fastow, and others made undisclosed side

agreements that guaranteed LJMagainst risk in certain of its transactions with Enron. These


                                                 21

=== PAGE 22 ===
included side agreements that CAUSEY, Fastow and others termed “Global Galactic,” pursuant

to which CAUSEY and Fastow rigged Enron-LJM deals so as to safeguard Enron’s scheme to

manipulate its reported financial results.

           43.         One such transaction involved LJM’s “purchase” of Enron’s interest in a

company that was building a power plant in Cuiaba, Brazil (the “Cuiabaproject”), On

September 30, 1999, when no true third-party buyer could be found, Enron “sold” a portion of its

interest in the Cuiaba project to LJM for $11.3
                                          million.        LJM agreed to “buy” this interest onIy

because defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY, Fastow and others, in

an undisclosed side deal, agreed that Enron would buy back the interest, ifnecessary, at a profit

to LJM. Based on this purported “sale,”which was in fact an asset parking or warehousing

arrangement, Enron improperly recognized approximately $65 million in income in the third and

fourth quarters of 1999, when it was straining to meet budget targets designed to ensure #at it

achieved its earnings-per-share goals.

           44.         By 2001, the Cuiaba project was approximateIy $200 million over budget.

Nonetheless, in the spring o f 2001, defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING, RICHARD A.

CAUSEY and Fastow caused Enron to agree to buy back LJM’s interest in the Cuiaba project at a

considerable profit to LJM, in keeping with the undisclosed oral side deal. After agreeing to

execute the repurchase, SKILLING, CAUSEY, Fastow and others decided to deIay publicIy

consummating t h e deal. until Fastow sold his interest in LJM so that Fastow’s role in the

transaction would not be disclosed, Because Fastow’s role at LJM was coming under increased

scrutiny, SKILLING, CAUSEY, Fastow and others sought ways to circumvent public disclosures

about Fastow’s dual roles in LJM and as Enron’s CFO. Consequently, the repurchase was not


                                                 22

=== PAGE 23 ===
effected until after Enron filed its second quarter 2001 financial reports, in which no repurchase

or agreement to repurchase was disclosad. In fact, Enron bad agreed to the repurchase all along

and it was accomplishedjust weeks after the second quarter filing with the SEC on the same

terms as those agreed upon earlier.

           45 .        NigerianBarges: In the fourth quarter 1999 Enron pushed through several

end-of-the-quarter transactions that were designed solely to achieve budget targets at a time when

the company was struggling to produce earnings sufficient to ensure that Enron met analysts’

expectations and Enron’s predictions for earnings growth. One transaction used by Enron to

ensure that its target was met in the fourth quarter of 2999 was a deal whereby Enron “sold”

Merrill Lynch an interest in electricity-generating power barges moored off the coast o f Nigeria.

When Enron was unable to find a true buyer for the barges by December 1999, it parked the

barges with Merrill Lynch so that Enron could record $12 million in earnings and $28 million in

cash flow needed to meet budget targets.

           46.          Enron was able to induce Merrill Lynch to enter into the Nigerian barges

transaction by promising that Merrill Lynch would receive a return of its investment plus an

agreed-upon profit within six months. Enron conveyed this promise in the form of an oral

”handshake”side-deal with Merrill Lynch that was concealed from Enron’s auditor and the

public Because Merrill Lynch’s supposed equity investment was not sufficiently “at risk,”

accounting rules prohibited Enron from treating the transaction as a sale from which it could

record earnings and cash flow. In June 2000,Enron in fact delivered on its “handshake”promise

to Merrill Lynch by producing LJM as a buyer for the Nigerian barges. Defendant RICHARD A.

CAUSEY and Fastow agreed to include LJM’s repurchase of the Nigerian barges from Merrill


                                                23

=== PAGE 24 ===
 Lynch at the agreed-uponprofit to Merrill Lynch in their “Global Galactic” agrement

concerning LJM deals designed to assist Enron in achieving its financial reporting objectives. In

turn,CAUSEY assured that LJM would b e bought out at a profit and paid a large fee for taking

MerrilI Lynch out of the transaction by the agreed-upon June 30,2000 deadline.

False and Misleading Representations to Investing Public

            47.        In furtherance of the scheme to manipulate Enron’s financial results and
inflate its stock price, defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and

others presented and participated in the presentation of knowingly false and misleading

statements about Enron’s financial results, the performance o f its businesses, and the manner in

which its stock was and should be valued. These statements were disseminated to the investing

public in conferences, conference calls, press releases, interviews, statements to members of the

media, and SEC fiIings. They included, but were not limited lo, those described in paragraphs 48

through 62 below.

           48.         First Quarter 2000 Analyst Call: On April 12,2000, Enron heId its

quarterly conference call to discuss its earnings for the first quarter of 2000. Defendants

JEFFREY K. SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY were among the senior Enron managers

who participated in the call and Enron’s preparation for the call. SKILLING knowingly made

false and misleading stalements about Enron’soperating earnings for the quarter and omitted to

disclose facts necessary to make his statementsnot misleading. SKLLING stated that Enron’s

wholesale energy “assets and investments” business recorded earnings of $220 million for the

quarter; that those earnings were “attributable to increased earnings from Enron’s portfolio of

energy-related and other investments”; that ‘‘this was a pretty good quarter for the energy-dated


                                                24

=== PAGE 25 ===
investment business in contrast to the drag it was over the last year”; and that the upswing in

earnings in that portion of Enron’s business was “basically the performance of the existing asset

portfolios.” Those statements were materially misleading because SKlLLING omitted to

disclose that, in reality, approximately $85 million of the $220 million in earnings were unrelated

to the oparating performance ofEnron’s energy business. Rather, as SKILLING well knew,

through “Project Grayhawk,” they were solely attributable to a scheme to generate earnings by

manufacturing an increase in Emon’s own stock price by heavily touting EBS at Emon’s January

20.2000 analyst conference

           49.         Fourth Quarter 2000 Analyst Call: On January 22,2001, Enron held its

quarterly conference call With securities analysts to discuss its earnings for the fourth quarter of

2000. Defendants JEFFREY K. SKILLING arid RICHARD A. CAUSEY were among the senior

Enron managers who participatedin the call and Enron’s preparation for the call. SKILLING

knowingly made false and misleading statements about Enron’s wholesaIe and retail energy

trading businesses and omitted to disclose facts necessary to make his statements not misleading,

including that “for Enron, the situation in California had little impact on fourth quarter results.

Let me repeat that. For Enron, the situation in California had little impact on fourth quarter

results.” Ha further stated that ‘nothing can happen in California that would jeopardize” Enron’s

earnings targets for 2001 and that California business was “small” for Enron. In reality, as

SKILLING well knew, Enron reaped huge profits in 2000 from energy trading in California and

concealed hundreds of millions of dollars ofthose earnings in undisclosed reserve accounts for

later use. Also, as SKLLING well knew, by late January 2001, California utilities owed EES

hundreds of millions o f dollars that EES could not collect and Enron had concealed large


                                                 25

=== PAGE 26 ===
reserves that it was forced to book for those uncollectible receivables within Enron Wholesale’s

books.

           50.         In support of Enron’s claims that EBS continued to be successful and a

major positive factor contributing to Enron’s current and future stock price, a senior Enron

manager misled analysts during the call about the source of EBS’s earnings in the fourth quarter

of 2000. After being directed by defendant JEFFREY K. SKILLING to answer a question about

the source of EBS’s revenues, the senior manager said that one-time, nonrecurring transactions

such as sales of “dark fiber“ and a ‘monetization,” or sale, of part of EBS’s nascent video-on-

demand venture with the Blockbuster company accounted for only “a fairly small amount” of

EBS’s revenues. In truth, as Enron executives and senior managers including defendant

RICHARD A. CAUSEY well h e w , the sale of projected future revenues from the Blockbuster

video-on-demand venture, which Enron abandonedjust a quarter later, accounted for $53 million

ofEBS’s fourth quarter 2000 revenues of $63 million.

           51.        January25,2001 Analyst Conference: Enron held its annual conference in

Houston with securities analysts on January 25,2001. At that conference, defendant JEFFREY

K. SKILLING and coconspirators under his supervision, as a focal point o f Enron’s case for an

increased stock value, knowingly made false and misleading presentations about the performance

and potential of EBS and EES and omitted to disclose facts necessary to make his statements not

misleading. SKILLING called all o f Enron’s major businesses, including EBS and EES, “strong

franchises with sustainable high earnings power.” With regard to EBS,he said that “our

network’s in place.” Ha asserted that Emon’s stock, which was then trading at over $80 per

share, should be valued at $126 per share, attributing $63 of that alleged stock value to EBS and


                                                26

=== PAGE 27 ===
EES , He stated that Enron was “not a trading business.”

           52.         These statements were false and misleading and omitted facts necessary to

make them not misleading. In reality, as defendant JEFFREY K.SKILLINGwell knew, EBS

was performing very poorly and had made little commercial progress in 2000; EES personnel

had recommended shutting down or selling EBS’s network; EBS had few revenue prospects for

the upcoming year; and EBS had an unsupportable cost structure that, without correction, could

potentially lead to substantial losses well in excess of those Enron had publicly forecast. Also, as

SKILLING well knew, EES too was an unsuccessful business. Its modest earnings during 2000

largely resulted from one-time sales of investment unrelated to its retail energy contracting

business; its existing retail energy contracts were overvalued by hundreds of milions of dollars;

and it was owed hundreds of millions of dollars by the California utilities that it could not collect

and that Enron was concealing within Enron Wholesale. In addition, as SKlLLING well h e w ,

Enron had made huge profits from speculative wholesale energy trading during 2000,particularly

in the western United States, and had cancealedhundreds of millions of dollars of those earnings

in reserve accounts.

           53.         March 23.2001 Analyst Call: Enron held a special conference call with

securities analysts on March 23,2002 in an effort to dispel growing public concerns about

Enron’s stock, which had fallen from over $80 per share to under $GO per share in less than two

months. Defendants JEFFREY K. SKILLING and RICHARD A.CAUSEY were among the

senior Enron managers who participated in the call. and Enron’s preparation for the call.

SKILLING knowingly made false and misleading statements, and omitted to disclose facts

necessary to make his statements not misleading, in an effort to prop up Enron’s stock. Among


                                                 27

=== PAGE 28 ===
other things, he stated that “Enron’s business is in great shape” and “I know this is a bad stock

market but Enron’sin good shape,” even though, as SKILLING well knew, both of Enron’s

showpiece new businesses, EBS and EES, were failing. He stated that Enron was “highly

confident” o f its income target of $225 million for the year for EES and that EES was seeing the

‘positive effect” of “the chaos that’s going on out in California.”   In reality, even EES’sexisting

contracts were overvalued by hundreds of millions of dollars. EES was owed hundreds of

millions of dollars by the California utilities that it could not collect and Enron had concealed

reserves it was forced to book for those receivables within Enron Wholesale EES’s new

management was predicting that it would take a year or more for EES to become truly profitable.

           54.         Defendant JEFFREY K.SKILLING further stated that EBS “is coming

along just fine” and that the company was “very comfortable with the volumes and targets and

the benchmarks that we set for EBS.” He said that EBS’s two profit-and-loss centers,

intermediation and content services, were “growing fast” and that EBS was not laying off

employees but rather “moving peopIe around inside EBS” and that this wag ‘‘very good news.”

In reality, as SKILLING well knew,EBS was continuing to fail. Senior personnel at EBS had

reported that the unit had’an unsupportable cost structure and unproven revenue model. One

senior EBS executive estimated that Enron would need to write-off, that is record as a loss,

approximately half of EBS’s $875 million book value. EBS was laying off employees and

SKILLING had told employees based in Portland, Oregon that EBS wouId be centralized in

Houston and jobs would be cut because ofa “total meltdown” in the broadband industry.

           55.         First Ouarter 2001 Analyst Call: Enron held its conference call with

securities analysts to discuss its first quarter 2001 results on April 17,2001. Defendants


                                                28

=== PAGE 29 ===
JEFFREY K. SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSES’ were among the senior Enron managers

who participated in the call and Enron’s preparation for the call. SKILLING made false and

misleading statements in the call and omitted to disclose facts necessary to make his statements

not misleading. SKILLING talked about continued “big, big numbers” in EES’s energy

contracting business. He falsely explained Enron’s movement of EES’s energy contract portfolio

into Enron Wholesale by omitting any reference Eo EES’s large losses or their transfer to Enron

Wholesale and stating, ‘‘[W]e have such capability in our wholesale business that we were -- we

just weren’t taking advantage of that in managing our portfolio at the retail side. And this retail

portfolio has gotten so big so fast that we needed to get the best -- the best hands working risk

management there,” While Enron reported modest first quarter earnings for EES o f $40 million,

in reality. as SKILLING well knew, EES was facing losses approaching one billion dollars,

including overvalued contracts, uncollectible receivables with the California utilities, and huge

costs from an increased California regulatory surcharge. As alleged in this Superseding

Indictment, Enron had moved EES’s energy trading portfolio into Enron Wholesale to conceal

those losses.

           56.         Defendant JEFFREY K.SKILLING made further knowingly false and

misleading statements about Enron’s wholesale energy trading business, and omitted lo disclose

facts necessary to make his statements not misleading, including that “we remain confident that

the situation in California will have no material impact on our financial condition and no adverse

impact on 2001. earnings.” He refused, when pressed by analysts, to provide any detail or

specific numbers regarding Enron’s reserves and to explain how Enron’sreserves were aIlotted

between EES and Enron Wholesale, stating only that “we have adequate reserves and other credit


                                                 29

=== PAGE 30 ===
offsets in place” to cover m y exposure in California In reality, as SKILLING well knew, Enron

had concealed for later use hundreds o f millions of dollars of year 2000 energy trading profits,

much of them from the California market, in reserve accounts within Enron Wholesale that

exceeded $1 billion, and had used those reserves to conceal hundreds ofmillions of dollars of

potential losses to EES,much of them incurred in the California market.

            57.         Defendant JEFFREY K. SKILLING also made knowingly false and

misleading statements, and omitted to disclose facts necessary to make his statements not

misleading, about the success of EBS. He stated that “[o]ur network i s now substantiaIly

complete” and that it “is just not the ease” that Enron was reducing staff of EBS because it was

getting out of the content services business. SKILLING also stressed that the reported losses in

the unit were on target and “anticipated” and that the unit’s capital expenditures were being

reduced because it was “able to get access to connectivity without having to build it.” In reality,

as SKlLLING well knew, the cost-cutting measures at EBS were instituted because the unit was

continuing to fail and to lay off employees rather than redeploy them, and was incurring much

larger than expected losses that could not be offset with projected future revenues.

            58.         A senior Enron manager made further false and misleading statements

about EBS in the call, and omitted to disclose facts necessary t o make his statements not

misleading, including that revenues from selling portions of EBS’s contentbusiness, as opposed

to recurring earnings from operations, were only “about a third” ofEBS’s overalI earnings and

that EBS had only done ‘‘a little bit” of such sales in the past two quarters. In reality, as

defendant JEFFREY K.SKILLING well knew, the sale of a portion of EBS’s content business

was the principal mechanism by which the unit had generated revenue in the last two quarters


                                                  30

=== PAGE 31 ===
and accounted for the majority of EBS’s earnings for the first quarter of 2001. Only a very small

percentage of the unit’s revenues in either quarter was due to operations that could be expected to

recur. Moreover, EBS had only been able to meet i t s target of $35 million in losses for the first

quarter of 2001 through the combined efforts of the sale of portions of its content services

business and the manipulation of the accounting for many of its expenses and aIlocations under

the supervision of defendant RICHARD A. CAUSEY,

           59.         Second Ouarter 2001 Analyst Call: Enron held its conference call with

securities analysts to discuss i t s second quarter 2001 results on July 12,2001. Defendants

JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY were among the senior Enron managers

who participated in the call and Enron’s preparation for the call. SKILLING made further

knowingly false and misleading statements about the condition of Enron, and omitted to disclose

facts necessary to make his statements not misleading, including that Enron had a “great quartet.“

He further stated that EES “had an outstanding second quarter” and was “firmly on track to
achieve our 2001 target of $225 million” in earnings; that losses in EBS were due to “industry

conditions” and “dried up” revenue opportunities; and that Enron’s “new businesses are

expanding and adding to OUR earnings power and valuation, and w e are wall positioned for future

growth.” A senior Enron manager also misled analysts about the movement of EES’s energy

contracting portfolio into Enron Wholesale, stating, “We just took the risk management functions

and combined them because we just -- we were trying to get some more efficiency out of

management of the overall. risk management function.”

           60.         In reality, as defendant JEFFREY K. SKILLING well knew, by the close
o f the second quarter of 2001, EBS had failed and its increased losses were because it had


                                                 31

=== PAGE 32 ===
stopped the one-time sales of portions of its business that had previously been the only

significant source of its earnings. EES was facing hundreds of milIions o f dollars in conceded

losses and was a year or more away from any prospect of success. As a whole, Enron was less

than five months from bankruptcy and the accelerating pace of the company’s decline was well

known to SKILLING, who abruptly resigned on August 14, 2001.

            61.        Third Quarter 2001 Analyst Call: Enron held its quarterly conference call
to discuss its third quarter 2001 earnings results with securities analysts on October 16, 2001.

Defendant RICHARD A. CAUSEY was among the senior Enron managers who participated in

the call and Enron’s preparation for the call. For the first time during the duration ofthe scheme

to manipulate its reported financial.results, Enron conceded that it had suffered large losses,

totaling approximately $1 billion; in certain segments of its business. These areas included many

declining assets that had been concealed in the “Raptor” hedges as well as EBS. However,

CAUSEY and others knowingly attempted to mislead the investing public about these losses in

order to prevent the bad news from further devaluing Enron’s stock price.

           62.         Enron misleadingly described the hundreds of millions ofdollars in losses
stemming from the “unwind,”or abandonment, of the “Raptors” as “nonrecurring” losses, that is,

a one-time or unusual earnings event. However, as defendant RICHARD A. CAUSEY well

knew, over the course of prior quarters, Enron had characterized the positive earnings that i t

previously recognized, and then hedged, from these same.assets as ordinary operating earnings

that could be expected to recur. In addition, Enron did not disclose in its third quarter press

release a substantial reduction in shareholder equity. Instead, Enron’s Chaiman/CEO only

briefly mentioned in the call that “[i}n connection with the early termination [of the Raptor


                                                 32

=== PAGE 33 ===
structures], shareholders’ equity will be reduced approximately $1.2 billion.” In reality and as

defendant RICHARD A. CAUSEY well knew,this disclosure, which Mediately alarmed

securities analysts because of its size and abnormality,resulted not from the termination o f the

“Raptor“ structures, but principally from a huge accounting error by Enron in prior earnings

results that Enron shortly would be forced to concede and correct.

False and Misleading Representations to Victims

           63.         Infurtherance ofthe scheme to manipulate Enron’s financial results and

inflate its stock price, defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY and

their coconspirators filed and caused to be filed with the SEC false annual 10-Kreports for the

years ending December 3 1, 1999 and December 31,2000, and false quarterly 10-Qreports for the

quarters ending September 30,1999, March 31,2000, June 30,2000, September 30,2000, March

3 1,2001 and June 30,2001. Among other things, those filings contained materially false and

misleading financial statements that misstated Enron’s actual. revenues and earnings and

understated Enron’s actual debt and expenses and materially false and misleading managment

descriptions and analysis of Enron’s business, and they omitted to disclose facts necessary in

order to make the disclosures made,in light of the circumstances under which they were made,

not misleading. In addition, in furtherance o f the scheme, SKILLING, CAUSEY and others

knowingly misrepresented, concealed and hid, and knowingly caused to be misrepresented,

concealed and hidden, the existence, goals and acts done in furtherance of the scheme, including

by providing false, misleading and inaccurate information and making false representations to,

among others, the Victims.




                                                33

=== PAGE 34 ===
                                          COUNTONE
                        (Conspiracy to Commit Securities and Wire Fraud:
                        Scheme to Manipulate Reported Financial Results)

             64.       The allegations in paragraphs 1 through 63 are realleged as if fully set
forth here

             65        In or about and between late 1999 and December 2001, both dates being

approximate and inclusive, within the Southern District of Texas and elsewhere, defendants

JEFFREY K. SKILLING and RICHARD A, CAUSEY,and others, did knowingly and

intentionallyconspire (1) to willfullly and unIawfully use and employ manipulative and deceptive

contrivances and directly and indirectly (i) to employ devices, schemes and artifices to defraud;

(ii) to make untrue statements of material fact and omit to state facts necessary in order to make

the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading;

and (iii) to engage in acts, practices, and courses of conduct which would and did operate as a

fraud and deceit upon members of the investing public, in connection with the purchase and sale

of Enron securities and by use of the instruments of communication in interstate commerce and

the mails in violation of Title 15, United States Code, Sections 78j(b) and 78ff and Rule 10b-5

ofthe SEC,Title 17, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 240.1 Ob-5, and (2) to devise a scheme

and artifice to defraud and obtain money and property by means of materialIy false and

fraudulent pretenses, representations and promises, and, for the purpose o f executing such

scheme and artifice, to cause interstate Wire communications in violation of Title 18, United

States Code, Section 1343.

                                          OVERT ACTS

             66.      In furtherance ofthe conspiracy and in order to carry out the objectives

                                                34

=== PAGE 35 ===
thereof, on or about the dates listed below, in the Southern District of Texas and elsewhere,

defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY, and others, committed and

caused to be committed the following overt acts, among others:

                       a.         In or about 1999, SKILLING, CAUSEY and others obtained

the approval of Enron’s Board at a Board meeting held in Houston, Texas for Enron’s CFO

Fastow to conduct transactions between Enron and LJM

                       b.         On.or about September 30,1999,SKILLING, CAUSEY and
othersenabled Enron to “sell” to LJM for $11.5 million a portion of Enron’s interest in a
company that was building a power plant in Cuiaba, Brazil;

                       c.         On or about November15,1999, SKILLING and CAUSEY

caused to be filed via electronic transmission from Houston, Texas to the SEC in Washington,

D.C.Enron’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the period ending September 30,1999;
                       d.         In or about the fourth quarter of 1999, Enron employees caused

Merrill Lynch to buy Enron electricity barges moored off the coast of Nigeria that Enron had

been unable to sell, so that Enron could record $12 million in earnings and $28 million in cash

flow needed for budget targets;

                       e.         In or about January 2000,SKILLING, CAUSEY and others
planned and approved the alteration o f “hedges” on certain Enron stock held by the JEDI

investment partnership so that Enron could record as operating earnings the increased value of

JEDI’s Enron stock holdings that SKILLING, CAUSEY and others planned to cause by Enron’s

announcements about its telecommunications business at its annual conference for securities

analysts in Houston, Texas;


                                                35

=== PAGE 36 ===
                      f.          On or about January 20,2000,SKlLLING and others made

false and misleading statements about Enron’s telecommunications business at Enron’s annual

conference for securities analysts held in Houston, Texas;

                      g.          On or about January 2 1,2000, CAUSEY sold 45,000shares of

Enron stock, generating gross proceeds of $3,220,000;

                      h.          On or about March 13,2000,SKILLING and CAUSEY signed

and caused to be delivered an annual management representation letter addressed to Enron’s

accountants in Houston, Texas;

                      i.          On or about March 30,2000,SKILLING and CAUSEY signed
and caused to be filed via electronic transmission from Houston, Texas to the SEC in

Washington, D.C. Enron’s annual report on Form 10-Kfor the period ending December 31,

1999;

                      j.          On or about April 12,2000, SKILLING, CAUSEY and others

conducted a quarterly conference call from Houston, Texas with securities analysts;

                      k.          On or about April 25 and 26,2000, SKILLING sold 96,217
shares of Enron stock, generating gross proceeds o f $7,077,076.75;

                      1.          On or about May 12,2000,CAUSEY and SKILLING signed
and caused to be delivered a quarterly management representation letter addressed to Enron‘s

accountants in Houston, Texas;

                      m.          On or about May 15,2000, SKILLING and CAUSEY caused
to be filed via electronic transmission from Houston, Texas to the SEC in Washington, D.C.

Enron’s quarterly report on Form 10-Qfor the period ending March 3 1,2000;


                                               36

=== PAGE 37 ===
                       n.          In or about the spring of2000, SKILLING, CAUSEY and
others designed and approved Emon’s use of the Raptor structure in order to ensure that Enron

would not have to report expected losses in the value of certain of its assets;

                       0.          On or about and between July 17 and 19,2000, after the second

quarter ended, SKILLING, CAUSEY and others caused entries to be made in Enron’s books and

records in Houston, Texas, which entries improperly released funds from a reserve account solely

to ensure that Enron reported a better earnings per share number than Enron actually achieved for

the second quarter;

                       P-          In or about the summer of 2000,in an undocumented side deal,

CAUSEY and Fastow agreed that LJM wouId receive a guaranteed return o f its $30 million

investment in the first Raptor structure, together with a profit of $1I million on that investment,

in exchange for which Enron would be permitted unilaterally to determine the value of the assets

hedged in Raptor without negotiation or due diligence by LJM

                       q.          On or about August 11, 2000, SKILLING and CAUSEY signed
and caused to be delivered a quarterly management representation letter addressed to Emon’s

accountants in Houston, Texas;

                       r.         On or about August 14,2000, SKILLING and CAUSEY
caused to be filed via electronic transmission from Houston, Texas to the SEC in Washington,

D.C, Enron’s quarterly report on Form 10-Qfor the period ending June 30,2000;

                       S.         In or about September 2000,CAUSEY and others caused
Enron to purchase a “put” on its own stock from an entity involved in the Raptor structure, which

had no business purpose for Enron but ensured that LJM received the complete return of its $30


                                                 37

=== PAGE 38 ===
million investment in the first Raptor structure, together With a profit of $11 million on that

investment;

                       t.          In or about September 2000, CAUSEY and others back-dated a

portion of the Raptor I transaction to Enron’s advantage, capturing a stock value of one of the

Enron assets hedged in Raptor I at a time when they knew that value already had declined;

                       U.          On or about September 6,2000,CAUSEY and Fastow held a
meeting in Houston, Texas to discuss Enron’s and LJM’s undocumented “Global. Galactic” side

agreement that LJM would be guaranteed against Ioss in certain of its transactions with Enron,

and that other losses to LJM would be made up through other transactions with Enron;

                       V.          On or about and between August 30,2000and September 5,
2000,SKILLING sold 86,441 shares of Enron stock, generating gross proceeds of$7,484,360;

                       W.          On or about September 28,2000,CAUSEY sold 80,753 shares

of Enron stock, generating gross proceeds of $7,096,807.83;

                       x.          On or about and between November 1 and November 7,2000.
SKILLING sold 138,668 shares of Enron stock, generating gross proceeds of $11,492,412.63;

                       Y.          O n or about November 13,2000,SKILLING and CAUSEY

signed and caused to be delivered a quarterly management representation letter addressed to

Enron’s accountants in Houston, Texas;

                       z.          On or about November 14,2000,SKILLING and CAUSEY

caused to be filed via electronic transmission from Houston, Texas to the SEC in Washington,

D.C.Enron’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the period ending September 30,2000;
                       aa.         On or about and between November 15,2000 and June 13,


                                                 38

=== PAGE 39 ===
2001,pursuant to a written plan providing for sales of 10,000 shares per week, SKILLING sold

3 10,000shares of Enron stock, generating gross proceeds of$20,485,247.42;

                        bb.         In or about November 2000, CAUSEY and others approved

Enron employees’ manipulatingthe value of Mariner Energy on Enron’s books in order to

produce approximately $100 million in reported earnings;

                        cc.         On or about January 22,2001, SKILLING, CAUSEY and
others conducted a quarterly conference call from Houston, Texas with securities analysts;

                        dd .        On or about January 25,2001, SKILLING and others planned

and delivered an annual. presentation in Houston, Texas to securities analysts;

                        ee.         On or about February 23,2001,SKILLING and CAUSEY
signed and caused to be delivered an annual management representation letter addressed to

Enron’s accountants in Houston, Texas;

                        ff.         On or about March 23,2001, SKILLING, CAUSEY and others
conducted a conference call from Houston, Texas with securities analysts;

                        gg.         In or about March 2001, SKILLING, CAUSEY and others
approved the transfer of large portions o f EES’s   business, including areas where hundreds of

millions o f dollars in losses would need to be recorded, from EES into Enron Wholesale;

                        hh.         On or about April 2,2001, SKILLING and CAUSEY signed

and caused to be filed via electronic transmission from Houston, Texas to the SEC in

Washington, D.C.Enron’s annual report on Form 10-K for the period ending December 3 1,

2000;
                        ..
                        11.         On or about April 17,2001, SKILLING, CAUSEY and others

                                                    39

=== PAGE 40 ===
conducted a quarterly conference call with securities analysts;

                      jj.         On or about May 15,2001, SKILLING and CAUSEY signed

and caused to be delivered a quarterly management representation letter addressed to Enron’s

accountants in Houston, Texas;

                       kk.        On or about May 15,2001, SKILLING and CAUSEY caused

to be filed via electronic transmission from Houston, Texas to the SEC in Washington, D.C.

Enron’s quarterly report on Form 10-Qfor the period ending March 3 1,2001;

                       11.         In or about the spring of 2001,SKILLING, CAUSEY and

others caused Enron to agree to buy back LJM’s interest in the Cuiaba project at a considerable

profit to LJM;

                       mm.        On or about July 12,2001,SKILLING, CAUSEY and others

conducted a quarterly conference call fromHouston, Texas with securities analysts;

                      nn.         On or about August 14,200 1, CAUSEY signed and caused to
be delivered a quarterly management representation letter addressed to Enron’s accountants in

Houston, Texas;

                       oo.        On or about August 14,2001, CAUSEY caused to be filed via

electronic transmission from Houston, Texas to the SEC in Washington, D.C.Enron’s quarterly

report on Form 10-Qfor the period ending June 30,2001;

                      PP          On or about September 17,2001, SKILLLING sold 500,000

shares of Enron stock, generating gross proceeds of $15,587,305.10;




                                                40

=== PAGE 41 ===
                         qq.         On or about October 16,2001, CAUSEY and others conducted

a quarterly conference call from Houston, Texas with securities analysts.

              (Title 18, United States Code, Sections 371 and 3551 et seq.)

                                            COUNT TWO
                                   (Securities Fraud: Raptor Fraud)

              67.        The allegations in paragraphs 1 through 63 are realleged as if fully set

forth here.

              68.        In or about and between spring 2000 and. October 2001, both dates being

approximate and inclusive, within the Southern District of Texas and elsewhere, defendants

JEFFREY K. SKlLLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY, and others, in a course o f conduct

involving the construction and use of Enron financial devices known as the Raptors, did willfully

and unlawfully use and employ manipulative and deceptive devices and contrivances and directly

and indirectly (i) employ devices, schemes and artifices t o defraud; (ii) make untrue statements of

material. facts and omit to state facts necessary in order to make the statementsmade, in light of

the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading; and (iii) engage in acts,

practices, and comes of conduct which would and did operate as a fraud and deceit upon

members of the investing public, in connection with purchases and sales of Enron securities and

by the use of the instruments of communication in interstate commerce and the mails.

              (Title 17, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 240.10b-5; Title 15, United States

Code, Sections 78j(b) and 78ff; Title 18, United States Code, Sections 2 and 3551 et seq.)




                                                  41

=== PAGE 42 ===
4   JEFFREY K. SKILLING   September 7,2000   $41,000,000from Talon 1 LLC
                                             Wilmington Trust Co. account
    RICHARD A. CAUSEY                        no+5 1419, Wilmington,
                                             Delaware, to LJM2-Talon LLC
                                             Chase Manhattan account no.
                                             323-156479,Houston, Texas

=== PAGE 43 ===
5   RICHARD A. CAUSEY     September 19,2000   $6,000,000from WM2-Talon
                                              LLC Chase Manhattan account
                                              no. 323-156479,Houston,
                                              Texas, to Talon I LLC
                                              Wilmington Trust Co. account
                                              no. 51419, Wilmington,
                                              Delaware


6   RICHARD A. CAUSEY     September 19,2000   $6,000,000 from Talon 1 LLC
                                              Wilmington Trust Co. account
                                              no. 51419, Wilmington,
                                              Delaware, to Enron Citibank
                                              account no.00076486, New
                                              York, New York

7   JEFFREY K. SKILLING   October 3,2000      $41,000,000 from Enron
                                              Citibank account no.00076486,
    RICHARD A. CAUSEY                         New York, New York, to
                                              Timberwolf I LLC Wilmington
                                              Trust Co. account no. S 197 1,
                                              Wilmington, Delaware

a   JEFFREY K.SKILLING    October 4,2000      $41,000,000 from Timberwolf I
                                              LLC Wilmington Trust Co.
    RICHARD A. CAUSEY                         account no, 51971, Wilmington,
                                              Delaware, to LJM2-Timberwolf
                                              LLC Chase Manhattan account
                                              no. 323-864104,Houston, Texas

9   RICHARD A. CAUSEY     October 13,2000     $1,100,000 from LJM2-
                                              Timberwolf LLC Chase
                                              Manhattan account no. 323-
                                              864104, Houston, Texas, to
                                              Timberwolf I LLC Wilmington
                                              Trust Co. account no. 51971,
                                              Wilmington, Delaware

=== PAGE 44 ===
10   RICHARD A. CAUSEY   October13,2000   $1,100,000 from Timberwolf I
                                          LLC Wilmington Trust Co.
                                          account no. 51971, Wilmington,
                                          Delaware, to Enron Citibank
                                          account no. 00076486,New
                                          York, New York

=== PAGE 45 ===
                                                          Form 10-Kfor Enron for the Fiscal Year 2000




              (Title 17, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 240.10b-5;Title 15, United States

Code, Sections 78j(b) and 78ff; Title 1 8, United States Code, Sections 2 and 355 1 et seq.)

                         C OUNTSEIGHTEENTHROUGHTWENTY-THREE
                          (Securities Fraud: Presentations to Securities Analysts)

              73   .T h e allegations of paragraphs 1 through 63 are realleged as if fully set
forth here.

              74.          On or about t h e dates set forth below, each such date constituting a
separate count of this Superseding Indictment, within the Southern District of Texas and




                                                     45

=== PAGE 46 ===
elsewhere, defendants JEFFREYK. SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY, and others, in

presentations to securities analysts, did willfully and unlawfullyuse and employ manipulative

and deceptive devices and contrivances and directly and indirectly (i) employ devices, schemes

and artifices to defraud; (ii) make untrue statements of material facts and omit to state facts

necessary in order to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which they

were made, not misleading; and (iii) engage in acts, practices, and courses of conduct which

would and did operate as a fraud and deceit upon members o f the investing public, in connection

with purchases and sales o f Enron stock and by the use of the instruments of communication in

interstate commerce and the mails.




           RICHARD A. CAUSEY




           RICHARD A CAUSEY




           JEFFREY K.. SKILLING
                                                                 Discuss Enron Stock Price
           RICHARD A. CAUSEY


                                                                 Conference Call
           RICHARD A, CAUSEY



                                                 46

=== PAGE 47 ===
23   JEFFREY K. SKILLING   July 12,2001   Second Quarter 2001 Analyst
                                          Conference Call
     RICHARD A. CAUSEY

=== PAGE 48 ===
                                             in Connection with Enron
     RICHARD A. CAUSEY                       Form 10-Kfor Year 1999

25   JEFFREY K.SKILLING   February 23,2001   Annual Representation Letter
                                             in Connection with Enron
     RICHARD A. CAUSEY                       Form 10-K�or Year 2000

=== PAGE 49 ===
       (False Statements to Auditors in Connection With Quarterly Representation Letters)

              78.      The allegations in paragraph I through 63 are realleged as if fully set

forth here.

              79.      On or about the dates set forth below, each such date constituting a

separate count of this Superseding Indictment, within the Southern District of Texas and

elsewhere, defendants JEFFREY K. SKILLING and RICHARD A. CAUSEY, and others,

knowingly and willfully made and caused to be made materially false and misleading statements,

and omitted to state material facts necessary in order to make statements made, in light of the

circumstances under which the statements were made, not misleading, to accountants of Enron,

an issuer of a class of securities registered pursuant to Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act

o f 2934, in connection with the review of the financial statements of Enron as requited by law to

be made, and the preparation and filing of documents and reports required to be filed with the

SEC pursuant to rules and regulations enacted by the SEC.

              so.      Specifically, while agreeing that they were responsible for the fair

presentation of the financial statements,”SKILLING and CAUSEY falsely represented to

Enron’s accountants that, among other things,(a) the financial statements were presented in

accordance With generally accepted accounting principles; (b) Enron properly recorded or

disclosed in its financial statements guarantees, whether written or oral, under which Enron was

contingently liable; (E) there was no fraud involving management or employees who had a

significant role in internal control, or fraud involving others that could have a material effect on

the financial statements; (d) all related party transactions, including sales and guarantees (both



                                                 49

=== PAGE 50 ===
                                             Letter in Connection with
     RICHARD A CAUSEY                        Enron Form 10-Qfor First
                                             Quarter 2000


27   JEFFREY K. SKILLING   August 1 1,2000   Quarterly Representation
                                             Letter in Connection with
     RICHARD A. CAUSEY                       Enron Form 10-Q for Second
                                             Quarter 2000


28   JEFFREY K. SKILLING   November 13,2000 Quarterly Representation
                                            Letter in Connection with
     RICHARD A. CAUSEY                      Enron Form 10-Qfor Third
                                            Quarter 2000

29   JEFFREY K.SKILLING    May 15, 2001      Quarterly Representation
                                             Letter in Connection with
     RICHARD A. CAUSEY                       Enron Form 10-Q for First
                                             Quarter 2001


30   RICHARD A. CAUSEY     August 14,2001    QuarterlyRepresentation
                                             Letter in Connection with
                                             Enron Form 10-Qfor Second
                                             Quarter 2001

=== PAGE 51 ===
                         COUNTSTHIRTY-ONETHROUGHFORTY
                           (insider Trading: JEFFREY K. SKILLING)

              81.      The allegations in paragraphs 1 through 63 are realleged as if fully set

forth here.

              82.      On or about the dates set forth below, each such date constituting a
separate count of this Superseding Indictment, within the Southern District of Texas and

elsewhere, defendant JEFFREY K.SKILLING knowingly and willfully used and employed

manipulative and deceptive devices and contrivances, by use of means and instrumentalities of

interstate commerce, in violation ofRule 10b-5 ofthe Rules and Regulations of the United States

Securities and Exchange Commission (Title 17, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 240.1Ob-

5), in that he engaged in acts, practices, and courses of business which would and did operate as a

fraud and deceit upon members of the investing public in connection with the purchase or sale of

securities, in Violation of Title 15, United States Code, Sections 78j(b) and 78ff. Specifically,

while in possession of material non-public information that Enron and its executives and senior

managers, including SKILLING had supplied and were continuing to supply materially false and

misIeading information to the investing public, including but not limited to Enron'spublicly

reported financial results and public statements of Enron's executives and senior managers,

SKILLING soId shares ofEnron stock and generated total proceeds of $62,626,401.90.




                                                51

=== PAGE 52 ===
32   April 26,2000       86,217       $74.00     $6,338,183.00
                                      $73.875
                                      $72.50

33   August 30,2000      15,000       $86.125    $1,291,875.00


34   September 1,2000    60,000       $87.00     $5,220,000.00
                                      $86.875
                                      $87.25


35   September 5,2000    11,441       $85.00     $972,485.00


36   November 1,2000     72,600       $83.2408   $6,041,023.50
                                      $83.0625


37   November 2,2000     20,000       $82,3381   $1,646,762.00


38   November 7,2000     46,068       $82.5872   $3,804,627.13

39   November 15,2000    10,000       $34.00to   $20,985,247.42
                         perweek      $49.90
                         for 31
                         weeks per
                         written
                         sales plan

40   September 17,2001   500,000      $31.5061$15,587,305.10
                                      $3 1.0822

=== PAGE 53 ===
                          COUNTSFORTY-ONEFORTY-TWO
                           (Insider Trading: RICHARD A. CAUSEY)

              83.      The allegations in paragraphs 1 through 63 are realleged as if fully set

forth here.

              84.      On or about the dates set forth below, each such date constituting a

separate count of this Superseding Indictment, within the Southern District of Texas and

elsewhere, defendant RICHARD A. CAUSEY knowingly and wilIfully used and employed

manipulative and deceptive devices and contrivances, by use of means and instrumentalities of

interstate commerce, in violation ofRule lob-5 of the Rules and Regulations of the United States

Securities and Exchange Commission (Title 17, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 240.1Ob-

5), in that he engaged in acts, practices, and courses ofbusiness which would and did operate as a

fraud and deceit upon members of the investing public in connection with the purchase or sale of

securities, in violation of Title 15, United States Code, Sections 78j(b) and 78ff. Specifically,

while in possession of material non-public information that Enron and its executives and senior

managers, including CAUSEY, had supplied and were continuing to supply materially false and

misleading information to the investing public, including but not limited to Enron’spublicly

=== PAGE 54 ===
42   September 28,2000   80,753   $87.8829   $7,096,807.83

=== PAGE 55 ===
                  (A)      a sum of money equal to the amount of proceeds obtained as a
                           result of the conspiracy, securities fraud and wire fraud
                           offenses for which the defendants are jointly and severally
                           liable;

                  (B)      real property known as 1999 McKinney Ave., #1008, Dallas,
                           Texas;

                  (C)      real property known as 10North Briarwood Court, Houston,
                           Texas;

                  (D)      $50,000in cash in MML Investors Services, Inc., BMA
                           account number 25 1.5 18;

                  (E)      securities, listed in Attachment A, worth approximately
                           $49,342,452.98, and $808,643.74 in cash, contained in Charles
                           Schwab account number 8 1 10-6773;

                  (F)      $132,544.65 contained in Mass Mutual Financial Group Policy
                           account number 11502764;

                  (G)      $91,800.51 in cash contained in Southwest Bank account
                           number 3229351 in the name of Veld Interests, Inc.

            87.   With respect to defendant RICHARD A+CAUSEY, the following

property:

                  (A)      a sum o f money equal. to the amount of proceeds obtained as a
                           result of the conspiracy, securities fraud and wire fraud
                           offenses, for which the defendants are jointly and severally
                           liable;

                  (B)      real property known as 39 North Regent Oak, The Woodlands,
                           Texas;

                  (C)      securities listed in Attachment B,worth approximately
                           $2,589,020.98, contained inFirst Union account number 2005-
                           0471;

                  (D)      approximately $274,305.69in Manulife North America
                           Annuity account number 2107843;



                                        5s

=== PAGE 56 ===
                        (E)        approximately $2 19,434.87 in Manulife North America
                                   Annuity account number 2106714;

           88.          In the went that any property described above as being subject to

forfeiture, as asresult of any act or omission by either defendant:

           (a) cannot be located upon the exercise of due diligence;

           (b) has been transferred or sold to or deposited with a third person;

           (c)   has been placed beyond the jurisdiction of the Court;

           (d) has been substantially diminished in value; or

           (e) has been commingled with other property which cannot be divided without

difficulty; it is the intent of the United States, pursuant to Title 18, United States Code, Section

982(b)(1), to seek forfeiture of any other property of defendants JEFFREY K.SKILLING and




                                                 56

=== PAGE 57 ===
RICHARD A, CAUSEY up to the value ofthe above described property in paragraphs 86 and
87.

Dated:    Houston, Texas
          February18,2004
                                                   A TRUE BILL




JOSHUA
R.          HOCHBERG
Acting United States Attorney

LESLIE R. CALDWELL
Director, Enron Task. Force


By:
          SAMUEL W. BUELL
          SEAN M. BERKOWITZ
          LINDA A. LACEWELL
          KATHRYN
          H.             RUEMMLER
          Special Attorneys, Enron Task Force
          LAUREL LOOMIS
          PATRICK MURPHY
          Trial Attorneys, Enron Task Force




                                              57
