
=== PAGE 1 ===
                        OCTOBER TERM, 2009                            477

                                Syllabus


FREE ENTERPRISE FUND et al. v. PUBLIC COM­
  PANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD et al.

certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
          the district of columbia circuit
    No. 08–861. Argued December 7, 2009—Decided June 28, 2010
Respondent, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, was cre­
 ated as part of a series of accounting reforms in the Sarbanes-Oxley
 Act of 2002. The Board is composed of ﬁve members appointed by the
 Securities and Exchange Commission. It was modeled on private self-
 regulatory organizations in the securities industry—such as the New
 York Stock Exchange—that investigate and discipline their own mem­
 bers subject to Commission oversight. Unlike these organizations, the
 Board is a Government-created entity with expansive powers to govern
 an entire industry. Every accounting ﬁrm that audits public companies
 under the securities laws must register with the Board, pay it an annual
 fee, and comply with its rules and oversight. The Board may inspect
 registered ﬁrms, initiate formal investigations, and issue severe sanc­
 tions in its disciplinary proceedings. The parties agree that the Board
 is “part of the Government” for constitutional purposes, Lebron v. Na­
 tional Railroad Passenger Corporation, 513 U. S. 374, 397, and that its
 members are “ ‘Ofﬁcers of the United States’ ” who “exercis[e] signiﬁcant
 authority pursuant to the laws of the United States,” Buckley v. Valeo,
 424 U. S. 1, 125–126. While the SEC has oversight of the Board, it
 cannot remove Board members at will, but only “for good cause shown,”
 “in accordance with” speciﬁed procedures. 15 U. S. C. §§ 7211(e)(6),
 7217(d)(3). The parties also agree that the Commissioners, in turn, can­
 not themselves be removed by the President except for “ ‘inefﬁciency,
 neglect of duty, or malfeasance in ofﬁce.’ ” Humphrey’s Executor v.
 United States, 295 U. S. 602, 620.
    The Board inspected petitioner accounting ﬁrm, released a report crit­
 ical of its auditing procedures, and began a formal investigation. The
 ﬁrm and petitioner Free Enterprise Fund, a nonproﬁt organization of
 which the ﬁrm is a member, sued the Board and its members, seeking,
 inter alia, a declaratory judgment that the Board is unconstitutional
 and an injunction preventing the Board from exercising its powers.
 Petitioners argued that the Sarbanes-Oxley Act contravened the separa­
 tion of powers by conferring executive power on Board members with­
 out subjecting them to Presidential control. The basis for petitioners’

=== PAGE 2 ===
478     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                        Syllabus

 challenge was that Board members were insulated from Presidential
 control by two layers of tenure protection: Board members could only
 be removed by the Commission for good cause, and the Commissioners
 could in turn only be removed by the President for good cause. Peti­
 tioners also challenged the Board’s appointment as violating the Ap­
 pointments Clause, which requires ofﬁcers to be appointed by the Presi­
 dent with the Senate’s advice and consent, or—in the case of “inferior
 Ofﬁcers”—by “the President alone, . . . the Courts of Law, or . . . the
 Heads of Departments,” Art. II, § 2, cl. 2. The United States inter­
 vened to defend the statute. The District Court found it had jurisdic­
 tion and granted summary judgment to respondents. The Court of Ap­
 peals afﬁrmed. It ﬁrst agreed that the District Court had jurisdiction.
 It then ruled that the dual restraints on Board members’ removal are
 permissible, and that Board members are inferior ofﬁcers whose ap­
 pointment is consistent with the Appointments Clause.
Held:
    1. The District Court had jurisdiction over these claims. The Com­
 mission may review any Board rule or sanction, and an aggrieved party
 may challenge the Commission’s “ﬁnal order” or “rule” in a court of
 appeals under 15 U. S. C. § 78y. The Government reads § 78y as an ex­
 clusive route to review, but the text does not expressly or implicitly
 limit the jurisdiction that other statutes confer on district courts. It is
 presumed that Congress does not intend to limit jurisdiction if “a ﬁnding
 of preclusion could foreclose all meaningful judicial review”; if the suit
 is “ ‘wholly “collateral” ’ to a statute’s review provisions”; and if the
 claims are “outside the agency’s expertise.” Thunder Basin Coal Co.
 v. Reich, 510 U. S. 200, 212–213.
    These considerations point against any limitation on review here.
 Section 78y provides only for review of Commission action, and peti­
 tioners’ challenge is “collateral” to any Commission orders or rules from
 which review might be sought. The Government advises petitioners to
 raise their claims by appealing a Board sanction, but petitioners have
 not been sanctioned, and it is no “meaningful” avenue of relief, id.,
 at 212, to require a plaintiff to incur a sanction in order to test a
 law’s validity, MedImmune, Inc. v. Genentech, Inc., 549 U. S. 118, 129.
 Petitioners’ constitutional claims are also outside the Commission’s
 competence and expertise, and the statutory questions involved do not
 require technical considerations of agency policy. Pp. 489–491.
    2. The dual for-cause limitations on the removal of Board members
 contravene the Constitution’s separation of powers. Pp. 492–508.
       (a) The Constitution provides that “[t]he executive Power shall be
 vested in a President of the United States of America.” Art. II, § 1,
 cl. 1. Since 1789, the Constitution has been understood to empower the

=== PAGE 3 ===
                     Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                     479

                               Syllabus

President to keep executive ofﬁcers accountable—by removing them
from ofﬁce, if necessary. See generally Myers v. United States, 272
U. S. 52. This Court has determined that this authority is not without
limit. In Humphrey’s Executor, supra, this Court held that Congress
can, under certain circumstances, create independent agencies run by
principal ofﬁcers appointed by the President, whom the President may
not remove at will but only for good cause. And in United States v.
Perkins, 116 U. S. 483, and Morrison v. Olson, 487 U. S. 654, the Court
sustained similar restrictions on the power of principal executive ofﬁ­
cers—themselves responsible to the President—to remove their own in­
feriors. However, this Court has not addressed the consequences of
more than one level of good-cause tenure. Pp. 492–495.
     (b) Where this Court has upheld limited restrictions on the Presi­
dent’s removal power, only one level of protected tenure separated the
President from an ofﬁcer exercising executive power. The President—
or a subordinate he could remove at will—decided whether the ofﬁcer’s
conduct merited removal under the good-cause standard. Here, the Act
not only protects Board members from removal except for good cause,
but withdraws from the President any decision on whether that good
cause exists. That decision is vested in other tenured ofﬁcers—the
Commissioners—who are not subject to the President’s direct control.
Because the Commission cannot remove a Board member at will, the
President cannot hold the Commission fully accountable for the Board’s
conduct. He can only review the Commissioner’s determination of
whether the Act’s rigorous good-cause standard is met. And if the
President disagrees with that determination, he is powerless to inter-
vene—unless the determination is so unreasonable as to constitute “ ‘in­
efﬁciency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in ofﬁce.’ ” Humphrey’s Ex­
ecutor, supra, at 620.
   This arrangement contradicts Article II’s vesting of the executive
power in the President. Without the ability to oversee the Board, or
to attribute the Board’s failings to those whom he can oversee, the Pres­
ident is no longer the judge of the Board’s conduct. He can neither
ensure that the laws are faithfully executed, nor be held responsible for
a Board member’s breach of faith. If this dispersion of responsibility
were allowed to stand, Congress could multiply it further by adding still
more layers of good-cause tenure. Such diffusion of power carries with
it a diffusion of accountability; without a clear and effective chain of
command, the public cannot determine where the blame for a pernicious
measure should fall. The Act’s restrictions are therefore incompatible
with the Constitution’s separation of powers. Pp. 495–498.
     (c) The “ ‘fact that a given law or procedure is efﬁcient, convenient,
and useful in facilitating functions of government, standing alone, will

=== PAGE 4 ===
480    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                       Syllabus

 not save it if it is contrary to the Constitution.” Bowsher v. Synar,
 478 U. S. 714, 736. The Act’s multilevel tenure protections provide a
 blueprint for the extensive expansion of legislative power. Congress
 controls the salary, duties, and existence of executive ofﬁces, and only
 Presidential oversight can counter its inﬂuence. The Framers created
 a structure in which “[a] dependence on the people” would be the “pri­
 mary controul on the government,” and that dependence is maintained
 by giving each branch “the necessary constitutional means, and personal
 motives, to resist encroachments of the others.” The Federalist No. 51,
 p. 349. A key “constitutional means” vested in the President was “the
 power of appointing, overseeing, and controlling those who execute
 the laws.” 1 Annals of Cong. 463. While a government of “opposite
 and rival interests” may sometimes inhibit the smooth functioning of
 administration, The Federalist No. 51, at 349, “[t]he Framers recog­
 nized that, in the long term, structural protections against abuse of
 power were critical to preserving liberty,” Bowsher, supra, at 730.
 Pp. 498–502.
       (d) The Government errs in arguing that, even if some constraints
 on the removal of inferior executive ofﬁcers might violate the Constitu­
 tion, the restrictions here do not. There is no construction of the Com­
 mission’s good-cause removal power that is broad enough to avoid invali­
 dation. Nor is the Commission’s broad power over Board functions the
 equivalent of a power to remove Board members. Altering the Board’s
 budget or powers is not a meaningful way to control an inferior ofﬁcer;
 the Commission cannot supervise individual Board members if it must
 destroy the Board in order to ﬁx it. Moreover, the Commission’s power
 over the Board is hardly plenary, as the Board may take signiﬁcant
 enforcement actions largely independently of the Commission. Enact­
 ing new SEC rules through the required notice and comment procedures
 would be a poor means of micromanaging the Board, and without certain
 ﬁndings, the Act forbids any general rule requiring SEC preapproval of
 Board actions. Finally, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is highly unusual in
 committing substantial executive authority to ofﬁcers protected by two
 layers of good-cause removal. Pp. 502–508.
    3. The unconstitutional tenure provisions are severable from the re­
 mainder of the statute. Because “[t]he unconstitutionality of a part of
 an Act does not necessarily defeat or affect the validity of its remaining
 provisions,” Champlin Reﬁning Co. v. Corporation Comm’n of Okla.,
 286 U. S. 210, 234, the “normal rule” is “that partial . . . invalidation is
 the required course,” Brockett v. Spokane Arcades, Inc., 472 U. S. 491,
 504. The Board’s existence does not violate the separation of powers,
 but the substantive removal restrictions imposed by §§ 7211(e)(6) and
 7217(d)(3) do. Concluding that the removal restrictions here are invalid

=== PAGE 5 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       481

                                   Syllabus

  leaves the Board removable by the Commission at will. With the ten­
  ure restrictions excised, the Act remains “ ‘fully operative as a law,’ ”
  New York v. United States, 505 U. S. 144, 186, and nothing in the Act’s
  text or historical context makes it “evident” that Congress would have
  preferred no Board at all to a Board whose members are removable at
  will, Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock, 480 U. S. 678, 684. The conse­
  quence is that the Board may continue to function as before, but its
  members may be removed at will by the Commission. Pp. 508–510.
     4. The Board’s appointment is consistent with the Appointments
  Clause. Pp. 510–513.
       (a) The Board members are inferior ofﬁcers whose appointment
  Congress may permissibly vest in a “Hea[d] of Departmen[t].” Inferior
  ofﬁcers “are ofﬁcers whose work is directed and supervised at some
  level” by superiors appointed by the President with the Senate’s con­
  sent. Edmond v. United States, 520 U. S. 651, 662–663. Because the
  good-cause restrictions discussed above are unconstitutional and void,
  the Commission possesses the power to remove Board members at will,
  in addition to its other oversight authority. Board members are there­
  fore directed and supervised by the Commission. P. 510.
       (b) The Commission is a “Departmen[t]” under the Appointments
  Clause. Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U. S. 868, 887, n. 4, speciﬁcally
  reserved the question whether a “principal agenc[y], such as” the SEC,
  is a “Departmen[t].” The Court now adopts the reasoning of the con­
  curring Justices in Freytag, who would have concluded that the SEC is
  such a “Departmen[t]” because it is a freestanding component of the
  Executive Branch not subordinate to or contained within any other
  such component. This reading is consistent with the common, near-
  contemporary deﬁnition of a “department”; with the early practice of
  Congress, see § 3, 1 Stat. 234; and with this Court’s cases, which have
  never invalidated an appointment made by the head of such an establish­
  ment. Pp. 510–511.
       (c) The several Commissioners, and not the Chairman, are the Com­
  mission’s “Hea[d].” The Commission’s powers are generally vested in
  the Commissioners jointly, not the Chairman alone. The Commission­
  ers do not report to the Chairman, who exercises administrative func­
  tions subject to the full Commission’s policies. There is no reason why
  a multimember body may not be the “Hea[d]” of a “Departmen[t]” that it
  governs. The Appointments Clause necessarily contemplates collective
  appointments by the “Courts of Law,” Art. II, § 2, cl. 2, and each House
  of Congress appoints its ofﬁcers collectively, see, e. g., Art. I, § 2, cl. 5.
  Practice has also sanctioned the appointment of inferior ofﬁcers by
  multimember agencies. Pp. 511–513.
537 F. 3d 667, afﬁrmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.

=== PAGE 6 ===
482     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                        Syllabus

   Roberts, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Scalia,
Kennedy, Thomas, and Alito, JJ., joined. Breyer, J., ﬁled a dissenting
opinion, in which Stevens, Ginsburg, and Sotomayor, JJ., joined, post,
p. 514.

  Michael A. Carvin argued the cause for petitioners.
With him on the briefs were Noel J. Francisco, Christian G.
Vergonis, Kenneth W. Starr, Viet D. Dinh, Sam Kazman,
and Hans Bader.
  Solicitor General Kagan argued the cause for the United
States. With her on the brief were Assistant Attorney Gen­
eral West, Deputy Solicitor General Kneedler, Curtis E.
Gannon, Mark B. Stern, Mark R. Freeman, David M.
Becker, Mark D. Cahn, Jacob H. Stillman, and John W.
Avery.
  Jeffrey A. Lamken argued the cause for respondents.
With him on the brief were Robert K. Kry, James R.
Doty, J. Gordon Seymour, Jacob N. Lesser, and Mary I.
Peters.*

   *Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were ﬁled for the American
Civil Rights Union et al. by Peter Ferrara; for the Cato Institute et al. by
Gene C. Schaerr, Steffen N. Johnson, Linda T. Coberly, and Ilya Shapiro;
for the Center for Individual Rights by Michael E. Rosman; for the Coali­
tion for Fair Lumber Imports by Kannon K. Shanmugam; for the Moun­
tain States Legal Foundation by J. Scott Detamore; for Stephen Bain­
bridge et al. by Donna M. Nagy; for William P. Barr et al. by Helgi C.
Walker, Daniel J. Popeo, and Richard A. Samp; and for Steven G. Cala­
bresi et al. by Christopher S. Yoo.
   Briefs of amici curiae urging afﬁrmance were ﬁled for the Center for
Audit Quality by Douglas R. Cox and Michael J. Scanlon; for Harold H.
Bruff et al. by Caitlin J. Halligan, Gillian E. Metzger, pro se, and Henry
Paul Monaghan, pro se; for Former Chairmen of the Securities and Ex­
change Commission by Richard H. Pildes, Christopher J. Meade, and
Catherine M. A. Carroll; and for the National Association of State Boards
of Accountancy by Noel L. Allen.
   Briefs of amici curiae were ﬁled for the Claremont Institute Center for
Constitutional Jurisprudence by John C. Eastman; and for the Council of
Institutional Investors et al. by Gregory S. Coleman, Christian J. Ward,

=== PAGE 7 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)              483

                       Opinion of the Court

  Chief Justice Roberts delivered the opinion of the
Court.
   Our Constitution divided the “powers of the new Federal
Government into three deﬁned categories, Legislative, Exec­
utive, and Judicial.” INS v. Chadha, 462 U. S. 919, 951
(1983). Article II vests “[t]he executive Power . . . in a Pres­
ident of the United States of America,” who must “take Care
that the Laws be faithfully executed.” Art. II, § 1, cl. 1; id.,
§ 3. In light of “[t]he impossibility that one man should be
able to perform all the great business of the State,” the Con­
stitution provides for executive ofﬁcers to “assist the su­
preme Magistrate in discharging the duties of his trust.” 30
Writings of George Washington 334 (J. Fitzpatrick ed. 1939).
   Since 1789, the Constitution has been understood to em­
power the President to keep these ofﬁcers accountable—by
removing them from ofﬁce, if necessary. See generally
Myers v. United States, 272 U. S. 52 (1926). This Court has
determined, however, that this authority is not without limit.
In Humphrey’s Executor v. United States, 295 U. S. 602
(1935), we held that Congress can, under certain circum­
stances, create independent agencies run by principal ofﬁ­
cers appointed by the President, whom the President may
not remove at will but only for good cause. Likewise, in
United States v. Perkins, 116 U. S. 483 (1886), and Morrison
v. Olson, 487 U. S. 654 (1988), the Court sustained similar
restrictions on the power of principal executive ofﬁcers—
themselves responsible to the President—to remove their
own inferiors. The parties do not ask us to reexamine any
of these precedents, and we do not do so.
   We are asked, however, to consider a new situation not yet
encountered by the Court. The question is whether these
separate layers of protection may be combined. May the

Ira M. Millstein, Harvey J. Goldschmid, Gregory W. Smith, Peter H.
Mixon, and Luke Bierman.

=== PAGE 8 ===
484    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                   Opinion of the Court

President be restricted in his ability to remove a principal
ofﬁcer, who is in turn restricted in his ability to remove an
inferior ofﬁcer, even though that inferior ofﬁcer determines
the policy and enforces the laws of the United States?
  We hold that such multilevel protection from removal is
contrary to Article II’s vesting of the executive power in the
President. The President cannot “take Care that the Laws
be faithfully executed” if he cannot oversee the faithfulness
of the ofﬁcers who execute them. Here the President can­
not remove an ofﬁcer who enjoys more than one level of
good-cause protection, even if the President determines that
the ofﬁcer is neglecting his duties or discharging them im­
properly. That judgment is instead committed to another
ofﬁcer, who may or may not agree with the President’s deter­
mination, and whom the President cannot remove simply be­
cause that ofﬁcer disagrees with him. This contravenes the
President’s “constitutional obligation to ensure the faithful
execution of the laws.” Id., at 693.

                              I
                              A
   After a series of celebrated accounting debacles, Congress
enacted the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 116 Stat. 745.
Among other measures, the Act introduced tighter regula­
tion of the accounting industry under a new Public Com­
pany Accounting Oversight Board. The Board is composed
of ﬁve members, appointed to staggered 5-year terms by
the Securities and Exchange Commission. It was modeled
on private self-regulatory organizations in the securities
industry—such as the New York Stock Exchange—that
investigate and discipline their own members subject to
Commission oversight. Congress created the Board as a
private “nonproﬁt corporation,” and Board members and em­
ployees are not considered Government “ofﬁcer[s] or employ­
ee[s]” for statutory purposes. 15 U. S. C. §§ 7211(a), (b).
The Board can thus recruit its members and employees from

=== PAGE 9 ===
                     Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)              485

                        Opinion of the Court

the private sector by paying salaries far above the standard
Government pay scale. See §§ 7211(f)(4), 7219.1
   Unlike the self-regulatory organizations, however, the
Board is a Government-created, Government-appointed en­
tity, with expansive powers to govern an entire industry.
Every accounting ﬁrm—both foreign and domestic—that
participates in auditing public companies under the securi­
ties laws must register with the Board, pay it an annual fee,
and comply with its rules and oversight. §§ 7211(a), 7212(a),
(f), 7213, 7216(a)(1). The Board is charged with enforcing
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the securities laws, the Commis­
sion’s rules, its own rules, and professional accounting stand­
ards. §§ 7215(b)(1), (c)(4). To this end, the Board may reg­
ulate every detail of an accounting ﬁrm’s practice, including
hiring and professional development, promotion, supervision
of audit work, the acceptance of new business and the contin­
uation of old, internal inspection procedures, professional
ethics rules, and “such other requirements as the Board may
prescribe.” § 7213(a)(2)(B).
   The Board promulgates auditing and ethics standards, per­
forms routine inspections of all accounting ﬁrms, demands
documents and testimony, and initiates formal investigations
and disciplinary proceedings. §§ 7213–7215 (2006 ed. and
Supp. II). The willful violation of any Board rule is treated
as a willful violation of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,
48 Stat. 881, 15 U. S. C. § 78a et seq.—a federal crime punish­
able by up to 20 years’ imprisonment or $25 million in ﬁnes
($5 million for a natural person). §§ 78ff(a), 7202(b)(1) (2006
ed.). And the Board itself can issue severe sanctions in
its disciplinary proceedings, up to and including the perma­
nent revocation of a ﬁrm’s registration, a permanent ban
on a person’s associating with any registered ﬁrm, and
money penalties of $15 million ($750,000 for a natural per­
son). § 7215(c)(4). Despite the provisions specifying that
  1
   The current salary for the Chairman is $673,000. Other Board mem­
bers receive $547,000. Brief for Petitioners 3.

=== PAGE 10 ===
486     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                    Opinion of the Court

Board members are not Government ofﬁcials for statutory
purposes, the parties agree that the Board is “part of the
Government” for constitutional purposes, Lebron v. Na­
tional Railroad Passenger Corporation, 513 U. S. 374, 397
(1995), and that its members are “ ‘Ofﬁcers of the United
States’ ” who “exercis[e] signiﬁcant authority pursuant to the
laws of the United States,” Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1,
125–126 (1976) (per curiam) (quoting Art. II, § 2, cl. 2);
cf. Brief for Petitioners 9, n. 1; Brief for United States
29, n. 8.
   The Act places the Board under the SEC’s oversight, par­
ticularly with respect to the issuance of rules or the im­
position of sanctions (both of which are subject to Com­
mission approval and alteration). §§ 7217(b)–(c). But the
individual members of the Board—like the ofﬁcers and direc­
tors of the self-regulatory organizations—are substantially
insulated from the Commission’s control. The Commission
cannot remove Board members at will, but only “for good
cause shown,” “in accordance with” certain procedures.
§ 7211(e)(6).
   Those procedures require a Commission ﬁnding, “on the
record” and “after notice and opportunity for a hearing,” that
the Board member
         “(A) has willfully violated any provision of th[e] Act,
      the rules of the Board, or the securities laws;
         “(B) has willfully abused the authority of that mem­
      ber; or
         “(C) without reasonable justiﬁcation or excuse, has
      failed to enforce compliance with any such provision or
      rule, or any professional standard by any registered
      public accounting firm or any associated person
      thereof.” § 7217(d)(3).

Removal of a Board member requires a formal Commission
order and is subject to judicial review. See 5 U. S. C.
§§ 554(a), 556(a), 557(a), (c)(B); 15 U. S. C. § 78y(a)(1). Simi­

=== PAGE 11 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)           487

                      Opinion of the Court

lar procedures govern the Commission’s removal of ofﬁcers
and directors of the private self-regulatory organizations.
See § 78s(h)(4). The parties agree that the Commissioners
cannot themselves be removed by the President except
under the Humphrey’s Executor standard of “inefﬁciency,
neglect of duty, or malfeasance in ofﬁce,” 295 U. S., at 620
(internal quotation marks omitted); see Brief for Petitioners
31; Brief for United States 43; Brief for Respondent Pub­
lic Company Accounting Oversight Board 31 (hereinafter
PCAOB Brief); Tr. of Oral Arg. 47, and we decide the case
with that understanding.
                             B
   Beckstead and Watts, LLP, is a Nevada accounting ﬁrm
registered with the Board. The Board inspected the ﬁrm,
released a report critical of its auditing procedures, and
began a formal investigation. Beckstead and Watts and the
Free Enterprise Fund, a nonproﬁt organization of which the
ﬁrm is a member, then sued the Board and its members,
seeking (among other things) a declaratory judgment that
the Board is unconstitutional and an injunction preventing
the Board from exercising its powers. App. 71.
   Before the District Court, petitioners argued that the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act contravened the separation of powers by
conferring wide-ranging executive power on Board members
without subjecting them to Presidential control. Id., at 67–
68. Petitioners also challenged the Act under the Appoint­
ments Clause, which requires “Ofﬁcers of the United States”
to be appointed by the President with the Senate’s advice
and consent. Art. II, § 2, cl. 2. The Clause provides an ex­
ception for “inferior Ofﬁcers,” whose appointment Congress
may choose to vest “in the President alone, in the Courts of
Law, or in the Heads of Departments.” Ibid. Because the
Board is appointed by the SEC, petitioners argued that
(1) Board members are not “inferior Ofﬁcers” who may be
appointed by “Heads of Departments”; (2) even if they are,
the Commission is not a “Departmen[t]”; and (3) even if it is,

=== PAGE 12 ===
488    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                   Opinion of the Court

the several Commissioners (as opposed to the Chairman) are
not its “Hea[d].” See App. 68–70. The United States in­
tervened to defend the Act’s constitutionality. Both sides
moved for summary judgment; the District Court deter­
mined that it had jurisdiction and granted summary judg­
ment to respondents. App. to Pet. for Cert. 110a–117a.
   A divided Court of Appeals afﬁrmed. 537 F. 3d 667
(CADC 2008). It agreed that the District Court had juris­
diction over petitioners’ claims. Id., at 671. On the merits,
the Court of Appeals recognized that the removal issue was
“a question of ﬁrst impression,” as neither that court nor
this one “ha[d] considered a situation where a restriction on
removal passes through two levels of control.” Id., at 679.
It ruled that the dual restraints on Board members’ removal
are permissible because they do not “render the President
unable to perform his constitutional duties.” Id., at 683.
The majority reasoned that although the President “does not
directly select or supervise the Board’s members,” id., at 681,
the Board is subject to the comprehensive control of the
Commission, and thus the President’s inﬂuence over the
Commission implies a constitutionally sufﬁcient inﬂuence
over the Board as well. Id., at 682–683. The majority also
held that Board members are inferior ofﬁcers subject to the
Commission’s direction and supervision, id., at 672–676, and
that their appointment is otherwise consistent with the Ap­
pointments Clause, id., at 676–678.
   Judge Kavanaugh dissented. He agreed that the case was
one of ﬁrst impression, id., at 698, but argued that “the dou­
ble for-cause removal provisions in the [Act] . . . combine
to eliminate any meaningful Presidential control over the
[Board],” id., at 697. Judge Kavanaugh also argued that
Board members are not effectively supervised by the Com­
mission and thus cannot be inferior ofﬁcers under the Ap­
pointments Clause. Id., at 709–712.
   We granted certiorari. 556 U. S. 1234 (2009).

=== PAGE 13 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)             489

                       Opinion of the Court

                                 II
   We ﬁrst consider whether the District Court had juris­
diction. We agree with both courts below that the stat­
utes providing for judicial review of Commission action did
not prevent the District Court from considering petitioners’
claims.
   The Sarbanes-Oxley Act empowers the Commission to
review any Board rule or sanction. See 15 U. S. C.
§§ 7217(b)(2)–(4), (c)(2). Once the Commission has acted, ag­
grieved parties may challenge “a ﬁnal order of the Commis­
sion” or “a rule of the Commission” in a court of appeals
under § 78y, and “[n]o objection . . . may be considered by the
court unless it was urged before the Commission or there
was reasonable ground for failure to do so.” §§ 78y(a)(1),
(b)(1), (c)(1).
   The Government reads § 78y as an exclusive route to re­
view. But the text does not expressly limit the jurisdiction
that other statutes confer on district courts. See, e. g., 28
U. S. C. §§ 1331, 2201. Nor does it do so implicitly. Provi­
sions for agency review do not restrict judicial review unless
the “statutory scheme” displays a “fairly discernible” intent
to limit jurisdiction, and the claims at issue “are of the type
Congress intended to be reviewed within th[e] statutory
structure.” Thunder Basin Coal Co. v. Reich, 510 U. S. 200,
207, 212 (1994) (internal quotation marks omitted). Gener­
ally, when Congress creates procedures “designed to permit
agency expertise to be brought to bear on particular prob­
lems,” those procedures “are to be exclusive.” Whitney
Nat. Bank in Jefferson Parish v. Bank of New Orleans &
Trust Co., 379 U. S. 411, 420 (1965). But we presume that
Congress does not intend to limit jurisdiction if “a ﬁnding of
preclusion could foreclose all meaningful judicial review”; if
the suit is “wholly collateral to a statute’s review provisions”;
and if the claims are “outside the agency’s expertise.”
Thunder Basin, supra, at 212–213 (internal quotation marks

=== PAGE 14 ===
490   FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
             ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Opinion of the Court

omitted). These considerations point against any limitation
on review here.
   We do not see how petitioners could meaningfully pursue
their constitutional claims under the Government’s theory.
Section 78y provides only for judicial review of Commission
action, and not every Board action is encapsulated in a ﬁnal
Commission order or rule.
   The Government suggests that petitioners could ﬁrst have
sought Commission review of the Board’s “auditing stand­
ards, registration requirements, or other rules.” Brief for
United States 16. But petitioners object to the Board’s ex­
istence, not to any of its auditing standards. Petitioners’
general challenge to the Board is “collateral” to any Commis­
sion orders or rules from which review might be sought.
Cf. McNary v. Haitian Refugee Center, Inc., 498 U. S. 479,
491–492 (1991). Requiring petitioners to select and chal­
lenge a Board rule at random is an odd procedure for Con­
gress to choose, especially because only new rules, and not
existing ones, are subject to challenge. See 15 U. S. C.
§§ 78s(b)(2), 78y(a)(1), 7217(b)(4).
   Alternatively, the Government advises petitioners to raise
their claims by appealing a Board sanction. Brief for
United States 16–17. But the investigation of Beckstead
and Watts produced no sanction, see id., at 7, n. 5; Reply
Brief for Petitioners 29, n. 11, and an uncomplimentary
inspection report is not subject to judicial review, see
§ 7214(h)(2). So the Government proposes that Beckstead
and Watts incur a sanction (such as a sizable ﬁne) by ignor­
ing Board requests for documents and testimony. Brief for
United States 17. If the Commission then afﬁrms, the ﬁrm
will win access to a court of appeals—and severe punishment
should its challenge fail. We normally do not require plain­
tiffs to “bet the farm . . . by taking the violative action”
before “testing the validity of the law,” MedImmune, Inc. v.
Genentech, Inc., 549 U. S. 118, 129 (2007); accord, Ex parte
Young, 209 U. S. 123 (1908), and we do not consider this a

=== PAGE 15 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                      491

                            Opinion of the Court

“meaningful” avenue of relief, Thunder Basin, 510 U. S.,
at 212.
  Petitioners’ constitutional claims are also outside the Com­
mission’s competence and expertise. In Thunder Basin, the
petitioner’s primary claims were statutory; “at root . . . [they]
ar[o]se under the Mine Act and f[e]ll squarely within the
[agency’s] expertise,” given that the agency had “extensive
experience” on the issue and had “recently addressed the
precise . . . claims presented.” Id., at 214–215. Likewise,
in United States v. Ruzicka, 329 U. S. 287 (1946), on which
the Government relies, we reserved for the agency fact-
bound inquiries that, even if “formulated in constitutional
terms,” rested ultimately on “factors that call for [an] under­
standing of the milk industry,” to which the Court made no
pretensions. Id., at 294. No similar expertise is required
here, and the statutory questions involved do not require
“technical considerations of [agency] policy.” Johnson v.
Robison, 415 U. S. 361, 373 (1974). They are instead stand­
ard questions of administrative law, which the courts are at
no disadvantage in answering.
  We therefore conclude that § 78y did not strip the District
Court of jurisdiction over these claims, which are properly
presented for our review.2

  2
    The Government asserts that “petitioners have not pointed to any case
in which this Court has recognized an implied private right of action
directly under the Constitution to challenge governmental action under
the Appointments Clause or separation-of-powers principles.” Brief for
United States 22. The Government does not appear to dispute such a
right to relief as a general matter, without regard to the particular consti­
tutional provisions at issue here. See, e. g., Correctional Services Corp.
v. Malesko, 534 U. S. 61, 74 (2001) (equitable relief “has long been recog­
nized as the proper means for preventing entities from acting unconstitu­
tionally”); Bell v. Hood, 327 U. S. 678, 684 (1946) (“[I]t is established prac­
tice for this Court to sustain the jurisdiction of federal courts to issue
injunctions to protect rights safeguarded by the Constitution”); see also
Ex parte Young, 209 U. S. 123, 149, 165, 167 (1908). If the Government’s
point is that an Appointments Clause or separation-of-powers claim should

=== PAGE 16 ===
492     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                    Opinion of the Court

                                   III
  We hold that the dual for-cause limitations on the removal
of Board members contravene the Constitution’s separation
of powers.
                             A
   The Constitution provides that “[t]he executive Power
shall be vested in a President of the United States of
America.” Art. II, § 1, cl. 1. As Madison stated on the ﬂoor
of the First Congress, “if any power whatsoever is in its
nature Executive, it is the power of appointing, overseeing,
and controlling those who execute the laws.” 1 Annals of
Cong. 463 (1789).
   The removal of executive ofﬁcers was discussed exten­
sively in Congress when the ﬁrst executive departments
were created. The view that “prevailed, as most consonant
to the text of the Constitution” and “to the requisite respon­
sibility and harmony in the Executive Department,” was
that the executive power included a power to oversee execu­
tive ofﬁcers through removal; because that traditional execu­
tive power was not “expressly taken away, it remained with
the President.” Letter from James Madison to Thomas Jef­
ferson (June 30, 1789), 16 Documentary History of the First
Federal Congress 893 (2004). “This Decision of 1789 pro­
vides contemporaneous and weighty evidence of the Consti­
tution’s meaning since many of the Members of the First
Congress had taken part in framing that instrument.”
Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U. S. 714, 723–724 (1986) (internal
quotation marks omitted). And it soon became the “set­
tled and well understood construction of the Constitution.”
Ex parte Hennen, 13 Pet. 230, 259 (1839).
   The landmark case of Myers v. United States reafﬁrmed
the principle that Article II confers on the President “the
general administrative control of those executing the laws.”

be treated differently than every other constitutional claim, it offers no
reason and cites no authority why that might be so.

=== PAGE 17 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)            493

                      Opinion of the Court

272 U. S., at 164. It is his responsibility to take care that
the laws be faithfully executed. The buck stops with the
President, in Harry Truman’s famous phrase. As we ex­
plained in Myers, the President therefore must have some
“power of removing those for whom he can not continue to
be responsible.” Id., at 117.
   Nearly a decade later in Humphrey’s Executor, this Court
held that Myers did not prevent Congress from conferring
good-cause tenure on the principal ofﬁcers of certain inde­
pendent agencies. That case concerned the members of the
Federal Trade Commission, who held 7-year terms and could
not be removed by the President except for “ ‘inefﬁciency,
neglect of duty, or malfeasance in ofﬁce.’ ” 295 U. S., at 620
(quoting 15 U. S. C. § 41). The Court distinguished Myers
on the ground that Myers concerned “an ofﬁcer [who] is
merely one of the units in the executive department and,
hence, inherently subject to the exclusive and illimitable
power of removal by the Chief Executive, whose subordinate
and aid he is.” 295 U. S., at 627. By contrast, the Court
characterized the FTC as “quasi-legislative and quasi-
judicial” rather than “purely executive,” and held that Con­
gress could require it “to act . . . independently of executive
control.” Id., at 627–629. Because “one who holds his ofﬁce
only during the pleasure of another, cannot be depended
upon to maintain an attitude of independence against the lat­
ter’s will,” the Court held that Congress had power to “ﬁx
the period during which [the Commissioners] shall continue
in ofﬁce, and to forbid their removal except for cause in the
meantime.” Id., at 629.
   Humphrey’s Executor did not address the removal of infe­
rior ofﬁcers, whose appointment Congress may vest in heads
of departments. If Congress does so, it is ordinarily the de­
partment head, rather than the President, who enjoys the
power of removal. See Myers, supra, at 119, 127; Hennen,
supra, at 259–260. This Court has upheld for-cause limita­
tions on that power as well.

=== PAGE 18 ===
494     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                    Opinion of the Court

   In Perkins, a naval cadet-engineer was honorably dis­
charged from the Navy because his services were no longer
required. 116 U. S. 483. He brought a claim for his salary
under statutes barring his peacetime discharge except by a
court-martial or by the Secretary of the Navy “for miscon­
duct.” Rev. Stat. §§ 1229, 1525. This Court adopted verba­
tim the reasoning of the Court of Claims, which had held that
when Congress “ ‘vests the appointment of inferior ofﬁcers in
the heads of Departments[,] it may limit and restrict the
power of removal as it deems best for the public interest.’ ”
116 U. S., at 485. Because Perkins had not been “ ‘dismissed
for misconduct . . . [or upon] the sentence of a court-
martial,’ ” the Court agreed that he was “ ‘still in ofﬁce and
. . . entitled to [his] pay.’ ” Ibid.3
   We again considered the status of inferior ofﬁcers in Mor­
rison. That case concerned the Ethics in Government Act,
which provided for an independent counsel to investigate al­
legations of crime by high executive ofﬁcers. The counsel
was appointed by a special court, wielded the full powers of
a prosecutor, and was removable by the Attorney General
only “ ‘for good cause.’ ” 487 U. S., at 663 (quoting 28 U. S. C.
§ 596(a)(1)). We recognized that the independent counsel
was undoubtedly an executive ofﬁcer, rather than “ ‘quasi­
legislative’ ” or “ ‘quasi-judicial,’ ” but we stated as “our pres­
ent considered view” that Congress had power to impose

  3
    When Perkins was decided in 1886, the Secretary of the Navy was a
principal ofﬁcer and the head of a department, see Rev. Stat. § 415, and
the Tenure of Ofﬁce Act purported to require Senate consent for his re­
moval. Ch. 154, 14 Stat. 430, Rev. Stat. § 1767. This requirement was
widely regarded as unconstitutional and void (as it is universally regarded
today), and it was repealed the next year. See Act of Mar. 3, 1887, ch. 353,
24 Stat. 500; Myers v. United States, 272 U. S. 52, 167–168 (1926); see also
Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U. S. 714, 726 (1986). Perkins cannot be read to
endorse any such restriction, much less in combination with further re­
strictions on the removal of inferiors. The Court of Claims opinion
adopted verbatim by this Court addressed only the authority of the Secre­
tary of the Navy to remove inferior ofﬁcers.

=== PAGE 19 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)          495

                      Opinion of the Court

good-cause restrictions on her removal. 487 U. S., at 689–
691. The Court noted that the statute “g[a]ve the Attorney
General,” an ofﬁcer directly responsible to the President and
“through [whom]” the President could act, “several means of
supervising or controlling” the independent counsel—“[m]ost
importantly . . . the power to remove the counsel for good
cause.” Id., at 695–696 (internal quotation marks omitted).
Under those circumstances, the Court sustained the statute.
Morrison did not, however, address the consequences of
more than one level of good-cause tenure—leaving the issue,
as both the court and dissent below recognized, “a question
of ﬁrst impression” in this Court. 537 F. 3d, at 679; see
id., at 698 (dissenting opinion).

                                B
   As explained, we have previously upheld limited restric­
tions on the President’s removal power. In those cases,
however, only one level of protected tenure separated the
President from an ofﬁcer exercising executive power. It
was the President—or a subordinate he could remove at
will—who decided whether the ofﬁcer’s conduct merited re­
moval under the good-cause standard.
   The Act before us does something quite different. It not
only protects Board members from removal except for good
cause, but withdraws from the President any decision on
whether that good cause exists. That decision is vested in­
stead in other tenured ofﬁcers—the Commissioners—none of
whom is subject to the President’s direct control. The re­
sult is a Board that is not accountable to the President, and
a President who is not responsible for the Board.
   The added layer of tenure protection makes a difference.
Without a layer of insulation between the Commission and
the Board, the Commission could remove a Board member
at any time, and therefore would be fully responsible for
what the Board does. The President could then hold the
Commission to account for its supervision of the Board, to

=== PAGE 20 ===
496    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                   Opinion of the Court

the same extent that he may hold the Commission to account
for everything else it does.
   A second level of tenure protection changes the nature of
the President’s review. Now the Commission cannot re­
move a Board member at will. The President therefore can­
not hold the Commission fully accountable for the Board’s
conduct, to the same extent that he may hold the Commis­
sion accountable for everything else that it does. The Com­
missioners are not responsible for the Board’s actions. They
are only responsible for their own determination of whether
the Act’s rigorous good-cause standard is met. And even
if the President disagrees with their determination, he is
powerless to intervene—unless that determination is so un­
reasonable as to constitute “inefﬁciency, neglect of duty, or
malfeasance in ofﬁce.” Humphrey’s Executor, 295 U. S., at
620 (internal quotation marks omitted).
   This novel structure does not merely add to the Board’s
independence, but transforms it. Neither the President, nor
anyone directly responsible to him, nor even an ofﬁcer whose
conduct he may review only for good cause, has full control
over the Board. The President is stripped of the power our
precedents have preserved, and his ability to execute the
laws—by holding his subordinates accountable for their con­
duct—is impaired.
   That arrangement is contrary to Article II’s vesting of the
executive power in the President. Without the ability to
oversee the Board, or to attribute the Board’s failings to
those whom he can oversee, the President is no longer the
judge of the Board’s conduct. He is not the one who decides
whether Board members are abusing their ofﬁces or neglect­
ing their duties. He can neither ensure that the laws are
faithfully executed, nor be held responsible for a Board mem­
ber’s breach of faith. This violates the basic principle that
the President “cannot delegate ultimate responsibility or the
active obligation to supervise that goes with it,” because Ar­
ticle II “makes a single President responsible for the actions

=== PAGE 21 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                    497

                           Opinion of the Court

of the Executive Branch.” Clinton v. Jones, 520 U. S. 681,
712–713 (1997) (Breyer, J., concurring in judgment).4
  Indeed, if allowed to stand, this dispersion of responsibility
could be multiplied. If Congress can shelter the bureauc­
racy behind two layers of good-cause tenure, why not a
third? At oral argument, the Government was unwilling to
concede that even ﬁve layers between the President and the
Board would be too many. Tr. of Oral Arg. 47–48. The of­
ﬁcers of such an agency—safely encased within a Matry­
oshka doll of tenure protections—would be immune from
Presidential oversight, even as they exercised power in the
people’s name.
  Perhaps an individual President might ﬁnd advantages in
tying his own hands. But the separation of powers does not
depend on the views of individual Presidents, see Freytag v.
Commissioner, 501 U. S. 868, 879–880 (1991), nor on whether
“the encroached-upon branch approves the encroachment,”
New York v. United States, 505 U. S. 144, 182 (1992). The
President can always choose to restrain himself in his deal­
ings with subordinates. He cannot, however, choose to bind
his successors by diminishing their powers, nor can he escape
responsibility for his choices by pretending that they are
not his own.
  The diffusion of power carries with it a diffusion of ac­
countability. The people do not vote for the “Ofﬁcers of the

   4
     Contrary to the dissent’s suggestion, post, at 525–527 (opinion of
Breyer, J.), the second layer of tenure protection does compromise the
President’s ability to remove a Board member the Commission wants to re­
tain. Without a second layer of protection, the Commission has no excuse
for retaining an ofﬁcer who is not faithfully executing the law. With the
second layer in place, the Commission can shield its decision from Presiden­
tial review by ﬁnding that good cause is absent—a ﬁnding that, given the
Commission’s own protected tenure, the President cannot easily overturn.
The dissent describes this conﬂict merely as one of four possible “scenar­
ios,” see post, at 525–526, but it is the central issue in this case: The
second layer matters precisely when the President ﬁnds it necessary to have
a subordinate ofﬁcer removed, and a statute prevents him from doing so.

=== PAGE 22 ===
498    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                   Opinion of the Court

United States.” Art. II, § 2, cl. 2. They instead look to the
President to guide the “assistants or deputies . . . subject to
his superintendence.” The Federalist No. 72, p. 487 (J.
Cooke ed. 1961) (A. Hamilton). Without a clear and effec­
tive chain of command, the public cannot “determine on
whom the blame or the punishment of a pernicious measure,
or series of pernicious measures ought really to fall.” Id.,
No. 70, at 476 (same). That is why the Framers sought to
ensure that “those who are employed in the execution of the
law will be in their proper situation, and the chain of depend­
ence be preserved; the lowest ofﬁcers, the middle grade, and
the highest, will depend, as they ought, on the President, and
the President on the community.” 1 Annals of Cong., at 499
(J. Madison).
   By granting the Board executive power without the Exec­
utive’s oversight, this Act subverts the President’s ability to
ensure that the laws are faithfully executed—as well as the
public’s ability to pass judgment on his efforts. The Act’s
restrictions are incompatible with the Constitution’s separa­
tion of powers.
                               C
  Respondents and the dissent resist this conclusion, por­
traying the Board as “the kind of practical accommodation
between the Legislature and the Executive that should
be permitted in a ‘workable government.’ ” Metropolitan
Washington Airports Authority v. Citizens for Abatement
of Aircraft Noise, Inc., 501 U. S. 252, 276 (1991) (MWAA)
(quoting Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, 343 U. S.
579, 635 (1952) (Jackson, J., concurring)); see, e. g., post, at
519 (opinion of Breyer, J.). According to the dissent, Con­
gress may impose multiple levels of for-cause tenure between
the President and his subordinates when it “rests agency
independence upon the need for technical expertise.” Post,
at 531. The Board’s mission is said to demand both “techni­
cal competence” and “apolitical expertise,” and its powers
may only be exercised by “technical experts.” Ibid. (internal

=== PAGE 23 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)              499

                       Opinion of the Court

quotation marks omitted). In this respect the statute creat­
ing the Board is, we are told, simply one example of the “vast
numbers of statutes governing vast numbers of subjects,
concerned with vast numbers of different problems, [that]
provide for, or foresee, their execution or administration
through the work of administrators organized within many
different kinds of administrative structures, exercising dif­
ferent kinds of administrative authority, to achieve their leg­
islatively mandated objectives.” Post, at 521.
   No one doubts Congress’s power to create a vast and var­
ied federal bureaucracy. But where, in all this, is the role
for oversight by an elected President? The Constitution re­
quires that a President chosen by the entire Nation oversee
the execution of the laws. And the “ ‘fact that a given law
or procedure is efﬁcient, convenient, and useful in facilitating
functions of government, standing alone, will not save it
if it is contrary to the Constitution,’ ” for “ ‘[c]onvenience
and efﬁciency are not the primary objectives—or the hall­
marks—of democratic government.’ ” Bowsher, 478 U. S., at
736 (quoting Chadha, 462 U. S., at 944).
   One can have a government that functions without being
ruled by functionaries, and a government that beneﬁts from
expertise without being ruled by experts. Our Constitution
was adopted to enable the people to govern themselves,
through their elected leaders. The growth of the Executive
Branch, which now wields vast power and touches almost
every aspect of daily life, heightens the concern that it may
slip from the Executive’s control, and thus from that of the
people. This concern is largely absent from the dissent’s
paean to the administrative state.
   For example, the dissent dismisses the importance of re­
moval as a tool of supervision, concluding that the Presi­
dent’s “power to get something done” more often depends on
“who controls the agency’s budget requests and funding, the
relationships between one agency or department and an­
other, . . . purely political factors (including Congress’ ability

=== PAGE 24 ===
500     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                    Opinion of the Court

to assert inﬂuence),” and indeed whether particular un­
elected ofﬁcials support or “resist” the President’s policies.
Post, at 524, 526 (emphasis deleted). The Framers did not
rest our liberties on such bureaucratic minutiae. As we said
in Bowsher, supra, at 730, “[t]he separated powers of our
Government cannot be permitted to turn on judicial assess­
ment of whether an ofﬁcer exercising executive power is on
good terms with Congress.”
   In fact, the multilevel protection that the dissent endorses
“provides a blueprint for extensive expansion of the legisla­
tive power.” MWAA, supra, at 277. In a system of checks
and balances, “[p]ower abhors a vacuum,” and one branch’s
handicap is another’s strength. 537 F. 3d, at 695, n. 4 (Kava­
naugh, J., dissenting) (internal quotation marks omitted).
“Even when a branch does not arrogate power to itself,”
therefore, it must not “impair another in the performance of
its constitutional duties.” Loving v. United States, 517 U. S.
748, 757 (1996).5 Congress has plenary control over the sal­
ary, duties, and even existence of executive ofﬁces. Only
Presidential oversight can counter its inﬂuence. That is
why the Constitution vests certain powers in the President
that “the Legislature has no right to diminish or modify.”
1 Annals of Cong., at 463 (J. Madison).6
  5
    The dissent quotes Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 138 (1976) (per cu­
riam), for the proposition that Congress has “broad authority to ‘create’
governmental ‘ “ofﬁces” ’ and to structure those ofﬁces ‘as it chooses.’ ”
Post, at 515. The Buckley Court put “ ‘ofﬁces’ ” in quotes because it was
actually describing legislative positions that are not really ofﬁces at all (at
least not under Article II). That is why the very next sentence of Buck­
ley said, “But Congress’ power . . . is inevitably bounded by the express
language” of the Constitution. 424 U. S., at 138–139 (emphasis added).
  6
    The dissent attributes to Madison a belief that some executive ofﬁcers,
such as the Comptroller, could be made independent of the President.
See post, at 530. But Madison’s actual proposal, consistent with his view
of the Constitution, was that the Comptroller hold ofﬁce for a term of
“years, unless sooner removed by the President”; he would thus be “de­
pendent upon the President, because he can be removed by him,” and also
“dependent upon the Senate, because they must consent to his [reappoint­
ment] for every term of years.” 1 Annals of Cong. 612 (1789).

=== PAGE 25 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)           501

                      Opinion of the Court

   The Framers created a structure in which “[a] dependence
on the people” would be the “primary controul on the gov­
ernment.” The Federalist No. 51, at 349 (J. Madison). That
dependence is maintained, not just by “parchment barriers,”
id., No. 48, at 333 (same), but by letting “[a]mbition . . .
counteract ambition,” giving each branch “the necessary
constitutional means, and personal motives, to resist en­
croachments of the others,” id., No. 51, at 349. A key
“constitutional means” vested in the President—perhaps the
key means—was “the power of appointing, overseeing, and
controlling those who execute the laws.” 1 Annals of Cong.,
at 463. And while a government of “opposite and rival in­
terests” may sometimes inhibit the smooth functioning of ad­
ministration, The Federalist No. 51, at 349, “[t]he Framers
recognized that, in the long term, structural protections
against abuse of power were critical to preserving liberty.”
Bowsher, supra, at 730.
   Calls to abandon those protections in light of “the era’s
perceived necessity,” New York, 505 U. S., at 187, are not
unusual. Nor is the argument from bureaucratic expertise
limited only to the ﬁeld of accounting. The failures of ac­
counting regulation may be a “pressing national problem,”
but “a judiciary that licensed extraconstitutional government
with each issue of comparable gravity would, in the long run,
be far worse.” Id., at 187–188. Neither respondents nor
the dissent explains why the Board’s task, unlike so many
others, requires more than one layer of insulation from the
President—or, for that matter, why only two. The point is
not to take issue with for-cause limitations in general; we do
not do that. The question here is far more modest. We
deal with the unusual situation, never before addressed by
the Court, of two layers of for-cause tenure. And though it
may be criticized as “elementary arithmetical logic,” post, at
535, two layers are not the same as one.
   The President has been given the power to oversee execu­
tive ofﬁcers; he is not limited, as in Harry Truman’s lament,
to “persuad[ing]” his unelected subordinates “to do what

=== PAGE 26 ===
502    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                   Opinion of the Court

they ought to do without persuasion.” Post, at 524 (internal
quotation marks omitted). In its pursuit of a “workable
government,” Congress cannot reduce the Chief Magistrate
to a cajoler-in-chief.
                             D
   The United States concedes that some constraints on the
removal of inferior executive ofﬁcers might violate the Con­
stitution. See Brief for United States 47. It contends,
however, that the removal restrictions at issue here do not.
   To begin with, the Government argues that the Commis­
sion’s removal power over the Board is “broad,” and could be
construed as broader still, if necessary to avoid invalidation.
See, e. g., id., at 51, and n. 19; cf. PCAOB Brief 22–23. But
the Government does not contend that simple disagreement
with the Board’s policies or priorities could constitute “good
cause” for its removal. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 41–43, 45–46.
Nor do our precedents suggest as much. Humphrey’s Exec­
utor, for example, rejected a removal premised on a lack of
agreement “ ‘on either the policies or the administering of
the Federal Trade Commission,’ ” because the FTC was de­
signed to be “ ‘independent in character,’ ” “free from ‘politi­
cal domination or control,’ ” and not “ ‘subject to anybody in
the government’ ” or “ ‘to the orders of the President.’ ” 295
U. S., at 619, 625. Accord, Morrison, 487 U. S., at 693 (not­
ing that “the congressional determination to limit the re­
moval power of the Attorney General was essential . . . to
establish the necessary independence of the ofﬁce”); Wiener
v. United States, 357 U. S. 349, 356 (1958) (describing for-
cause removal as “involving the rectitude” of an ofﬁcer).
And here there is judicial review of any effort to remove
Board members, see 15 U. S. C. § 78y(a)(1), so the Commis­
sion will not have the ﬁnal word on the propriety of its own
removal orders. The removal restrictions set forth in the
statute mean what they say.
   Indeed, this case presents an even more serious threat to
executive control than an “ordinary” dual for-cause standard.

=== PAGE 27 ===
                      Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                 503

                         Opinion of the Court

Congress enacted an unusually high standard that must be
met before Board members may be removed. A Board
member cannot be removed except for willful violations of
the Act, Board rules, or the securities laws; willful abuse of
authority; or unreasonable failure to enforce compliance—as
determined in a formal Commission order, rendered on the
record and after notice and an opportunity for a hearing.
§ 7217(d)(3); see § 78y(a). The Act does not even give the
Commission power to ﬁre Board members for violations of
other laws that do not relate to the Act, the securities laws,
or the Board’s authority. The President might have less
than full conﬁdence in, say, a Board member who cheats on
his taxes; but that discovery is not listed among the grounds
for removal under § 7217(d)(3).7
   The rigorous standard that must be met before a Board
member may be removed was drawn from statutes concern­
ing private organizations like the New York Stock Exchange.
Cf. §§ 78s(h)(4), 7217(d)(3). While we need not decide the
question here, a removal standard appropriate for limiting
Government control over private bodies may be inappropri­
ate for ofﬁcers wielding the executive power of the United
States.
   Alternatively, respondents portray the Act’s limitations on
removal as irrelevant, because—as the Court of Appeals
held—the Commission wields “at-will removal power over
Board functions if not Board members.” 537 F. 3d, at 683
(emphasis added); accord, Brief for United States 27–28;
  7
    The Government implausibly argues that § 7217(d)(3) “does not ex­
pressly make its three speciﬁed grounds of removal exclusive,” and that
“the Act could be construed to permit other grounds.” Brief for United
States 51, n. 19. But having provided in § 7211(e)(6) that Board members
are to be removed “in accordance with [§ 7217(d)(3)], for good cause
shown,” Congress would not have speciﬁed the necessary Commission
ﬁnding in § 7217(d)(3)—including formal procedures and detailed condi­
tions—if Board members could also be removed without any ﬁnding at
all. Cf. PCAOB Brief 6 (“Cause exists where” the § 7217(d)(3) conditions
are met).

=== PAGE 28 ===
504    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                   Opinion of the Court

PCAOB Brief 48. The Commission’s general “oversight and
enforcement authority over the Board,” § 7217(a), is said to
“blun[t] the constitutional impact of for-cause removal,” 537
F. 3d, at 683, and to leave the President no worse off than
“if Congress had lodged the Board’s functions in the SEC’s
own staff,” PCAOB Brief 15.
   Broad power over Board functions is not equivalent to the
power to remove Board members. The Commission may,
for example, approve the Board’s budget, § 7219(b), issue
binding regulations, §§ 7202(a), 7217(b)(5), relieve the Board
of authority, § 7217(d)(1), amend Board sanctions, § 7217(c), or
enforce Board rules on its own, §§ 7202(b)(1), (c). But alter­
ing the budget or powers of an agency as a whole is a prob­
lematic way to control an inferior ofﬁcer. The Commission
cannot wield a free hand to supervise individual members if
it must destroy the Board in order to ﬁx it.
   Even if Commission power over Board activities could sub­
stitute for authority over its members, we would still reject
respondents’ premise that the Commission’s power in this
regard is plenary. As described above, the Board is em­
powered to take signiﬁcant enforcement actions, and does
so largely independently of the Commission. See supra, at
485–486. Its powers are, of course, subject to some latent
Commission control. See supra, at 486–487. But the Act
nowhere gives the Commission effective power to start, stop,
or alter individual Board investigations, executive activities
typically carried out by ofﬁcials within the Executive Branch.
   The Government and the dissent suggest that the Commis­
sion could govern and direct the Board’s daily exercise of
prosecutorial discretion by promulgating new SEC rules, or
by amending those of the Board. Brief for United States 27;
post, at 528. Enacting general rules through the required
notice and comment procedures is obviously a poor means of
micromanaging the Board’s affairs. See §§ 78s(c), 7215(b)(1),
7217(b)(5); cf. 5 U. S. C. § 553, 15 U. S. C. § 7202(a), PCAOB

=== PAGE 29 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                    505

                           Opinion of the Court

Brief 24, n. 6.8 So the Government offers another proposal,
that the Commission require the Board by rule to “secure
SEC approval for any actions that it now may take itself.”
Brief for United States 27. That would surely constitute
one of the “limitations upon the activities, functions, and op­
erations of the Board” that the Act forbids, at least without
Commission ﬁndings equivalent to those required to ﬁre the
Board instead. § 7217(d)(2). The Board thus has signiﬁcant
independence in determining its priorities and intervening
in the affairs of regulated ﬁrms (and the lives of their associ­
ated persons) without Commission preapproval or direction.
   Finally, respondents suggest that our conclusion is contra­
dicted by the past practice of Congress. But the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act is highly unusual in committing substantial execu­
tive authority to ofﬁcers protected by two layers of for-cause
removal—including at one level a sharply circumscribed
deﬁnition of what constitutes “good cause,” and rigorous pro­
cedures that must be followed prior to removal.
   The parties have identiﬁed only a handful of isolated posi­
tions in which inferior ofﬁcers might be protected by two
levels of good-cause tenure. See, e. g., PCAOB Brief 43.
As Judge Kavanaugh noted in dissent below:
      “Perhaps the most telling indication of the severe consti­
      tutional problem with the PCAOB is the lack of histori­
      cal precedent for this entity. Neither the majority
      opinion nor the PCAOB nor the United States as inter­
      venor has located any historical analogues for this novel
      structure. They have not identiﬁed any independent
      agency other than the PCAOB that is appointed by
  8
    Contrary to the dissent’s assertions, see post, at 528–529, the Commis­
sion’s powers to conduct its own investigations (with its own resources),
to remove particular provisions of law from the Board’s bailiwick, or to
require the Board to perform functions “other” than inspections and inves­
tigations, § 7211(c)(5), are no more useful in directing individual enforce­
ment actions.

=== PAGE 30 ===
506     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                    Opinion of the Court

      and removable only for cause by another independent
      agency.” 537 F. 3d, at 699.
   The dissent here suggests that other such positions might
exist, and complains that we do not resolve their status in
this opinion. Post, at 536–544. The dissent itself, however,
stresses the very size and variety of the Federal Govern­
ment, see post, at 520–521, and those features discourage
general pronouncements on matters neither briefed nor ar­
gued here. In any event, the dissent fails to support its
premonitions of doom; none of the positions it identiﬁes are
similarly situated to the Board. See post, at 540–543.
   For example, many civil servants within independent
agencies would not qualify as “Ofﬁcers of the United States,”
who “exercis[e] signiﬁcant authority pursuant to the laws of
the United States,” Buckley, 424 U. S., at 126.9 The parties
here concede that Board members are executive “Ofﬁcers,”
as that term is used in the Constitution. See supra, at 485–
486; see also Art. II, § 2, cl. 2. We do not decide the status
of other Government employees, nor do we decide whether
“lesser functionaries subordinate to ofﬁcers of the United
States” must be subject to the same sort of control as those
who exercise “signiﬁcant authority pursuant to the laws.”
Buckley, supra, at 126, and n. 162.
   Nor do the employees referenced by the dissent enjoy the
same signiﬁcant and unusual protections from Presidential
oversight as members of the Board. Senior or policymaking
positions in government may be excepted from the competi­
tive service to ensure Presidential control, see 5 U. S. C.
§§ 2302(a)(2)(B), 3302, 7511(b)(2), and members of the Senior
Executive Service may be reassigned or reviewed by agency
heads (and entire agencies may be excluded from that Serv­
   9
     One “may be an agent or employé working for the government and paid
by it, as nine-tenths of the persons rendering service to the government
undoubtedly are, without thereby becoming its ofﬁce[r].” United States
v. Germaine, 99 U. S. 508, 509 (1879). The applicable proportion has of
course increased dramatically since 1879.

=== PAGE 31 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                    507

                           Opinion of the Court

ice by the President), see, e. g., §§ 3132(c), 3395(a), 4312(d),
4314(b)(3), (c)(3); cf. § 2302(a)(2)(B)(ii). While the full extent
of that authority is not before us, any such authority is of
course wholly absent with respect to the Board. Nothing in
our opinion, therefore, should be read to cast doubt on the
use of what is colloquially known as the civil service system
within independent agencies.10
   Finally, the dissent wanders far aﬁeld when it suggests
that today’s opinion might increase the President’s authority
to remove military ofﬁcers. Without expressing any view
whatever on the scope of that authority, it is enough to note
that we see little analogy between our Nation’s armed serv­
ices and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board.
Military ofﬁcers are broadly subject to Presidential control
through the chain of command and through the President’s
powers as Commander in Chief. Art. II, § 2, cl. 1; see, e. g.,
10 U. S. C. §§ 162, 164(g). The President and his subordi­
nates may also convene boards of inquiry or courts-martial
to hear claims of misconduct or poor performance by those
ofﬁcers. See, e. g., §§ 822(a)(1), 823(a)(1), 892(3), 933–934,
1181–1185. Here, by contrast, the President has no author­
ity to initiate a Board member’s removal for cause.
   There is no reason for us to address whether these posi­
tions identiﬁed by the dissent, or any others not at issue in
this case, are so structured as to infringe the President’s

  10
     For similar reasons, our holding also does not address that subset of
independent agency employees who serve as administrative law judges.
See, e. g., 5 U. S. C. §§ 556(c), 3105. Whether administrative law judges
are necessarily “Ofﬁcers of the United States” is disputed. See, e. g.,
Landry v. FDIC, 204 F. 3d 1125 (CADC 2000). And unlike members of
the Board, many administrative law judges of course perform adjudicative
rather than enforcement or policymaking functions, see §§ 554(d), 3105, or
possess purely recommendatory powers. The Government below refused
to identify either “civil service tenure-protected employees in independent
agencies” or administrative law judges as “precedent for the PCAOB.”
537 F. 3d 667, 699, n. 8 (CADC 2008) (Kavanaugh, J., dissenting); see Tr. of
Oral Arg. in No. 07–5127 (CADC), pp. 32, 37–38, 42.

=== PAGE 32 ===
508    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                   Opinion of the Court

constitutional authority. Nor is there any substance to the
dissent’s concern that the “work of all these various ofﬁcials”
will “be put on hold.” Post, at 544. As the judgment in
this case demonstrates, restricting certain ofﬁcers to a single
level of insulation from the President affects the conditions
under which those ofﬁcers might someday be removed, and
would have no effect, absent a congressional determination
to the contrary, on the validity of any ofﬁcer’s continuance in
ofﬁce. The only issue in this case is whether Congress may
deprive the President of adequate control over the Board,
which is the regulator of ﬁrst resort and the primary law
enforcement authority for a vital sector of our economy. We
hold that it cannot.
                               IV
   Petitioners’ complaint argued that the Board’s “freedom
from Presidential oversight and control” rendered it “and all
power and authority exercised by it” in violation of the Con­
stitution. App. 46. We reject such a broad holding. In­
stead, we agree with the Government that the unconstitu­
tional tenure provisions are severable from the remainder of
the statute.
   “Generally speaking, when confronting a constitutional
ﬂaw in a statute, we try to limit the solution to the problem,”
severing any “problematic portions while leaving the re­
mainder intact.” Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of North­
ern New Eng., 546 U. S. 320, 328–329 (2006). Because “[t]he
unconstitutionality of a part of an Act does not necessarily
defeat or affect the validity of its remaining provisions,”
Champlin Reﬁning Co. v. Corporation Comm’n of Okla., 286
U. S. 210, 234 (1932), the “normal rule” is “that partial,
rather than facial, invalidation is the required course,”
Brockett v. Spokane Arcades, Inc., 472 U. S. 491, 504 (1985).
Putting to one side petitioners’ Appointments Clause chal­
lenges (addressed below), the existence of the Board does
not violate the separation of powers, but the substantive re­

=== PAGE 33 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)             509

                      Opinion of the Court

moval restrictions imposed by 15 U. S. C. §§ 7211(e)(6) and
7217(d)(3) do. Under the traditional default rule, removal is
incident to the power of appointment. See, e. g., Sampson
v. Murray, 415 U. S. 61, 70, n. 17 (1974); Myers, 272 U. S., at
119; Ex parte Hennen, 13 Pet., at 259–260. Concluding that
the removal restrictions are invalid leaves the Board remov­
able by the Commission at will, and leaves the President
separated from Board members by only a single level of
good-cause tenure. The Commission is then fully responsi­
ble for the Board’s actions, which are no less subject than
the Commission’s own functions to Presidential oversight.
   The Sarbanes-Oxley Act remains “ ‘fully operative as a
law’ ” with these tenure restrictions excised. New York, 505
U. S., at 186 (quoting Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock, 480 U. S.
678, 684 (1987)). We therefore must sustain its remaining
provisions “[u]nless it is evident that the Legislature would
not have enacted those provisions . . . independently of that
which is [invalid].” Ibid. (internal quotation marks omit­
ted). Though this inquiry can sometimes be “elusive,”
Chadha, 462 U. S., at 932, the answer here seems clear: The
remaining provisions are not “incapable of functioning inde­
pendently,” Alaska Airlines, 480 U. S., at 684, and nothing
in the statute’s text or historical context makes it “evident”
that Congress, faced with the limitations imposed by the
Constitution, would have preferred no Board at all to a
Board whose members are removable at will. Ibid.; see also
Ayotte, supra, at 330.
   It is true that the language providing for good-cause re­
moval is only one of a number of statutory provisions that,
working together, produce a constitutional violation. In
theory, perhaps, the Court might blue-pencil a sufﬁcient
number of the Board’s responsibilities so that its members
would no longer be “Ofﬁcers of the United States.” Or we
could restrict the Board’s enforcement powers, so that it
would be a purely recommendatory panel. Or the Board

=== PAGE 34 ===
510    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                   Opinion of the Court

members could in future be made removable by the Presi­
dent, for good cause or at will. But such editorial freedom—
far more extensive than our holding today—belongs to the
Legislature, not the Judiciary. Congress of course remains
free to pursue any of these options going forward.

                               V
   Petitioners raise three more challenges to the Board under
the Appointments Clause. None has merit.
   First, petitioners argue that Board members are principal
ofﬁcers requiring Presidential appointment with the Senate’s
advice and consent. We held in Edmond v. United States,
520 U. S. 651, 662–663 (1997), that “[w]hether one is an ‘infe­
rior’ ofﬁcer depends on whether he has a superior,” and that
“ ‘inferior ofﬁcers’ are ofﬁcers whose work is directed and
supervised at some level” by other ofﬁcers appointed by
the President with the Senate’s consent. In particular, we
noted that “[t]he power to remove ofﬁcers” at will and with­
out cause “is a powerful tool for control” of an inferior. Id.,
at 664. As explained above, the statutory restrictions on
the Commission’s power to remove Board members are un­
constitutional and void. Given that the Commission is prop­
erly viewed, under the Constitution, as possessing the power
to remove Board members at will, and given the Commis­
sion’s other oversight authority, we have no hesitation in con­
cluding that under Edmond the Board members are inferior
ofﬁcers whose appointment Congress may permissibly vest
in a “Hea[d] of Departmen[t].”
   But, petitioners argue, the Commission is not a “Depart­
men[t]” like the “Executive departments” (e. g., State, Treas­
ury, Defense) listed in 5 U. S. C. § 101. In Freytag, 501 U. S.,
at 887, n. 4, we speciﬁcally reserved the question whether a
“principal agenc[y], such as . . . the Securities and Exchange
Commission,” is a “Departmen[t]” under the Appointments
Clause. Four Justices, however, would have concluded that

=== PAGE 35 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                   511

                          Opinion of the Court

the Commission is indeed such a “Departmen[t],” see id., at
918 (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg­
ment), because it is a “free-standing, self-contained entity in
the Executive Branch,” id., at 915.
   Respondents urge us to adopt this reasoning as to those
entities not addressed by our opinion in Freytag, see Brief
for United States 37–39; PCAOB Brief 30–33, and we do.
Respondents’ reading of the Appointments Clause is consist­
ent with the common, near-contemporary deﬁnition of a “de­
partment” as a “separate allotment or part of business; a
distinct province, in which a class of duties are allotted to a
particular person.” 1 N. Webster, American Dictionary of
the English Language (1828) (def. 2) (1995 facsimile ed.). It
is also consistent with the early practice of Congress, which
in 1792 authorized the Postmaster General to appoint “an
assistant, and deputy postmasters, at all places where such
shall be found necessary,” § 3, 1 Stat. 234—thus treating him
as the “Hea[d] of [a] Departmen[t]” without the title of Secre­
tary or any role in the President’s Cabinet. And it is con­
sistent with our prior cases, which have never invalidated an
appointment made by the head of such an establishment.
See Freytag, supra, at 917; cf. Burnap v. United States,
252 U. S. 512, 515 (1920); United States v. Germaine, 99 U. S.
508, 511 (1879). Because the Commission is a freestanding
component of the Executive Branch, not subordinate to or
contained within any other such component, it constitutes
a “Departmen[t]” for the purposes of the Appointments
Clause.11
   But petitioners are not done yet. They argue that the full
Commission cannot constitutionally appoint Board members,
because only the Chairman of the Commission is the Com­

   11
      We express no view on whether the Commission is thus an “executive
Departmen[t]” under the Opinions Clause, Art. II, § 2, cl. 1, or under Sec­
tion 4 of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment. See Freytag v. Commissioner,
501 U. S. 868, 886–887 (1991).

=== PAGE 36 ===
512     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                    Opinion of the Court

mission’s “Hea[d].” 12 The Commission’s powers, however,
are generally vested in the Commissioners jointly, not the
Chairman alone. See, e. g., 15 U. S. C. §§ 77s, 77t, 78u, 78w.
The Commissioners do not report to the Chairman, who ex­
ercises administrative and executive functions subject to the
full Commission’s policies. See Reorg. Plan No. 10 of 1950,
§ 1(b)(1), 64 Stat. 1265. The Chairman is also appointed
from among the Commissioners by the President alone, id.,
§ 3, at 1266, which means that he cannot be regarded as “the
head of an agency” for purposes of the Reorganization Act.
See 5 U. S. C. § 904. (The Commission as a whole, on the
other hand, does meet the requirements of the Act, includ­
ing its provision that “the head of an agency [may] be an
individual or a commission or board with more than one
member.”) 13
   As a constitutional matter, we see no reason why a multi-
member body may not be the “Hea[d]” of a “Departmen[t]”

  12
      The Board argued below that petitioners lack standing to raise this
claim, because no member of the Board has been appointed over the Chair­
man’s objection, and so petitioners’ injuries are not fairly traceable to an
invalid appointment. See Defendants’ Memorandum of Points and Au­
thorities in Support of Motion to Dismiss the Complaint in Civil Action
No. 1:06–cv–00217–JR (DC), Doc. 17, pp. 42–43; Brief for Appellees
PCAOB et al. in No. 07–5127 (CADC), pp. 32–33. We cannot assume, how­
ever, that the Chairman would have made the same appointments acting
alone; and petitioners’ standing does not require precise proof of what the
Board’s policies might have been in that counterfactual world. See Glid­
den Co. v. Zdanok, 370 U. S. 530, 533 (1962) (plurality opinion).
   13
      Petitioners contend that ﬁnding the Commission to be the head will
invalidate numerous appointments made directly by the Chairman, such
as those of the “heads of major [SEC] administrative units.” Reorg. Plan
No. 10, § 1(b)(2), at 1266. Assuming, however, that these individuals are
ofﬁcers of the United States, their appointment is still made “subject to
the approval of the Commission.” Ibid. We have previously found that
the department head’s approval satisﬁes the Appointments Clause, in
precedents that petitioners do not ask us to revisit. See, e. g., United
States v. Smith, 124 U. S. 525, 532 (1888); Germaine, 99 U. S., at 511;
United States v. Hartwell, 6 Wall. 385, 393–394 (1868).

=== PAGE 37 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)              513

                       Opinion of the Court

that it governs. The Appointments Clause necessarily con­
templates collective appointments by the “Courts of Law,”
Art. II, § 2, cl. 2, and each House of Congress, too, appoints
its ofﬁcers collectively, see Art. I, § 2, cl. 5; id., § 3, cl. 5.
Petitioners argue that the Framers vested the nomination of
principal ofﬁcers in the President to avoid the perceived evils
of collective appointments, but they reveal no similar con­
cern with respect to inferior ofﬁcers, whose appointments
may be vested elsewhere, including in multimember bodies.
Practice has also sanctioned the appointment of inferior ofﬁ­
cers by multimember agencies. See Freytag, 501 U. S., at 918
(Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment);
see also Classiﬁcation Act of 1923, ch. 265, § 2, 42 Stat. 1488
(deﬁning “the head of the department” to mean “the ofﬁcer
or group of ofﬁcers . . . who are not subordinate or responsi­
ble to any other ofﬁcer of the department” (emphasis added));
37 Op. Atty. Gen. 227, 231 (1933) (endorsing collective ap­
pointment by the Civil Service Commission). We conclude
that the Board members have been validly appointed by the
full Commission.
   In light of the foregoing, petitioners are not entitled to
broad injunctive relief against the Board’s continued opera­
tions. But they are entitled to declaratory relief sufﬁcient
to ensure that the reporting requirements and auditing
standards to which they are subject will be enforced only by
a constitutional agency accountable to the Executive. See
Bowsher, 478 U. S., at 727, n. 5 (concluding that a separation-
of-powers violation may create a “here-and-now” injury
that can be remedied by a court (internal quotation marks
omitted)).
                           *    *    *
  The Constitution that makes the President accountable to
the people for executing the laws also gives him the power
to do so. That power includes, as a general matter, the au­
thority to remove those who assist him in carrying out his

=== PAGE 38 ===
514    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

duties. Without such power, the President could not be held
fully accountable for discharging his own responsibilities; the
buck would stop somewhere else. Such diffusion of author­
ity “would greatly diminish the intended and necessary re­
sponsibility of the chief magistrate himself.” The Federalist
No. 70, at 478.
   While we have sustained in certain cases limits on the
President’s removal power, the Act before us imposes a new
type of restriction—two levels of protection from removal
for those who nonetheless exercise signiﬁcant executive
power. Congress cannot limit the President’s authority in
this way.
   The judgment of the United States Court of Appeals for
the District of Columbia Circuit is afﬁrmed in part and re­
versed in part, and the case is remanded for further proceed­
ings consistent with this opinion.
                                              It is so ordered.

  Justice Breyer, with whom Justice Stevens, Justice
Ginsburg, and Justice Sotomayor join, dissenting.
   The Court holds unconstitutional a statute providing that
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC or Commis­
sion) can remove members of the Public Company Account­
ing Oversight Board from ofﬁce only for cause. It argues
that granting the “inferior ofﬁcer[s]” on the Accounting
Board “more than one level of good-cause protection . . . con­
travenes the President’s ‘constitutional obligation to ensure
the faithful execution of the laws.’ ” Ante, at 484. I agree
that the Accounting Board members are inferior ofﬁcers.
See ante, at 493–495. But in my view the statute does not
significantly interfere with the President’s “executive
Power.” Art. II, § 1. It violates no separation-of-powers
principle. And the Court’s contrary holding threatens to
disrupt severely the fair and efﬁcient administration of the
laws. I consequently dissent.

=== PAGE 39 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)           515

                     Breyer, J., dissenting

                                I
                                A
   The legal question before us arises at the intersection of
two general constitutional principles. On the one hand,
Congress has broad power to enact statutes “necessary and
proper” to the exercise of its speciﬁcally enumerated consti­
tutional authority. Art. I, § 8, cl. 18. As Chief Justice Mar­
shall wrote for the Court nearly 200 years ago, the Neces­
sary and Proper Clause reﬂects the Framers’ efforts to
create a Constitution that would “endure for ages to come.”
McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 415 (1819). It em­
bodies their recognition that it would be “unwise” to pre­
scribe “the means by which government should, in all future
time, execute its powers.” Ibid. Such “immutable rules”
would deprive the Government of the needed ﬂexibility to
respond to future “exigencies which, if foreseen at all, must
have been seen dimly.” Ibid. Thus the Necessary and
Proper Clause affords Congress broad authority to “create”
governmental “ ‘ofﬁces’ ” and to structure those ofﬁces “as
it chooses.” Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 138 (1976) (per
curiam); cf. Lottery Case, 188 U. S. 321, 355 (1903). And
Congress has drawn on that power over the past century to
create numerous federal agencies in response to “various
crises of human affairs” as they have arisen. McCulloch,
supra, at 415 (emphasis deleted). Cf. Wong Yang Sung v.
McGrath, 339 U. S. 33, 36–37 (1950).
   On the other hand, the opening sections of Articles I, II,
and III of the Constitution separately and respectively vest
“[a]ll legislative Powers” in Congress, the “executive Power”
in the President, and the “judicial Power” in the Supreme
Court (and such “inferior Courts as Congress may from time
to time ordain and establish”). In doing so, these provisions
imply a structural separation-of-powers principle. See, e. g.,
Miller v. French, 530 U. S. 327, 341–342 (2000). And that

=== PAGE 40 ===
516    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

principle, along with the instruction in Article II, § 3, that
the President “shall take Care that the Laws be faithfully
executed,” limits Congress’ power to structure the Federal
Government. See, e. g., INS v. Chadha, 462 U. S. 919, 946
(1983); Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U. S. 868, 878 (1991);
Northern Pipeline Constr. Co. v. Marathon Pipe Line Co.,
458 U. S. 50, 64 (1982); Commodi ty Futures Trading
Comm’n v. Schor, 478 U. S. 833, 859–860 (1986). Indeed,
this Court has held that the separation-of-powers principle
guarantees the President the authority to dismiss certain
Executive Branch ofﬁcials at will. Myers v. United States,
272 U. S. 52 (1926).
   But neither of these two principles is absolute in its appli­
cation to removal cases. The Necessary and Proper Clause
does not grant Congress power to free all Executive Branch
ofﬁcials from dismissal at the will of the President. Ibid.
Nor does the separation-of-powers principle grant the Presi­
dent an absolute authority to remove any and all Executive
Branch ofﬁcials at will. Rather, depending on, say, the na­
ture of the ofﬁce, its function, or its subject matter, Congress
sometimes may, consistent with the Constitution, limit the
President’s authority to remove an ofﬁcer from his post.
See Humphrey’s Executor v. United States, 295 U. S. 602
(1935), overruling in part Myers, supra; Morrison v. Olson,
487 U. S. 654 (1988). And we must here decide whether the
circumstances surrounding the statute at issue justify such
a limitation.
   In answering the question presented, we cannot look to
more speciﬁc constitutional text, such as the text of the Ap­
pointments Clause or the Presentment Clause, upon which
the Court has relied in other separation-of-powers cases.
See, e. g., Chadha, supra, at 946; Buckley, supra, at 124–125.
That is because, with the exception of the general “vesting”
and “take care” language, the Constitution is completely
“silent with respect to the power of removal from ofﬁce.”
Ex parte Hennen, 13 Pet. 230, 258 (1839); see also Morrison,

=== PAGE 41 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)           517

                     Breyer, J., dissenting

supra, at 723 (Scalia, J., dissenting) (“There is, of course,
no provision in the Constitution stating who may remove
executive ofﬁcers . . . ”).
   Nor does history offer signiﬁcant help. The President’s
power to remove Executive Branch ofﬁcers “was not dis­
cussed in the Constitutional Convention.” Myers, supra, at
109–110. The First Congress enacted federal statutes that
limited the President’s ability to oversee Executive Branch
ofﬁcials, including the Comptroller of the United States, fed­
eral district attorneys (precursors to today’s United States
attorneys), and, to a lesser extent, the Secretary of the
Treasury. See, e. g., Lessig, Readings by Our Unitary Exec­
utive, 15 Cardozo L. Rev. 175, 183–184 (1993); Tiefer, The
Constitutionality of Independent Ofﬁcers as Checks on
Abuses of Executive Power, 63 B. U. L. Rev. 59, 74–75 (1983);
Casper, An Essay in Separation of Powers: Some Early Ver­
sions and Practices, 30 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 211, 240–241
(1989) (hereinafter Casper); H. Bruff, Balance of Forces: Sep­
aration of Powers Law in the Administrative State 414–417
(2006). But those statutes did not directly limit the Presi­
dent’s authority to remove any of those ofﬁcials—“a subject”
that was “much disputed” during “the early history of this
government,” “and upon which a great diversity of opinion
was entertained.” Hennen, supra, at 259; see also United
States ex rel. Goodrich v. Guthrie, 17 How. 284, 306 (1855)
(McLean, J., dissenting); Casper 233–237 (recounting the De­
bate of 1789). Scholars, like Members of this Court, have
continued to disagree, not only about the inferences that
should be drawn from the inconclusive historical record, but
also about the nature of the original disagreement. Com­
pare ante, at 492; Myers, supra, at 114 (majority opinion of
Taft, C. J.); and Prakash, New Light on the Decision of 1789,
91 Cornell L. Rev. 1021 (2006), with, e. g., Myers, supra, at
194 (McReynolds, J., dissenting); Corwin, Tenure of Ofﬁce
and the Removal Power Under the Constitution, 27 Colum.
L. Rev. 353, 369 (1927); Lessig & Sunstein, The President

=== PAGE 42 ===
518    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

and the Administration, 94 Colum. L. Rev. 1, 25–26 (1994)
(hereinafter Lessig & Sunstein); and L. Fisher, President
and Congress: Power and Policy 86–89 (1972).
   Nor does this Court’s precedent fully answer the question
presented. At least it does not clearly invalidate the pro­
vision in dispute. See Part II–C, infra. In Myers, supra,
the Court invalidated—for the ﬁrst and only time—a con­
gressional statute on the ground that it unduly limited the
President’s authority to remove an Executive Branch ofﬁcial.
But soon thereafter the Court expressly disapproved most
of Myers’ broad reasoning. See Humphrey’s Executor,
supra, at 626–627, overruling in part Myers, supra; Wiener
v. United States, 357 U. S. 349, 352 (1958) (stating that Hum­
phrey’s Executor “explicitly ‘disapproved’ ” of much of the
reasoning in Myers). Moreover, the Court has since said
that “the essence of the decision in Myers was the judgment
that the Constitution prevents Congress from ‘draw[ing]
to itself . . . the power to remove or the right to partici­
pate in the exercise of that power.’ ” Morrison, supra, at
686 (emphasis added). And that feature of the statute—a
feature that would aggrandize the power of Congress—is
not present here. Congress has not granted itself any role
in removing the members of the Accounting Board.
Cf. Freytag, 501 U. S., at 878 (“separation-of-powers juris­
prudence generally focuses on the danger of one branch’s
aggrandizing its power at the expense of another branch”
(emphasis added)); Buckley, 424 U. S., at 129 (same); Schor,
478 U. S., at 856 (same); Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U. S. 714,
727 (1986) (same). Compare Myers, supra (striking down
statute where Congress granted itself removal authority
over Executive Branch ofﬁcial), with Humphrey’s Executor,
supra (upholding statute where such aggrandizing was ab­
sent); Wiener, supra (same); Morrison, supra (same).
   In short, the question presented lies at the intersection of
two sets of conﬂicting, broadly framed constitutional princi­
ples. And no text, no history, perhaps no precedent pro­

=== PAGE 43 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)             519

                      Breyer, J., dissenting

vides any clear answer. Cf. Chicago v. Morales, 527 U. S.
41, 106 (1999) (Thomas, J., joined by Rehnquist, C. J., and
Scalia, J., dissenting) (expressing the view that “this Court”
is “most vulnerable” when “it deals with judge-made consti­
tutional law” that lacks “roots in the language” of the Consti­
tution (internal quotation marks omitted)).

                                B
   When previously deciding this kind of nontextual question,
the Court has emphasized the importance of examining how
a particular provision, taken in context, is likely to function.
Thus, in Crowell v. Benson, 285 U. S. 22, 53 (1932), a founda­
tional separation-of-powers case, the Court said that “regard
must be had, as in other cases where constitutional limits are
invoked, not to mere matters of form, but to the substance
of what is required.” The Court repeated this injunction in
Schor and again in Morrison. See Schor, supra, at 854
(stating that the Court must look “ ‘beyond form to the sub­
stance of what’ Congress has done”); Morrison, 487 U. S.,
at 689–691 (“The analysis contained in our removal cases is
designed not to deﬁne rigid categories of those ofﬁcials who
may or may not be removed at will by the President,” but
rather asks whether, given the “functions of the ofﬁcials in
question,” a removal provision “interfere[s] with the Presi­
dent’s exercise of the ‘executive power’ ” (emphasis added)).
The Court has thereby written into law Justice Jackson’s
wise perception that “the Constitution . . . contemplates that
practice will integrate the dispersed powers into a workable
government.” Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, 343
U. S. 579, 635 (1952) (concurring opinion) (emphasis added).
See also ibid. (“The actual art of governing under our Consti­
tution does not and cannot conform to judicial deﬁnitions of
the power of any of its branches based on isolated clauses or
even single Articles torn from context”).
   It is not surprising that the Court in these circumstances
has looked to function and context, and not to bright-line

=== PAGE 44 ===
520    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

rules. For one thing, that approach embodies the intent of
the Framers. As Chief Justice Marshall long ago observed,
our Constitution is fashioned so as to allow the three coordi­
nate branches, including this Court, to exercise practical
judgment in response to changing conditions and “exigen­
cies,” which at the time of the founding could be seen only
“dimly,” and perhaps not at all. McCulloch, 4 Wheat.,
at 415.
   For another, a functional approach permits Congress and
the President the ﬂexibility needed to adapt statutory law to
changing circumstances. That is why the “powers conferred
upon the Federal Government by the Constitution were
phrased in language broad enough to allow for the expansion
of the Federal Government’s role” over time. New York v.
United States, 505 U. S. 144, 157 (1992). Indeed, the Federal
Government at the time of the founding consisted of about
2,000 employees and served a population of about 4 million.
See Kaufman, The Growth of the Federal Personnel System,
in The Federal Government Service 7, 8 (W. Sayre 2d ed.
1965); Dept. of Commerce, Census Bureau, Historical Statis­
tics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970, pt. 1, p. 8
(1975). Today, however, the Federal Government employs
about 4.4 million workers who serve a Nation of more than
310 million people living in a society characterized by rapid
technological, economic, and social change. See Ofﬁce of
Management and Budget, Analytical Perspectives, Budget of
the U. S. Government, Fiscal Year 2010, p. 368 (2009).
   Federal statutes now require or permit Government ofﬁ­
cials to provide, regulate, or otherwise administer, not only
foreign affairs and defense, but also a wide variety of such
subjects as taxes, welfare, social security, medicine, pharma­
ceutical drugs, education, highways, railroads, electricity,
natural gas, nuclear power, ﬁnancial instruments, banking,
medical care, public health and safety, the environment, fair
employment practices, consumer protection, and much else
besides. Those statutes create a host of different organi­

=== PAGE 45 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)              521

                       Breyer, J., dissenting

zational structures. Sometimes they delegate administra­
tive authority to the President directly, e. g., 10 U. S. C.
§ 2031(a)(1); 42 U. S. C. § 5192(c); sometimes they place au­
thority in a long-established Cabinet department, e. g., 7
U. S. C. § 1637b(c)(1); 12 U. S. C. § 5221(b)(2) (2006 ed., Supp.
II); sometimes they delegate authority to an independent
commission or board, e. g., 15 U. S. C. § 4404(b); 28 U. S. C.
§ 994; sometimes they place authority directly in the hands
of a single senior administrator, e. g., 15 U. S. C. § 657d(c)(4);
42 U. S. C. § 421; sometimes they place it in a subcabinet bu­
reau, ofﬁce, division, or other agency, e. g., 18 U. S. C. § 4048;
sometimes they vest it in multimember or multiagency task
groups, e. g., 5 U. S. C. §§ 593–594; 50 U. S. C. § 402 (2006 ed.
and Supp. II); sometimes they vest it in commissions or advi­
sory committees made up of members of more than one
branch, e. g., 20 U. S. C. § 42(a); 28 U. S. C. § 991(a) (2006 ed.,
Supp. II); 42 U. S. C. § 1975; sometimes they divide it among
groups of departments, commissions, bureaus, divisions, and
administrators, e. g., 5 U. S. C. § 9902(a) (2006 ed., Supp. II);
7 U. S. C. § 136i–1(g); and sometimes they permit state or
local governments to participate as well, e. g., 7 U. S. C.
§ 2009aa–1(a). Statutes similarly grant administrators a
wide variety of powers—for example, the power to make
rules, develop informal practices, investigate, adjudicate, im­
pose sanctions, grant licenses, and provide goods, services,
advice, and so forth. See generally 5 U. S. C. § 500 et seq.
   The upshot is that today vast numbers of statutes govern­
ing vast numbers of subjects, concerned with vast numbers
of different problems, provide for, or foresee, their execution
or administration through the work of administrators orga­
nized within many different kinds of administrative struc­
tures, exercising different kinds of administrative authority,
to achieve their legislatively mandated objectives. And,
given the nature of the Government’s work, it is not surpris­
ing that administrative units come in many different shapes
and sizes.

=== PAGE 46 ===
522    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

   The functional approach required by our precedents recog­
nizes this administrative complexity and, more importantly,
recognizes the various ways Presidential power operates
within this context—and the various ways in which a re­
moval provision might affect that power. As human beings
have known ever since Ulysses tied himself to the mast so
as safely to hear the Sirens’ song, sometimes it is necessary
to disable oneself in order to achieve a broader objective.
Thus, legally enforceable commitments—such as contracts,
statutes that cannot instantly be changed, and, as in the case
before us, the establishment of independent administrative
institutions—hold the potential to empower precisely be­
cause of their ability to constrain. If the President seeks to
regulate through impartial adjudication, then insulation of
the adjudicator from removal at will can help him achieve
that goal. And to free a technical decisionmaker from the
fear of removal without cause can similarly help create legiti­
macy with respect to that ofﬁcial’s regulatory actions by
helping to insulate his technical decisions from nontechnical
political pressure.
   Neither is power always susceptible to the equations of
elementary arithmetic. A rule that takes power from a
President’s friends and allies may weaken him. But a rule
that takes power from the President’s opponents may
strengthen him. And what if the rule takes power from a
functionally neutral independent authority? In that case, it
is difﬁcult to predict how the President’s power is affected
in the abstract.
   These practical reasons not only support our precedents’
determination that cases such as this should examine the
speciﬁc functions and context at issue; they also indicate that
judges should hesitate before second-guessing a “for cause”
decision made by the other branches. See, e. g., Chadha, 462
U. S., at 944 (applying a “presumption that the challenged
statute is valid”); Bowsher, 478 U. S., at 736 (Stevens, J.,

=== PAGE 47 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)             523

                      Breyer, J., dissenting

concurring in judgment). Compared to Congress and the
President, the Judiciary possesses an inferior understanding
of the realities of administration, and the manner in which
power, including and most especially political power, oper­
ates in context.
  There is no indication that the two comparatively more
expert branches were divided in their support for the “for
cause” provision at issue here. In this case, the Act em­
bodying the provision was passed by a vote of 423 to 3 in the
House of Representatives and by a vote of 99 to 0 in the
Senate. 148 Cong. Rec. 14458, 14505 (2002). The creation
of the Accounting Board was discussed at great length
in both bodies without anyone ﬁnding in its structure any
constitutional problem. See id., at 12035–12037, 12112–
12132, 12315–12323, 12372–12377, 12488–12508, 12529–12534,
12612–12618, 12673–12680, 12734–12751, 12915–12960, 13347–
13354, 14439–14458, 14487–14506. The President signed the
Act. And, when he did so, he issued a signing statement
that critiqued multiple provisions of the Act but did not
express any separation-of-powers concerns. See President’s
Statement on Signing the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 38
Weekly Comp. of Pres. Doc. 1286 (2002). Cf. ABA, Report
of Task Force on Presidential Signing Statements and the
Separation of Powers Doctrine 15 (2006), online at http://
www.abanet.org / op / signingstatements / aba _ ﬁnal _ signing _
statements_recommendation-report_7-24-06.pdf (all Internet
materials as visited June 24, 2010, and available in Clerk of
Court’s case ﬁle) (noting that President Bush asserted “over
500” “constitutional objections” through signing statements
“in his ﬁrst term,” including 82 “related to his theory of the
‘unitary executive’ ”).
  Thus, here, as in similar cases, we should decide the consti­
tutional question in light of the provision’s practical function­
ing in context. And our decision should take account of the
Judiciary’s comparative lack of institutional expertise.

=== PAGE 48 ===
524    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

                              II
                              A
   To what extent then is the Act’s “for cause” provision
likely, as a practical matter, to limit the President’s exercise
of executive authority? In practical terms no “for cause”
provision can, in isolation, deﬁne the full measure of execu­
tive power. This is because a legislative decision to place
ultimate administrative authority in, say, the Secretary of
Agriculture rather than the President, the way in which the
statute deﬁnes the scope of the power the relevant adminis­
trator can exercise, the decision as to who controls the
agency’s budget requests and funding, the relationships be­
tween one agency or department and another, as well as
more purely political factors (including Congress’ ability to
assert inﬂuence) are more likely to affect the President’s
power to get something done. That is why President Tru­
man complained that “ ‘the powers of the President amount
to’ ” bringing “ ‘people in and try[ing] to persuade them to
do what they ought to do without persuasion.’ ” C. Rossiter,
The American Presidency 154 (2d rev. ed. 1960). And that
is why scholars have written that the President “is neither
dominant nor powerless” in his relationships with many Gov­
ernment entities, “whether denominated executive or inde­
pendent.” Strauss, The Place of Agencies in Government:
Separation of Powers and the Fourth Branch, 84 Colum.
L. Rev. 573, 583 (1984) (hereinafter Strauss). Those entities
“are all subject to presidential direction in signiﬁcant as­
pects of their functioning, and [are each] able to resist presi­
dential direction in others.” Ibid. (emphasis added).
   Indeed, notwithstanding the majority’s assertion that the
removal authority is “the key” mechanism by which the
President oversees inferior ofﬁcers in the independent agen­
cies, ante, at 501, it appears that no President has ever actu­
ally sought to exercise that power by testing the scope of a
“for cause” provision. See Bruff, Bringing the Independent

=== PAGE 49 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)           525

                     Breyer, J., dissenting

Agencies in From the Cold, 62 Vand. L. Rev. En Banc 63,
68 (2009), online at http://vanderbiltlawreview.org/articles/
2009/11/Bruff-62-Vand-L-Rev-En-Banc-63.pdf (noting that
“Presidents do not test the limits of their power by removing
commissioners . . . ”); Lessig & Sunstein 110–112 (noting that
courts have not had occasion to deﬁne what constitutes
“cause” because Presidents rarely test removal provisions).
   But even if we put all these other matters to the side, we
should still conclude that the “for cause” restriction before
us will not restrict Presidential power signiﬁcantly. For one
thing, the restriction directly limits, not the President’s
power, but the power of an already independent agency.
The Court seems to have forgotten that fact when it iden­
tiﬁes its central constitutional problem: According to the
Court, the President “is powerless to intervene” if he has
determined that the Board members’ “conduct merit[s] re­
moval” because “[t]hat decision is vested instead in other
tenured ofﬁcers—the Commissioners—none of whom is sub­
ject to the President’s direct control.” Ante, at 495–496.
But so long as the President is legitimately foreclosed from
removing the Commissioners except for cause (as the major­
ity assumes), nullifying the Commission’s power to remove
Board members only for cause will not resolve the problem
the Court has identiﬁed: The President will still be “power­
less to intervene” by removing the Board members if the
Commission reasonably decides not to do so.
   In other words, the Court fails to show why two layers of
“for cause” protection—layer 1 insulating the Commissioners
from the President, and layer 2 insulating the Board from
the Commissioners—impose any more serious limitation
upon the President’s powers than one layer. Consider the
four scenarios that might arise:
  1. The President and the Commission both want to keep a
     Board member in ofﬁce. Neither layer is relevant.
  2. The President and the Commission both want to dismiss
     a Board member. Layer 2 stops them both from doing

=== PAGE 50 ===
526   FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
             ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                 Breyer, J., dissenting

      so without cause. The President’s ability to remove
      the Commission (layer 1) is irrelevant, for he and the
      Commission are in agreement.
  3. The President wants to dismiss a Board member, but
      the Commission wants to keep the member. Layer 1
      allows the Commission to make that determination not­
      withstanding the President’s contrary view. Layer 2
      is irrelevant because the Commission does not seek to
      remove the Board member.
  4. The President wants to keep a Board member, but
      the Commission wants to dismiss the Board member.
      Here, layer 2 helps the President, for it hinders the
      Commission’s ability to dismiss a Board member whom
      the President wants to keep in place.
  Thus, the majority’s decision to eliminate only layer 2 ac­
complishes virtually nothing. And that is because a re­
moval restriction’s effect upon Presidential power depends
not on the presence of a “double-layer” of for-cause removal,
as the majority pretends, but rather on the real-world nature
of the President’s relationship with the Commission. If the
President confronts a Commission that seeks to resist his
policy preferences—a distinct possibility when, as here, a
Commission’s membership must reﬂect both political parties,
15 U. S. C. § 78d(a)—the restriction on the Commission’s
ability to remove a Board member is either irrelevant (as
in scenario 3) or may actually help the President (as in sce­
nario 4). And if the President faces a Commission that
seeks to implement his policy preferences, layer 1 is irrele­
vant, for the President and Commission see eye to eye.
  In order to avoid this elementary logic, the Court creates
two alternative scenarios. In the ﬁrst, the Commission and
the President both want to remove a Board member, but
have varying judgments as to whether they have good
“cause” to do so—i. e., the President and the Commission
both conclude that a Board member should be removed, but

=== PAGE 51 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)           527

                     Breyer, J., dissenting

disagree as to whether that conclusion (which they have both
reached) is reasonable. Ante, at 496. In the second, the
President wants to remove a Board member and the Com­
mission disagrees; but, notwithstanding its freedom to make
reasonable decisions independent of the President (afforded
by layer 1), the Commission (while apparently telling the
President that it agrees with him and would like to remove
the Board member) uses layer 2 as an “excuse” to pursue its
actual aims—an excuse which, given layer 1, it does not need.
Ante, at 497, n. 4.
   Both of these circumstances seem unusual. I do not know
if they have ever occurred. But I do not deny their logical
possibility. I simply doubt their importance. And the fact
that, with respect to the President’s power, the double layer
of for-cause removal sometimes might help, sometimes might
hurt, leads me to conclude that its overall effect is at most
indeterminate.
   But once we leave the realm of hypothetical logic and view
the removal provision at issue in the context of the entire
Act, its lack of practical effect becomes readily apparent.
That is because the statute provides the Commission with
full authority and virtually comprehensive control over all of
the Board’s functions. Those who created the Accounting
Board modeled it, in terms of structure and authority, upon
the semiprivate regulatory bodies prevalent in the area of
ﬁnancial regulation, such as the New York Stock Exchange
and other similar self-regulating organizations. See gener­
ally Brief for Former Chairmen of the SEC as Amici Curiae
(hereinafter Brief for Former SEC Chairmen). And those
organizations—which rely on private ﬁnancing and on ofﬁ­
cers drawn from the private sector—exercise rulemaking
and adjudicatory authority that is pervasively controlled by,
and is indeed “entirely derivative” of, the Securities and
Exchange Commission. See National Assn. of Securities
Dealers, Inc. v. SEC, 431 F. 3d 803, 806 (CADC 2005).

=== PAGE 52 ===
528    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer,J.,dissenting

   Adhering to that model, the statute here gives the Ac-
counting Board the power to adopt rules and standards “re-
lating to the preparation of audit reports”; to adjudicate dis-
ciplinary proceedings involving accounting ﬁrms that fail to
follow these rules; to impose sanctions; and to engage in
other related activities, such as conducting inspections of
accounting ﬁrms registered as the law requires and investi-
gations to monitor compliance with the rules and related
legal obligations. See 15 U. S. C. §§ 7211–7216. But, at the
same time:
  • No Accounting Board rule takes effect unless and until
    the Commission approves it, § 7217(b)(2);
  • The Commission may “abrogat[e], delet[e] or ad[d] to”
    any rule or any portion of a rule promulgated by the
    Accounting Board whenever, in the Commission’s view,
    doing so “further[s] the purposes” of the securities and
    accounting-oversight laws, § 7217(b)(5);
  • The Commission may review any sanction the Board im-
    poses and “enhance, modify, cancel, reduce, or require
    the remission of ” that sanction if it ﬁnds the Board’s ac-
    tion not “appropriate,” §§ 7215(e), 7217(c)(3);
  • The Commission may promulgate rules restricting or
    directing the Accounting Board’s conduct of all in-
    spections and investigations, §§ 7211(c)(3), 7214(h),
    7215(b)(1)–(4);
  • The Commission may itself initiate any investigation
    or promulgate any rule within the Accounting Board’s
    purview, § 7202, and may also remove any Accounting
    Board member who has unreasonably “failed to enforce
    compliance with” the relevant “rule[s], or any profes-
    sional standard,” § 7217(d)(3)(C) (emphasis added);
  • The Commission may at any time “relieve the Board
    of any responsibility to enforce compliance with any
    provision” of the Act, the rules, or professional stand-

=== PAGE 53 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)             529

                      Breyer, J., dissenting

    ards if, in the Commission’s view, doing so is in “the
    public interest,” §§ 7217(d)(1)–(2) (emphasis added).
   As these statutory provisions make clear, the Court is sim­
ply wrong when it says that “the Act nowhere gives the
Commission effective power to start, stop, or alter” Board
investigations. Ante, at 504. On the contrary, the Commis­
sion’s control over the Board’s investigatory and legal func­
tions is virtually absolute. Moreover, the Commission has
general supervisory powers over the Accounting Board it­
self: It controls the Board’s budget, §§ 7219(b), (d)(1); it can
assign to the Board any “duties or functions” that it “de­
termines are necessary or appropriate,” § 7211(c)(5); it has
full “oversight and enforcement authority over the Board,”
§ 7217(a), including the authority to inspect the Board’s
activities whenever it believes it “appropriate” to do so,
§ 7217(d)(2) (emphasis added). And it can censure the Board
or its members, as well as remove the members from ofﬁce,
if the members, for example, fail to enforce the Act, violate
any provisions of the Act, or abuse the authority granted
to them under the Act, § 7217(d)(3). Cf. Shurtleff v. United
States, 189 U. S. 311, 314–319 (1903) (holding that removal
authority is not always “restricted to a removal for th[e]
causes” set forth by statute); Bowsher, 478 U. S., at 729 (re­
jecting the “arguable premis[e]” “that the enumeration of
certain speciﬁed causes of removal excludes the possibility
of removal for other causes”). Contra, ante, at 503, n. 7.
See generally Pildes, Putting Power Back Into Separation of
Powers Analysis: Why the SEC-PCAOB Structure is Consti­
tutional, 62 Vand. L. Rev. En Banc 85 (2009), online at http://
vanderbiltlawreview.org /articles /2009/11/Pildes-62-Vand-L­
Rev-En-Banc-85.pdf (explaining further the comprehensive
nature of the Commission’s powers).
   What is left? The Commission’s inability to remove a
Board member whose perfectly reasonable actions cause the
Commission to overrule him with great frequency? What
is the practical likelihood of that occurring, or, if it does, of

=== PAGE 54 ===
530    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

the President’s serious concern about such a matter? Ev­
eryone concedes that the President’s control over the Com­
mission is constitutionally sufﬁcient. See Humphrey’s Ex­
ecutor, 295 U. S. 602; Wiener, 357 U. S. 349; ante, at 483.
And if the President’s control over the Commission is sufﬁ­
cient, and the Commission’s control over the Board is virtu­
ally absolute, then, as a practical matter, the President’s
control over the Board should prove sufﬁcient as well.

                               B
   At the same time, Congress and the President had good
reason for enacting the challenged “for cause” provision.
First and foremost, the Board adjudicates cases. See 15
U. S. C. § 7215. This Court has long recognized the appro­
priateness of using “for cause” provisions to protect the
personal independence of those who even only sometimes
engage in adjudicatory functions. Humphrey’s Executor,
supra, at 623–628; see also Wiener, supra, at 355–356; Mor­
rison, 487 U. S., at 690–691, and n. 30; McAllister v. United
States, 141 U. S. 174, 191–201 (1891) (Field, J., dissenting).
Indeed, as early as 1789 James Madison stated that “there
may be strong reasons why an” executive “ofﬁcer” such as
the Comptroller of the United States “should not hold his
ofﬁce at the pleasure of the Executive branch” if one of his
“principal dut[ies]” “partakes strongly of the judicial charac­
ter.” 1 Annals of Cong. 611–612; cf. ante, at 500, n. 6 (noting
that the statute Congress ultimately enacted limited Presi­
dential control over the Comptroller in a different fashion);
see supra, at 517. The Court, however, all but ignores the
Board’s adjudicatory functions when conducting its analysis.
See, e. g., ante, at 498–499. And when it ﬁnally does address
that central function (in a footnote), it simply asserts that
the Board does not “perform adjudicative . . . functions,”
ante, at 507, n. 10 (emphasis added), an assertion that is incon­
sistent with the terms of the statute. See § 7215(c)(1) (gov­
erning “proceeding[s] by the Board to determine whether a

=== PAGE 55 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)            531

                     Breyer, J., dissenting

registered public accounting ﬁrm, or an associated person
thereof, should be disciplined”).
   Moreover, in addition to their adjudicative functions, the
Accounting Board members supervise, and are themselves,
technical professional experts. See § 7211(e)(1) (requiring
that Board members “have a demonstrated” technical “un­
derstanding of the responsibilities” and “obligations of ac­
countants with respect to the preparation and issuance of
audit reports”). This Court has recognized that the “difﬁ­
culties involved in the preparation of ” sound auditing reports
require the application of “scientiﬁc accounting principles.”
United States v. Anderson, 269 U. S. 422, 440 (1926). And
this Court has recognized the constitutional legitimacy of a
justiﬁcation that rests agency independence upon the need
for technical expertise. See Humphrey’s Executor, supra,
at 624–626; see also Breger & Edles, Established by Practice:
The Theory and Operation of Independent Federal Agen­
cies, 52 Admin. L. Rev. 1111, 1131–1133 (2000) (hereinafter
Breger & Edles) (explaining how the need for administrators
with “technical competence,” “apolitical expertise,” and skill
in “scientiﬁc management” led to original creation of inde­
pendent agencies); J. Landis, The Administrative Process 23
(1938) (similar); Woodrow Wilson, Democracy and Efﬁciency,
87 Atlantic Monthly 289, 299 (1901) (describing need for insu­
lation of experts from political inﬂuences).
   Here, the justiﬁcation for insulating the “technical ex­
perts” on the Board from fear of losing their jobs due to
political inﬂuence is particularly strong. Congress deliber­
ately sought to provide that kind of protection. See, e. g.,
148 Cong. Rec. 12036, 12115, 13352–13355. It did so for good
reason. See ante, at 484 (noting that the Accounting Board
was created in response to “a series of celebrated accounting
debacles”); H. R. Rep. No. 107–414, pp. 18–19 (2002) (same);
Brief for Former SEC Chairmen 8–9. And historically, this
regulatory subject matter—ﬁnancial regulation—has been
thought to exhibit a particular need for independence. See,

=== PAGE 56 ===
532    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

e. g., 51 Cong. Rec. 8857 (1914) (remarks of Sen. Morgan upon
creation of the Federal Trade Commission) (“[I]t is unsafe
for an . . . administrative ofﬁcer representing a great political
party . . . to hold the power of life and death over the great
business interests of this country. . . . That is . . . why I
believe in . . . taking these business matters out of politics”).
And Congress, by, for example, providing the Board with a
revenue stream independent of the congressional appropria­
tions process, § 7219, helped insulate the Board from congres­
sional, as well as other, political inﬂuences. See, e. g., 148
Cong. Rec. 12036 (statement of Sen. Stabenow).
   In sum, Congress and the President could reasonably have
thought it prudent to insulate the adjudicative Board mem­
bers from fear of purely politically based removal. Cf. Civil
Service Comm’n v. Letter Carriers, 413 U. S. 548, 565 (1973)
(“[I]t is not only important that the Government and its em­
ployees in fact avoid practicing political justice, but it is also
critical that they appear to the public to be avoiding it, if
conﬁdence in the system of representative Government is
not to be eroded to a disastrous extent”). And in a world
in which we count on the Federal Government to regulate
matters as complex as, say, nuclear-power production, the
Court’s assertion that we should simply learn to get by
“without being” regulated “by experts” is, at best, unrealis­
tic—at worst, dangerously so. Ante, at 499.

                                C
   Where a “for cause” provision is so unlikely to restrict
Presidential power and so likely to further a legitimate insti­
tutional need, precedent strongly supports its constitutional­
ity. First, in considering a related issue in Nixon v. Admin­
istrator of General Services, 433 U. S. 425 (1977), the Court
made clear that when “determining whether the Act disrupts
the proper balance between the coordinate branches, the
proper inquiry focuses on the extent to which it prevents
the Executive Branch from accomplishing its constitutionally

=== PAGE 57 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)             533

                      Breyer, J., dissenting

assigned functions.” Id., at 443. The Court said the same
in Morrison, where it upheld a restriction on the President’s
removal power. 487 U. S., at 691 (“[T]he real question is
whether the removal restrictions are of such a nature that
they impede the President’s ability to perform his constitu­
tional duty, and the functions of the ofﬁcials in question must
be analyzed in that light”). Here, the removal restriction
may somewhat diminish the Commission’s ability to control
the Board, but it will have little, if any, negative effect in
respect to the President’s ability to control the Board, let
alone to coordinate the Executive Branch. See Part II–A,
supra. Indeed, given Morrison, where the Court upheld a
restriction that signiﬁcantly interfered with the President’s
important historic power to control criminal prosecutions, a
“ ‘purely executive’ ” function, 487 U. S., at 687–689, the con­
stitutionality of the present restriction would seem to fol­
low a fortiori.
   Second, as previously pointed out, this Court has repeat­
edly upheld “for cause” provisions where they restrict the
President’s power to remove an ofﬁcer with adjudicatory re­
sponsibilities. Compare Humphrey’s Executor, 295 U. S., at
623–628; Wiener, 357 U. S., at 355; Schor, 478 U. S., at 854;
Morrison, supra, at 691, n. 30, with ante, at 498–499 (ig­
noring these precedents). And we have also upheld such
restrictions when they relate to ofﬁcials with technical re­
sponsibilities that warrant a degree of special independence.
E. g., Humphrey’s Executor, supra, at 624. The Accounting
Board’s functions involve both kinds of responsibility. And,
accordingly, the Accounting Board’s adjudicatory responsibil­
ities, the technical nature of its job, the need to attract ex­
perts to that job, and the importance of demonstrating the
nonpolitical nature of the job to the public strongly justify a
statute that ensures that Board members need not fear for
their jobs when competently carrying out their tasks, while
still maintaining the Commission as the ultimate authority
over Board policies and actions. See Part II–B, supra.

=== PAGE 58 ===
534     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                   Breyer, J., dissenting

  Third, consider how several cases ﬁt together in a way
that logically compels a holding of constitutionality here. In
United States v. Perkins, 116 U. S. 483, 484 (1886)—which
was reafﬁrmed in Myers, 272 U. S., at 127, and in Morrison,
supra, at 689, n. 27—the Court upheld a removal restriction
limiting the authority of the Secretary of the Navy to re­
move a “cadet-engineer,” whom the Court explicitly deﬁned
as an “inferior ofﬁcer.” The Court said:
        “We have no doubt that when Congress, by law, vests
      the appointment of inferior ofﬁcers in the heads of
      Departments it may limit and restrict the power of
      removal as it deems best for the public interest. The
      constitutional authority in Congress to thus vest the
      appointment implies authority to limit, restrict, and
      regulate the removal by such laws as Congress may
      enact in relation to the ofﬁcers so appointed.” Per­
      kins, supra, at 485 (emphasis added; internal quotation
      marks omitted).

See also Morrison, supra, at 723–724 (Scalia, J., dissenting)
(agreeing that the power to remove an “inferior ofﬁcer” who
is appointed by a department head can be restricted).
Cf. ante, at 510–513 (holding that SEC Commissioners are
“Heads of Departments”).
  In Humphrey’s Executor, the Court held that Congress
may constitutionally limit the President’s authority to re­
move certain principal ofﬁcers, including heads of depart­
ments. 295 U. S., at 627–629. And the Court has consist­
ently recognized the validity of that holding. See Wiener,
supra; United States v. Nixon, 418 U. S. 683, 706 (1974);
Buckley, 424 U. S., at 133–136; Chadha, 462 U. S., at 953,
n. 16; Bowsher, 478 U. S., at 725–726; Morrison, supra, at
686–693; Mistretta v. United States, 488 U. S. 361, 410–411
(1989).

=== PAGE 59 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)           535

                     Breyer, J., dissenting

   And in Freytag, 501 U. S., at 921, Justice Scalia stated
in a concurring opinion written for four Justices, including
Justice Kennedy, that “adjusting the remainder of the
Constitution to compensate for Humphrey’s Executor is a
fruitless endeavor.” In these Justices’ view, the Court
should not create a separate constitutional jurisprudence for
the “independent agencies.” That being so, the law should
treat their heads as it treats other Executive Branch heads
of departments. Consequently, as the Court held in Per­
kins, Congress may constitutionally “limit and restrict” the
Commission’s power to remove those whom they appoint
(e. g., the Accounting Board members).
   Fourth, the Court has said that “[o]ur separation-of-powers
jurisprudence generally focuses on the danger of one branch’s
aggrandizing its power at the expense of another branch.”
Freytag, supra, at 878 (emphasis added); accord, Buckley,
supra, at 129; Schor, supra, at 856; Morrison, 487 U. S., at
686; cf. Bowsher, supra. Indeed, it has added that “the es­
sence of the decision in Myers,” which is the only one of our
cases to have struck down a “for cause” removal restriction,
“was the judgment that the Constitution prevents Congress
from ‘draw[ing] to itself . . . the power to remove.’ ” Mor­
rison, supra, at 686 (quoting Myers, supra, at 161; emphasis
added). Congress here has “drawn” no power to itself to
remove the Board members. It has instead sought to limit
its own power, by, for example, providing the Accounting
Board with a revenue stream independent of the congres­
sional appropriations process. See supra, at 532; see also
Brief for Former SEC Chairmen 16. And this case thereby
falls outside the ambit of the Court’s most serious constitu­
tional concern.
   In sum, the Court’s prior cases impose functional criteria
that are readily met here. Once one goes beyond the
Court’s elementary arithmetical logic (i. e., “one plus one is

=== PAGE 60 ===
536    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

greater than one”) our precedent virtually dictates a holding
that the challenged “for cause” provision is constitutional.

                               D
   We should ask one further question. Even if the “for
cause” provision before us does not itself signiﬁcantly inter­
fere with the President’s authority or aggrandize Congress’
power, is it nonetheless necessary to adopt a bright-line
rule forbidding the provision lest, through a series of such
provisions, each itself upheld as reasonable, Congress
might undercut the President’s central constitutional role?
Cf. Strauss 625–626. The answer to this question is that no
such need has been shown. Moreover, insofar as the Court
seeks to create such a rule, it fails. And in failing it threat­
ens a harm that is far more serious than any imaginable
harm this “for cause” provision might bring about.
   The Court fails to create a bright-line rule because of con­
siderable uncertainty about the scope of its holding—an un­
certainty that the Court’s opinion both reﬂects and gener­
ates. The Court suggests, for example, that its rule may
not apply where an inferior ofﬁcer “perform[s] adjudicative
. . . functions.” Cf. ante, at 507, n. 10. But the Accounting
Board performs adjudicative functions. See supra, at 530–
532. What, then, are we to make of the Court’s potential
exception? And would such an exception apply to an admin­
istrative law judge who also has important administrative
duties beyond pure adjudication? See, e. g., 8 CFR § 1003.9,
34 CFR § 81.4 (2009). The Court elsewhere suggests that
its rule may be limited to removal statutes that provide for
“judicial review of a[n] effort to remove” an ofﬁcial for cause.
Ante, at 502. But we have previously stated that all ofﬁcers
protected by a for-cause removal provision and later subject
to termination are entitled to “notice and [a] hearing” in the
“courts,” as without such review “the appointing power” oth­
erwise “could remove at pleasure or for such cause as [only]
it deemed sufﬁcient.” Reagan v. United States, 182 U. S.

=== PAGE 61 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)             537

                      Breyer, J., dissenting

419, 425 (1901); Shurtleff, 189 U. S., at 314; cf. Humphrey’s
Executor, 295 U. S. 602 (entertaining civil suit challenging
removal). But cf. Bowsher, 478 U. S., at 729. What weight,
then, should be given to this hint of an exception?
   The Court further seems to suggest that its holding may
not apply to inferior ofﬁcers who have a different relation­
ship to their appointing agents than the relationship between
the Commission and the Board. See ante, at 502–503, 506–
507. But the only characteristic of the “relationship” be­
tween the Commission and the Board that the Court appar­
ently deems relevant is that the relationship includes two
layers of for-cause removal. See, e. g., ante, at 504 (“Broad
power over Board functions is not equivalent to the power
to remove Board members”). Why then would any different
relationship that also includes two layers of for-cause re­
moval survive where this one has not? Cf. Part II–A, supra
(describing the Commission’s near absolute control over the
Board). In a word, what differences are relevant? If the
Court means to state that its holding in fact applies only where
Congress has “enacted an unusually high standard” of for-
cause removal—and does not otherwise render two layers
of “ ‘ordinary’ ” for-cause removal unconstitutional—I should
welcome the statement. Ante, at 502–503 (emphasis added);
see also ante, at 505, 506, 496, 503 (underscoring this statute’s
“sharply circumscribed deﬁnition of what constitutes ‘good
cause’ ” and its “rigorous,” “signiﬁcant and unusual [removal]
protections”). But much of the majority’s opinion appears
to avoid so narrow a holding in favor of a broad, basically
mechanical rule—a rule that, as I have said, is divorced from
the context of the case at hand. Compare Parts III–A,
III–B, III–C, ante, with Parts II–A, II–B, II–C, supra. And
such a mechanical rule cannot be cabined simply by saying
that, perhaps, the rule does not apply to instances that, at
least at ﬁrst blush, seem highly similar. A judicial holding
by its very nature is not “a restricted railroad ticket, good

=== PAGE 62 ===
538    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

for” one “day and train only.” Smith v. Allwright, 321 U. S.
649, 669 (1944) (Roberts, J., dissenting).
   The Court begins to reveal the practical problems inherent
in its double for-cause rule when it suggests that its rule
may not apply to “the civil service.” Ante, at 507. The
“civil service” is deﬁned by statute to include “all appointive
positions in . . . the Government of the United States,” ex­
cluding the military, but including all civil “ofﬁcer[s]” up to
and including those who are subject to Senate conﬁrmation.
5 U. S. C. §§ 2101, 2102(a)(1)(B), 2104. The civil service thus
includes many ofﬁcers indistinguishable from the members
of both the Commission and the Accounting Board. Indeed,
as this Court recognized in Myers, the “competitive serv­
ice”—the class within the broader civil service that enjoys
the most robust career protection—“includes a vast major­
ity of all the civil ofﬁcers” in the United States. 272 U. S.,
at 173 (emphasis added); 5 U. S. C. § 2102(c).
   But even if I assume that the majority categorically ex­
cludes the competitive service from the scope of its new rule,
cf. ante, at 506 (leaving this question open), the exclusion
would be insufﬁcient. This is because the Court’s “double
for-cause” rule applies to appointees who are “inferior of­
ﬁcer[s].” Ante, at 484. And who are they? Courts and
scholars have struggled for more than a century to deﬁne the
constitutional term “inferior ofﬁcers,” without much success.
See 2 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution § 1536,
pp. 397–398 (3d ed. 1858) (“[T]here does not seem to have
been any exact line drawn, who are and who are not to be
deemed inferior ofﬁcers, in the sense of the constitution”);
Edmond v. United States, 520 U. S. 651, 661 (1997) (“Our
cases have not set forth an exclusive criterion for [deﬁning]
inferior ofﬁcers”); Memorandum from Steven G. Bradbury,
Acting Assistant Attorney General, Ofﬁce of Legal Counsel,
to the General Counsels of the Executive Branch: Ofﬁcers of
the United States Within the Meaning of the Appointments
Clause, p. 3 (Apr. 16, 2007) (hereinafter OLC Memo), online

=== PAGE 63 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)           539

                     Breyer, J., dissenting

at http://www.justice.gov/olc/2007/appointmentsclausev10.pdf
(“[T]he Supreme Court has not articulated the precise scope
and application of the [Inferior Ofﬁcer] Clause’s require­
ments”); Konecke, The Appointments Clause and Military
Judges: Inferior Appointment to a Principal Ofﬁce, 5 Seton
Hall Const. L. J. 489, 492 (1995) (same); Burkoff, Appoint­
ment and Removal Under the Federal Constitution: The Im­
pact of Buckley v. Valeo, 22 Wayne L. Rev. 1335, 1347, 1364
(1976) (describing our early precedent as “circular” and our
later law as “not particularly useful”). The Court does not
clarify the concept. But without deﬁning who is an inferior
ofﬁcer, to whom the majority’s new rule applies, we cannot
know the scope or the coherence of the legal rule that the
Court creates. I understand the virtues of a common-law
case-by-case approach. But here that kind of approach
(when applied without more speciﬁcity than I can ﬁnd in the
Court’s opinion) threatens serious harm.
   The problem is not simply that the term “inferior ofﬁcer”
is indeﬁnite but also that efforts to deﬁne it inevitably con­
clude that the term’s sweep is unusually broad. Consider
the Court’s deﬁnitions: Inferior ofﬁcers are, inter alia,
(1) those charged with “the administration and enforcement
of the public law,” Buckley, 424 U. S., at 139; (2) those
granted “signiﬁcant authority,” id., at 126; ante, at 506;
(3) those with “responsibility for conducting civil litigation
in the courts of the United States,” 424 U. S., at 140; and
(4) those “who can be said to hold an ofﬁce,” United States
v. Germaine, 99 U. S. 508, 510 (1879), that has been created
either by “regulations” or by “statute,” United States v.
Mouat, 124 U. S. 303, 307–308 (1888).
   Consider the deﬁnitional conclusion that the Department
of Justice more recently reached: An “inferior ofﬁcer” is any­
one who holds a “continuing” position and who is “invested
by legal authority with a portion of the sovereign powers of
the federal Government,” including, inter alia, the power to
“arrest criminals,” “seize persons or property,” “issue regu­

=== PAGE 64 ===
540    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

lations,” “issue . . . authoritative legal opinions,” “conduc[t]
civil litigation,” “collec[t] revenue,” represent “the United
States to foreign nations,” “command” military force, or
enter into “contracts” on behalf “of the nation.” OLC Memo
1, 4, 12–13, 15–16 (internal quotation marks omitted; empha­
sis added).
   And consider the fact that those whom this Court has held
to be “ofﬁcers” include: (1) a district court clerk, Hennen, 13
Pet., at 258; (2) “thousands of clerks in the Departments of
the Treasury, Interior, and the othe[r]” departments, Ger­
maine, supra, at 511, who are responsible for “the records,
books, and papers appertaining to the ofﬁce,” Hennen, supra,
at 259; (3) a clerk to “the assistant treasurer” stationed “at
Boston,” United States v. Hartwell, 6 Wall. 385, 392 (1868);
(4 & 5) an “assistant-surgeon” and a “cadet-engineer” ap­
pointed by the Secretary of the Navy, United States v.
Moore, 95 U. S. 760, 762 (1878); Perkins, 116 U. S., at 484;
(6) election monitors, Ex parte Siebold, 100 U. S. 371, 397–
399 (1880); (7) United States attorneys, Myers, supra, at 159;
(8) federal marshals, Siebold, supra, at 397; Morrison, 487
U. S., at 676; (9) military judges, Weiss v. United States, 510
U. S. 163, 170 (1994); (10) judges in Article I courts, Freytag,
501 U. S., at 880–881; and (11) the general counsel of the De­
partment of Transportation, Edmond, supra. Individual
Members of the Court would add to the list the Federal Com­
munication Commission’s managing director, the Federal
Trade Commission’s “secretary,” the general counsel of the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and more gener­
ally, bureau chiefs, general counsels, and administrative law
judges, see Freytag, supra, at 918–920 (Scalia, J., concur­
ring in part and concurring in judgment), as well as “ordi­
nary commissioned military ofﬁcers,” Weiss, supra, at 182
(Souter, J., concurring).
   Reading the criteria above as stringently as possible, I still
see no way to avoid sweeping hundreds, perhaps thousands
of high-level Government ofﬁcials within the scope of the

=== PAGE 65 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)             541

                      Breyer, J., dissenting

Court’s holding, putting their job security and their adminis­
trative actions and decisions constitutionally at risk. To
make even a conservative estimate, one would have to begin
by listing federal departments, ofﬁces, bureaus, and other
agencies whose heads are by statute removable only “for
cause.” I have found 48 such agencies, which I have listed
in Appendix A, infra. Then it would be necessary to iden­
tify the senior ofﬁcials in those agencies ( just below the top)
who themselves are removable only “for cause.” I have
identiﬁed 573 such high-ranking ofﬁcials, whom I have listed
in Appendix B, infra. They include most of the leader­
ship of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (including that
agency’s executive director as well as the directors of its Of­
ﬁce of Nuclear Reactor Regulation and Ofﬁce of Enforce­
ment), virtually all of the leadership of the Social Security
Administration, the executive directors of the Federal En­
ergy Regulatory Commission and the Federal Trade Com­
mission, as well as the general counsels of the Chemical
Safety Board, the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review
Commission, and the National Mediation Board.
   This list is a conservative estimate because it consists only
of career appointees in the Senior Executive Service (SES),
see 5 U. S. C. §§ 2101a, 3132(a)(2), a group of high-ranking
ofﬁcials distinct from the “competitive service,” see § 2102(a)
(1)(C), who “serve in the key positions just below the top
Presidential appointees,” Ofﬁce of Personnel Management,
About the SES, online at http://www.opm.gov/ses/about_ses/
index.asp; and who are, without exception, subject to “re­
moval” only for cause, §§ 7542–7543; see also § 2302(a)(2)
(substantially limiting conditions under which “a career ap­
pointee position in the Senior Executive Service” may be
“transfer[red], or reassign[ed]”). SES ofﬁcials include, for
example, the Director of the Bureau of Prisons, the Director
of the National Drug Intelligence Center, and the Director of
the Ofﬁce of International Monetary Policy in the Treasury
Department. See Senate Committee on Homeland Security

=== PAGE 66 ===
542    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

and Governmental Affairs, United States Government Policy
and Supporting Positions 99, 103, 129 (2008) (hereinafter
Plum Book). And by virtually any deﬁnition, essentially
all SES ofﬁcials qualify as “inferior ofﬁcers,” for their du­
ties, as deﬁned by statute, require them to “direc[t] the
work of an organizational unit,” carry out high-level manage­
rial functions, or “otherwise exercis[e] important policy­
making, policy-determining, or other executive functions.”
§ 3132(a)(2) (emphasis added). Cf. ante, at 484 (describing
an “inferior ofﬁcer” as someone who “determines the policy
and enforces the laws of the United States”); ante, at 506–507
(acknowledging that career SES appointees in independent
agencies may be rendered unconstitutional in future cases).
Is the SES exempt from today’s rule or is it not? The
Court, after listing reasons why the SES may be different,
simply says that it will not “address” the matter. Ante,
at 507. Perhaps it does not do so because it cannot do so
without revealing the difﬁculty of distinguishing the SES
from the Accounting Board and thereby also revealing the
inherent instability of the legal rule it creates.
   The potential list of those whom today’s decision affects is
yet larger. As Justice Scalia has observed, administra­
tive law judges (ALJs) “are all executive ofﬁcers.” Freytag,
501 U. S., at 910 (opinion concurring in part and concurring
in judgment) (emphasis deleted); see also, e. g., id., at 881
(majority opinion) (“[A] [tax-court] special trial judge is an
‘inferior Ofﬁcer’ ”); Edmond, 520 U. S., at 654 (“[M]ilitary
trial and appellate judges are [inferior] ofﬁcers”). But
cf. ante, at 507, n. 10. And ALJs are each removable “only
for good cause established and determined by the Merit Sys­
tems Protection Board,” 5 U. S. C. §§ 7521(a)–(b). But the
members of the Merit Systems Protection Board are them­
selves protected from removal by the President absent good
cause. § 1202(d).
   My research reﬂects that the Federal Government relies
on 1,584 ALJs to adjudicate administrative matters in over

=== PAGE 67 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)            543

                     Breyer, J., dissenting

25 agencies. See Appendix C, infra; see also Memorandum
of Juanita Love, Ofﬁce of Personnel Management, to Su­
preme Court Library (May 28, 2010) (available in Clerk of
Court’s case ﬁle). These ALJs adjudicate Social Security
beneﬁts, employment disputes, and other matters highly im­
portant to individuals. Does every losing party before an
ALJ now have grounds to appeal on the basis that the decision
entered against him is unconstitutional? Cf. ante, at 507,
n. 10 (“[O]ur holding also does not address” this question).
   And what about the military? Commissioned military of­
ﬁcers “are ‘inferior ofﬁcers.’ ” Weiss, 510 U. S., at 182 (Sou­
ter, J., concurring); id., at 169–170 (majority opinion). There
are over 210,000 active-duty commissioned ofﬁcers currently
serving in the Armed Forces. See Dept. of Defense, Active
Duty Military Personnel by Rank (Apr. 30, 2010), online at
http://siadapp.dmdc.osd.mil/personnel/MILITARY/rg1004.pdf.
Numerous statutory provisions provide that such ofﬁcers
may not be removed from ofﬁce except for cause (at least
in peacetime). See, e. g., 10 U. S. C. §§ 629–632, 804, 1161,
1181–1185. And such ofﬁcers can generally be so removed
only by other commissioned ofﬁcers, see §§ 612, 825, 1187,
who themselves enjoy the same career protections.
   The majority might simply say that the military is differ­
ent. But it will have to explain how it is different. It is
difﬁcult to see why the Constitution would provide a Presi­
dent who is the military’s “commander-in-chief,” Art. II, § 2,
cl. 1, with less authority to remove “inferior” military “ofﬁ­
cers” than to remove comparable civil ofﬁcials. See Bar­
ron & Lederman, The Commander in Chief at the Lowest
Ebb—A Constitutional History, 121 Harv. L. Rev. 941, 1102–
1106 (2008) (describing President’s “superintendence prerog­
ative” over the military). Cf. ante, at 507 (not “expressing
any view whatever” as to whether military ofﬁcers’ author­
ity is now unconstitutional).
   The majority sees “no reason . . . to address whether” any
of “these positions,” “or any others,” might be deemed un­

=== PAGE 68 ===
544    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

constitutional under its new rule, preferring instead to leave
these matters for a future case. Ante, at 507. But what is
to happen in the meantime? Is the work of all these various
ofﬁcials to be put on hold while the courts of appeals deter­
mine whether today’s ruling applies to them? Will Con­
gress have to act to remove the “for cause” provisions?
Cf. Buckley, 424 U. S., at 142–143. Can the President then
restore them via executive order? And, still, what about
the military? A clearer line would help avoid these practi­
cal difﬁculties.
   The majority asserts that its opinion will not affect the
Government’s ability to function while these many questions
are litigated in the lower courts because the Court’s holding
concerns only “the conditions under which th[e]se ofﬁcers
might someday be removed.” Ante, at 508. But this case
was not brought by federal ofﬁcials challenging their poten­
tial removal. It was brought by private individuals who
were subject to regulation “ ‘here-and-now’ ” and who “object
to the” very “existence” of the regulators themselves.
Ante, at 513, 490 (emphasis added). And those private indi­
viduals have prevailed. Thus, any person similarly regu­
lated by a federal ofﬁcial who is potentially subject to the
Court’s amorphous new rule will be able to bring an “ ‘im­
plied private right of action directly under the Constitution’ ”
“seeking . . . a declaratory judgment that” the ofﬁcial’s ac­
tions are “unconstitutional and an injunction preventing the”
ofﬁcial “from exercising [his] powers.” Ante, at 491, n. 2,
487; cf., e. g., Legal Services Corporation v. Velazquez, 531
U. S. 533, 546 (2001) (afﬁrming grant of preliminary injunc­
tion to cure, inter alia, a separation-of-powers violation);
Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co., 343 U. S. 579 (same). Such
a plaintiff need not even ﬁrst exhaust his administrative rem­
edies. Ante, at 489–491.
   Nor is it clear that courts will always be able to cure such
a constitutional defect merely by severing an offending re­
moval provision. For a court’s “ability to devise [such] a ju­

=== PAGE 69 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)             545

                      Breyer, J., dissenting

dicial remedy . . . often depends on how clearly” the “back­
ground constitutional rules at issue” have been “articulated”;
severance will be unavailable “in a murky constitutional con­
text,” which is precisely the context that the Court’s new
rule creates. Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of Northern
New Eng., 546 U. S. 320, 329, 330 (2006). Moreover, “the
touchstone” of the severability analysis “is legislative in­
tent,” id., at 330, and Congress has repeatedly expressed its
judgment “over the last century that it is in the best interest
of the country, indeed essential, that federal service should
depend upon meritorious performance rather than political
service,” Civil Service Comm’n, 413 U. S., at 557; see also
Bush v. Lucas, 462 U. S. 367, 380–388 (1983) (describing the
history of “[c]ongressional attention to the problem of politi­
cally motivated removals”). And so it may well be that
courts called upon to resolve the many questions the majori­
ty’s opinion raises will not only apply the Court’s new rule
to its logical conclusion, but will also determine that the only
available remedy to certain double for-cause problems is to
invalidate entire agencies.
   Thus, notwithstanding the majority’s assertions to the con­
trary, the potential consequences of today’s holding are wor­
rying. The upshot, I believe, is a legal dilemma. To in­
terpret the Court’s decision as applicable only in a few
circumstances will make the rule less harmful but arbitrary.
To interpret the rule more broadly will make the rule more
rational, but destructive.
                               III
  One last question: How can the Court simply assume with­
out deciding that the SEC Commissioners themselves are
removable only “for cause”? See ante, at 487 (“[W]e decide
the case with th[e] understanding” “that the Commissioners
cannot themselves be removed by the President except” for
cause (emphasis added)). Unless the Commissioners them­
selves are in fact protected by a “for cause” requirement,
the Accounting Board statute, on the Court’s own reasoning,

=== PAGE 70 ===
546    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

is not constitutionally defective. I am not aware of any
other instance in which the Court has similarly (on its own
or through stipulation) created a constitutional defect in a
statute and then relied on that defect to strike a statute
down as unconstitutional. Cf. Alabama v. North Carolina,
560 U. S. 330, 352 (2010) (opinion for the Court by Scalia,
J.) (“We do not—we cannot—add provisions to a federal stat­
ute . . . especially [if] . . . separation-of-powers concerns . . .
would [thereby] arise”); The Anaconda v. American Sugar
Reﬁning Co., 322 U. S. 42, 46 (1944) (describing parties’ in­
ability to “stipulate away” what “the legislation declares”).
   It is certainly not obvious that the SEC Commissioners
enjoy “for cause” protection. Unlike the statutes establish­
ing the 48 federal agencies listed in Appendix A, infra, the
statute that established the Commission says nothing about
removal. It is silent on the question. As far as its text is
concerned, the President’s authority to remove the Commis­
sioners is no different from his authority to remove the Sec­
retary of State or the Attorney General. See Shurtleff, 189
U. S., at 315 (“To take away th[e] power of removal . . . would
require very clear and explicit language. It should not be
held to be taken away by mere inference or implication”); see
also Memorandum from David J. Barron, Acting Assistant
Attorney General, Ofﬁce of Legal Counsel, to the Principal
Deputy Counsel to the President: Removability of the Fed­
eral Coordinator for Alaska Natural Gas Transportation
Projects, p. 2 (Oct. 23, 2009), online at http://justice.gov/olc/
2009/gas-transportproject.pdf (“[Where] Congress did not
explicitly provide tenure protection . . . the President, con­
sistent with . . . settled principles, may remove . . . without
cause”); The Constitutional Separation of Powers Between
the President and Congress, 20 Op. Legal Counsel 124, 170
(1996) (same).
   Nor is the absence of a “for cause” provision in the statute
that created the Commission likely to have been inadvertent.
Congress created the Commission during the 9-year period
after this Court decided Myers, and thereby cast serious

=== PAGE 71 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)            547

                     Breyer, J., dissenting

doubt on the constitutionality of all “for cause” removal pro­
visions, but before it decided Humphrey’s Executor, which
removed any doubt in respect to the constitutionality of mak­
ing commissioners of independent agencies removable only
for cause. In other words, Congress created the SEC at a
time when, under this Court’s precedents, it would have been
unconstitutional to make the Commissioners removable
only for cause. And, during that 9-year period, Congress
created at least three major federal agencies without making
any of their ofﬁcers removable for cause. See 48 Stat. 885,
15 U. S. C. § 78d (SEC); 48 Stat. 1066, 47 U. S. C. § 154 (Fed­
eral Communications Commission); 46 Stat. 797 (Federal
Power Commission) (re-formed post-Humphrey’s Executor
as the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission with “for
cause” protection, 91 Stat. 582, 42 U. S. C. § 7171). By way
of contrast, only one month after Humphrey’s Executor was
decided, Congress returned to its pre-Myers practice of in­
cluding such provisions in statutes creating independent
commissions. See § 3, 49 Stat. 451, 29 U. S. C. § 153 (estab­
lishing National Labor Relations Board with an explicit
removal limitation).
   The fact that Congress did not make the SEC Commission­
ers removable “for cause” does not mean it intended to
create a dependent, rather than an independent agency.
Agency independence is a function of several different fac­
tors, of which “for cause” protection is only one. Those fac­
tors include, inter alia, an agency’s separate (rather than
presidentially dependent) budgeting authority, its separate
litigating authority, its composition as a multimember bipar­
tisan board, the use of the word “independent” in its author­
izing statute, and, above all, a political environment, reﬂect­
ing tradition and function, that would impose a heavy
political cost upon any President who tried to remove a
commissioner of the agency without cause. See generally
Breger & Edles 1135–1155.
   The absence of a “for cause” provision is thus not fatal to
agency independence. Indeed, a “Congressional Research

=== PAGE 72 ===
548    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                  Breyer, J., dissenting

Service ofﬁcial suggests that there are at least 13 ‘independ­
ent’ agencies without a removal provision in their statutes.”
Id., at 1143, n. 161 (emphasis added) (citing congressional tes­
timony). But it does draw the majority’s rule into further
confusion. For not only are we left without a deﬁnition of
an “inferior ofﬁcer,” but we are also left to guess which de­
partment heads will be deemed by the majority to be subject
to for-cause removal notwithstanding statutes containing no
such provision. If any agency deemed “independent” will
be similarly treated, the scope of the majority’s holding is
even broader still. See Appendix D, infra (listing agencies
potentially affected).
   The Court then, by assumption, reads into the statute
books a “for cause removal” phrase that does not appear in
the relevant statute and which Congress probably did not
intend to write. And it does so in order to strike down, not
to uphold, another statute. This is not a statutory construc­
tion that seeks to avoid a constitutional question, but its op­
posite. See Ashwander v. TVA, 297 U. S. 288, 347 (1936)
(Brandeis, J., concurring) (“It is not the habit of the Court to
decide questions of a constitutional nature unless absolutely
necessary to a decision of the case” (internal quotation marks
omitted)); NLRB v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago, 440 U. S.
490, 500 (1979) (“[A]n Act of Congress ought not be construed
to violate the Constitution if any other possible construction
remains available”).
   I do not need to decide whether the Commissioners are in
fact removable only “for cause” because I would uphold the
Accounting Board’s removal provision as constitutional re­
gardless. But were that not so, a determination that the
silent SEC statute means no more than it says would prop­
erly avoid the determination of unconstitutionality that the
Court now makes.
                          *     *     *
  In my view the Court’s decision is wrong—very wrong.
As Parts II–A, II–B, and II–C of this opinion make clear, if

=== PAGE 73 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)             549

                Appendix A to opinion of Breyer, J.

the Court were to look to the proper functional and contex­
tual considerations, it would ﬁnd the Accounting Board pro­
vision constitutional. As Part II–D shows, insofar as the
Court instead tries to create a bright-line rule, it fails to do
so. Its rule of decision is both imprecise and overly broad.
In light of the present imprecision, it must either narrow
its rule arbitrarily, leaving it to apply virtually alone to the
Accounting Board, or it will have to leave in place a broader
rule of decision applicable to many other “inferior ofﬁcers” as
well. In doing the latter, it will undermine the President’s
authority. And it will create an obstacle, indeed pose a seri­
ous threat, to the proper functioning of that workable Gov­
ernment that the Constitution seeks to create—in provisions
this Court is sworn to uphold.
   With respect I dissent.

                        APPENDIXES
                            A
   There are 24 stand-alone federal agencies (i. e., “depart­
ments”) whose heads are, by statute, removable by the Presi­
dent only “for cause.” Moreover, there are at least 24
additional ofﬁces, boards, or bureaus situated within de­
partments that are similarly subject, by statute, to for-
cause removal provisions. The chart below ﬁrst lists the 24
departments and then lists the 24 additional ofﬁces, boards,
and bureaus. I have highlighted those instances in which a
“for-cause” ofﬁce is situated within a “for-cause” depart­
ment—i. e., instances of “double for-cause” removal that are
essentially indistinguishable from this case (with the notable
exception that the Accounting Board may not be statutorily
subject to two layers of for-cause removal, cf. Part III,
supra). This list does not include instances of “double for-
cause” removal that arise in Article I courts, although such in­
stances might also be affected by the majority’s holding,
cf. ante, at 507, n. 10. Compare 48 U. S. C. §§ 1424(a), 1614(a),
with 28 U. S. C. §§ 631(a), (i), and 18 U. S. C. §§ 23, 3602(a).

=== PAGE 74 ===
550      FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
                ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
               Appendix A to opinion of Breyer, J.

           Department               Statutory Removal Provision
                            “Any member of the Board, including the
                            Chairperson, may be removed for inefﬁ­
 1    Chemical Safety Board
                            ciency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in
                            ofﬁce.” 42 U. S. C. § 7412(r)(6)(B)
                               “The President may remove a member of
       Commission on Civil     the Commission only for neglect of duty
 2
            Rights             or malfeasance in ofﬁce.” 42 U. S. C.
                               § 1975(e)
                               “Any member of the Commission may be
        Consumer Product       removed by the President for neglect of
 3
        Safety Commission      duty or malfeasance in ofﬁce but for no
                               other cause.” 15 U. S. C. § 2053(a)
                            “Members shall hold ofﬁce for a term of 5
                            years and may be removed by the Presi­
         Federal Energy
 4                          dent only for inefﬁciency, neglect of duty,
      Regulatory Commission
                            or malfeasance in ofﬁce.” 42 U. S. C.
                            § 7171(b)(1)
                              “Members of the Authority shall be ap­
                              pointed by the President by and with the
                              advice and consent of the Senate, and may
      Federal Labor Relations
 5                            be removed by the President only upon
             Authority
                              notice and hearing and only for inefﬁ­
                              ciency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in
                              ofﬁce.” 5 U. S. C. § 7104(b)
                               “The President may remove a Com­
         Federal Maritime      missioner for inefﬁciency, neglect of duty,
 6
           Commission          or malfeasance in ofﬁce.” 46 U. S. C.
                               § 301(b)(3)
                           “Any member of the Commission may be
   Federal Mine Safety and
                           removed by the President for inefﬁciency,
 7     Health Review
                           neglect of duty, or malfeasance in ofﬁce.”
        Commission
                           30 U. S. C. § 823(b)(1)
                            “[E]ach member shall hold ofﬁce for a
                            term of fourteen years from the expiration
 8    Federal Reserve Board of the term of his predecessor, unless
                            sooner removed for cause by the Presi­
                            dent.” 12 U. S. C. § 242

=== PAGE 75 ===
                     Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                     551

                 Appendix A to opinion of Breyer, J.

          Department              Statutory Removal Provision
                             “Any Commissioner may be removed by
         Federal Trade       the President for inefﬁciency, neglect
9
          Commission         of duty, or malfeasance in ofﬁce.” 15
                             U. S. C. § 41
                          “Any appointed member may be removed
     Independent Medicare by the President for neglect of duty or
10
        Advisory Board    malfeasance in ofﬁce, but for no other
                          cause.” 124 Stat. 504
                             “Any member may be removed by the
         Merit Systems       President only for inefﬁciency, neglect of
11
        Protection Board     duty, or malfeasance in ofﬁce.” 5 U. S. C.
                             § 1202(d)
                             “Any member of the Board may be re­
                             moved by the President, upon notice and
        National Labor
12                           hearing, for neglect of duty or malfeasance
        Relations Board
                             in ofﬁce, but for no other cause.” 29
                             U. S. C. § 153(a)
                             “A member of the Board may be removed
                             by the President for inefﬁciency, neglect
       National Mediation
13                           of duty, malfeasance in ofﬁce, or ineligibil­
             Board
                             ity, but for no other cause.” 45 U. S. C.
                             § 154
                             “The President may remove a member for
     National Transportation
14                           inefﬁciency, neglect of duty, or malfea­
          Safety Board
                             sance in ofﬁce.” 49 U. S. C. § 1111(c)
                             “Any member of the Commission may be
       Nuclear Regulatory    removed by the President for inefﬁciency,
15
          Commission         neglect of duty, or malfeasance in ofﬁce.”
                             42 U. S. C. § 5841(e)
                           “A member of the Commission may be re­
   Occupational Safety and
                           moved by the President for inefﬁciency,
16     Health Review
                           neglect of duty, or malfeasance in ofﬁce.”
        Commission
                           29 U. S. C. § 661(b)
                            “The Special Counsel may be removed by
                            the President only for inefﬁciency, ne­
17 Ofﬁce of Special Counsel
                            glect of duty, or malfeasance in ofﬁce.” 5
                            U. S. C. § 1211(b)

=== PAGE 76 ===
552     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
              Appendix A to opinion of Breyer, J.

           Department               Statutory Removal Provision
                               “The Commissioners shall be chosen solely
                               on the basis of their technical qualiﬁca­
                               tions, professional standing, and demon­
        Postal Regulatory
 18                            strated expertise in economics, account­
           Commission
                               ing, law, or public administration, and may
                               be removed by the President only for
                               cause.” 39 U. S. C. § 502(a)
                               “The exercise of the power of the Postal
                               Service shall be directed by a Board of
                               Governors composed of 11 members . . . .
 19      Postal Service*       The Governors shall not be representa­
                               tives of speciﬁc interests using the Postal
                               Service, and may be removed only for
                               cause.” 39 U. S. C. § 202
                               “[The] Commissioner may be removed
          Social Security      from ofﬁce only pursuant to a ﬁnding by
 20
          Administration       the President of neglect of duty or malfea­
                               sance in ofﬁce.” 42 U. S. C. § 902(a)(3)
                              “A member of the Board appointed under
                              subsection (b)(5) . . . may be removed by
                              the President . . . in consultation with the
      United States Institute
 21                           Board, for conviction of a felony, malfea­
            of Peace*
                              sance in ofﬁce, persistent neglect of du­
                              ties, or inability to discharge duties.” 22
                              U. S. C. § 4605(f)
                               “The Chair, Vice Chairs, and members of
                               the Commission shall be subject to re­
          United States
                               moval from the Commission by the Presi­
 22        Sentencing
                               dent only for neglect of duty or malfea­
           Commission
                               sance in ofﬁce or for other good cause
                               shown.” 28 U. S. C. § 991(a)
                               “A member of the Board may be removed
                               by a vote of seven members for malfea­
          Legal Services       sance in ofﬁce or for persistent neglect of
 23
           Corporation*        or inability to discharge duties, or for of­
                               fenses involving moral turpitude, and for
                               no other cause.” 42 U. S. C. § 2996c(e)


  *See Lebron v. National Railroad Passenger Corporation, 513 U. S.
374 (1995).

=== PAGE 77 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                    553

                   Appendix A to opinion of Breyer, J.

           Department                Statutory Removal Provision
                               “A member of the Board may be removed
                               by a vote of seven members for malfea­
                               sance in ofﬁce, persistent neglect of, or in­
 24   State Justice Institute*
                               ability to discharge duties, or for any of­
                               fense involving moral turpitude, but for no
                               other cause.” 42 U. S. C. § 10703(h)
          Ofﬁce Within
                                      Statutory Removal Provision
          Department
                                “The Division shall be headed by a Direc­
                                tor, appointed by the Secretary from
          Department of         among persons who have substantial ex­
           Agriculture:         perience in practicing administrative
 25
         National Appeals       law. . . . The Director shall not be subject
             Division           to removal during the term of ofﬁce, ex­
                                cept for cause established in accordance
                                with law.” 7 U. S. C. §§ 6992(b)(1)–(2)
        Department of           “The Secretary may remove for cause any
          Agriculture:          member of a Council required to be ap­
 26
       Regional Fishery         pointed by the Secretary . . . .” 16
      Management Councils       U. S. C. § 1852(b)(6)
         Department of
                                “The Secretary of Commerce may remove
           Commerce:
 27                             any member of the board [of the Corpora­
      Corporation for Travel
                                tion] for good cause.” 124 Stat. 57
           Promotion†
                           “The Chief of Navy Reserve is appointed
                           for a term determined by the Chief of
    Department of Defense:
 28                        Naval Operations, normally four years,
    Ofﬁce of Navy Reserve
                           but may be removed for cause at any
                           time.” 10 U. S. C. § 5143(c)(1)
                           “The Commander, Marine Forces Re­
                           serve, is appointed for a term determined
    Department of Defense:
                           by the Commandant of the Marine Corps,
 29 Ofﬁce of Marine Forces
                           normally four years, but may be removed
           Reserve
                           for cause at any time.” 10 U. S. C.
                           § 5144(c)(1)


  *See Lebron v. National Railroad Passenger Corporation, 513 U. S.
374 (1995).
  †See Lebron, supra.

=== PAGE 78 ===
554     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
              Appendix A to opinion of Breyer, J.

          Ofﬁce Within
                                     Statutory Removal Provision
          Department
                           “The Chief of Air Force Reserve is ap-
    Department of Defense:
                           pointed for a period of four years, but may
 30   Ofﬁce of Air Force
                           be removed for cause at any time.” 10
           Reserve
                           U. S. C. § 8038(c)(1)
                           “[A]n ofﬁcer appointed as Director of the
    Department of Defense: Joint Staff of the National Guard Bureau
 31    Joint Staff of the  serves for a term of four years, but may
    National Guard Bureau be removed from ofﬁce at any time for
                           cause.” 10 U. S. C. § 10505(a)(3)(A)
                           “A member of the Board may be removed
                           by the Secretary of Defense only for
    Department of Defense:
 32                        misconduct or failure to perform func-
      Board of Actuaries
                           tions vested in the Board.” 10 U. S. C.
                           § 183(b)(3) (2006 ed., Supp. IV)
                           “A member of the Board may be removed
    Department of Defense:
                           by the Secretary of Defense for miscon-
      Medicare-Eligible
 33                        duct or failure to perform functions
     Retiree Health Care
                           vested in the Board, and for no other rea-
      Board of Actuaries
                           son.” 10 U. S. C. § 1114(a)(2)(A)
         Department of
                               “The Chief Operating Ofﬁcer may be re-
           Education:
                               moved by . . . the President; or . . . the
       Performance-Based
                               Secretary, for misconduct or failure to
34     Organization for the
                               meet performance goals set forth in the
       Delivery of Federal
                               performance agreement in paragraph (4).”
        Student Financial
                               20 U. S. C. § 1018(d)(3)
           Assistance
                            “The Chairperson [of the FLRA, who also
    Federal Labor Relations
                            chairs the Board] may remove any other
          Authority:
                            Board member . . . for corruption, neglect
 35 Foreign Service Labor
                            of duty, malfeasance, or demonstrated inca­
     Relations Board (see
                            pacity to perform his or her functions . . . .”
         supra, row 5)
                            22 U. S. C. § 4106(e)
                               “Members of the Civilian Board shall be
        General Services
                               subject to removal in the same manner as
        Administration:
                               administrative law judges, [i. e., ‘only for
 36     Civilian Board of
                               good cause established and determined by
      Contract Appeals (see
                               the Merit Systems Protection Board.’]”
         supra, row 11)
                               41 U. S. C. § 438(b)(2) (emphasis added)

=== PAGE 79 ===
                     Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                   555

                Appendix A to opinion of Breyer, J.

        Ofﬁce Within
                                  Statutory Removal Provision
        Department
     Department of Health
     and Human Services:
                             “No member shall be removed, except for
37    National Advisory
                             cause.” 42 U. S. C. § 254j(b)
      Council on National
     Health Service Corps
     Department of Health
     and Human Services:
                             “The Chief Actuary may be removed only
38   Medicare & Medicaid
                             for cause.” 42 U. S. C. § 1317(b)(1)
      Ofﬁce of the Chief
           Actuary
        Department of
                             “An ofﬁcer may be removed from the posi­
      Homeland Security:
39                           tion of Director for cause at any time.”
      Ofﬁce of the Coast
                             14 U. S. C. § 53(c)(1)
        Guard Reserve
                          “A Commissioner may only be removed
                          from ofﬁce before the expiration of the
     Department of the
                          term of ofﬁce of the member by the Presi­
          Interior:
40                        dent (or, in the case of associate member,
   National Indian Gaming
                          by the Secretary) for neglect of duty, or
        Commission
                          malfeasance in ofﬁce, or for other good
                          cause shown.” 25 U. S. C. § 2704(b)(6)
                             “The Librarian of Congress may sanction
                             or remove a Copyright Royalty Judge for
     Library of Congress:    violation of the standards of conduct
41    Copyright Royalty      adopted under subsection (h), misconduct,
         Judgeships          neglect of duty, or any disqualifying phys­
                             ical or mental disability. ” 17 U. S. C.
                             § 802(i)
                             “The Inspector General may at any time
        Postal Service:
                             be removed upon the written concurrence
42     Inspector General
                             of at least 7 Governors, but only for
      (see supra, row 19)
                             cause.” 39 U. S. C. § 202(e)(3)
   Securities and Exchange
         Commission:       “A member of the Board may be removed
43     Public Company      by the Commission from ofﬁce . . . for good
    Accounting Oversight cause shown . . . .” 15 U. S. C. § 7211(e)(6)
            Board

=== PAGE 80 ===
556     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
              Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

          Ofﬁce Within
                                  Statutory Removal Provision
          Department
         Social Security
         Administration:
                             “The Chief Actuary may be removed only
44      Ofﬁce of the Chief
                             for cause.” 42 U. S. C. § 902(c)(1)
             Actuary
       (see supra, row 20)

                             “The Secretary of State may, upon writ­
                             ten notice, remove a Board member for
                             corruption, neglect of duty, malfeasance,
      Department of State:
                             or demonstrated incapacity to perform his
45      Foreign Service
                             or her functions, established at a hearing
        Grievance Board
                             (unless the right to a hearing is waived
                             in writing by the Board member).” 22
                             U. S. C. § 4135(d)

         Department of
                             “Any member of the Committee may be
         Transportation:
46                           removed for cause by the Secretary.” 49
       Air Trafﬁc Services
                             U. S. C. § 106(p)(6)(G)
           Committee

          Department of
                             “The President may remove a member for
         Transportation:
47                           inefﬁciency, neglect of duty, or malfea­
      Surface Transportation
                             sance in ofﬁce.” 49 U. S. C. § 701(b)(3)
              Board

                          “The Chairman may be removed by the
                          President for misconduct, inefﬁciency, ne­
                          glect of duty, or engaging in the practice
   Department of Veterans of law or for physical or mental disability
          Affairs:        which, in the opinion of the President,
48
     Board of Veterans’   prevents the proper execution of the
          Appeals         Chairman’s duties. The Chairman may
                          not be removed from ofﬁce by the Presi­
                          dent on any other grounds.” 38 U. S. C.
                          § 7101(b)(2)


                                  B
  The table that follows lists the 573 career appointees in
the SES who constitute the upper level management of
the independent agencies listed in Appendix A, supra. Each

=== PAGE 81 ===
                      Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       557

                 Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

of these ofﬁcials is, under any deﬁnition—including the
Court’s—an inferior ofﬁcer, and is, by statute, subject to two
layers of for-cause removal. See supra, at 539–543.
   The data are organized into three columns: The ﬁrst col­
umn lists the “ofﬁce” to which the corresponding ofﬁcial is
assigned within the respective agency and, where available,
the provision of law establishing that ofﬁce. Cf. supra, at
539 (citing Mouat, 124 U. S., at 307–308; Germaine, 99 U. S.,
at 510). The second and third columns respectively list the
career appointees in each agency who occupy “general” and
“reserved” SES positions. A “general” position is one that
could be ﬁlled by either a career appointee or by a noncareer
appointee were the current (career) occupant to be replaced.
See 5 U. S. C. § 3132(b)(1). Because 90% of all SES positions
must be ﬁlled by career appointees, § 3134(b), “most General
positions are ﬁlled by career appointees,” Plum Book 200.
A “reserved” position, by contrast, must always be ﬁlled by
a career appointee. § 3132(b)(1). The data for the “general
position” column come from the 2008 Plum Book, a quadren­
nial manual prepared by the congressional committees re­
sponsible for Government oversight. See supra, at 541–542.
Positions listed as vacant in that source are not included.
The data for the “reserved position” column come from a list
periodically published by the Ofﬁce of Personnel Manage­
ment and last published in 2006. See 72 Fed. Reg. 16154–
16251 (2007); § 3132(b)(4). Given the Federal Government’s
size and the temporal lag between the underlying sources,
the list that follows is intended to be illustrative, not exact.

                 Nuclear Regulatory Commission (192)
       Ofﬁce            General Position              Reserved Position

                                                  Director of Nuclear
    Ofﬁce of the        Executive Director
                                                   Security Projects
 Executive Director
   for Operations       Deputy Executive
10 CFR § 1.32 (2009) Director for Reactor and
                     Preparedness Programs

=== PAGE 82 ===
558       FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
                 ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

         Ofﬁce            General Position            Reserved Position

                         Deputy Executive
                       Director for Materials,
                       Waste, Research, State,
                       Tribal, and Compliance
    Ofﬁce of the              Programs
 Executive Director      Deputy Executive
  for Operations—      Director for Corporate
     Continued              Management

                       Assistant for Operations

                        Director for Strategic
                       Organizational Planning
                          and Optimization

       Ofﬁce of the
        Secretary             Secretary
      10 CFR § 1.25

                                                     Director, Division of
                       Chief Financial Ofﬁcer        Planning, Budget and
                                                           Analysis

 Ofﬁce of the Chief                                  Director, Division of
  Financial Ofﬁcer                                    Financial Services
   10 CFR § 1.31                                    Deputy Chief Financial
                                                           Ofﬁcer

                                                     Director, Division of
                                                    Financial Management

                                                  Deputy Inspector General

    Ofﬁce of the                                  Assistant Inspector General
 Inspector General                                         for Audits
   10 CFR § 1.12
                                                  Assistant Inspector General
                                                       for Investigations

Ofﬁce of the General                                Director, Commission
      Counsel             General Counsel           Adjudicatory Technical
   10 CFR § 1.23                                           Support

=== PAGE 83 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       559

                   Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce             General Position              Reserved Position

                                              Deputy Assistant General
                      Deputy General Counsel Counsel for Rulemaking and
                                                     Fuel Cycle
                                                 Deputy Assistant General
                             Solicitor
                                                 Counsel for Administration

                     Associate General Counsel
                                               Assistant General Counsel
                         for Licensing and
                                                for Operating Reactors
                             Regulation

                     Assistant General Counsel
                     for Rulemaking and Fuel
                               Cycle
                     Assistant General Counsel
Ofﬁce of the General
                         for Legal Counsel,
     Counsel—
                      Legislation, and Special
    Continued
                              Projects
                     Associate General Counsel
                           for Hearings,
                         Enforcement, and
                          Administration
                     Assistant General Counsel
                          for New Reactor
                              Programs

                     Assistant General Counsel
                      for Operating Reactors

                     Assistant General Counsel
                     for the High-Level Waste
                       Repository Programs

      Ofﬁce of
    Commission
     Appellate                                             Director
    Adjudication
   10 CFR § 1.24

 Ofﬁce of Congres­
   sional Affairs            Director
   10 CFR § 1.27

=== PAGE 84 ===
560       FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
                 ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

          Ofﬁce            General Position           Reserved Position

  Ofﬁce of Public
      Affairs                  Director
  10 CFR § 1.28
         Ofﬁce of              Director
      International
        Programs
                           Deputy Director
      10 CFR § 1.29

         Ofﬁce of
      Investigations           Director                Deputy Director
      10 CFR § 1.36

         Ofﬁce of
      Enforcement              Director
      10 CFR § 1.33

                               Director                Deputy Director

                                                     Director, Division of
     Ofﬁce of                                             Contracts
  Administration                                    Director, Division of
  10 CFR § 1.34                                    Administrative Services
                                                     Director, Division of
                                                    Facilities and Security

                               Director
  Ofﬁce of Human
                           Deputy Director
     Resources
   10 CFR § 1.39         Associate Director for
                       Training and Development

                               Director                Deputy Director
                                                  Director, Information and
                                                  Records Services Division
Ofﬁce of Information                              Director, High-Level Waste
      Services                                      Business and Program
   10 CFR § 1.35                                       Integration Staff
                                                  Director, Business Process
                                                      Improvement and
                                                         Applications

=== PAGE 85 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       561

                   Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce              General Position              Reserved Position

                                                    Director, Program
      Ofﬁce of                                     Management, Policy
    Information                                  Development and Analysis
     Services—                                            Staff
     Continued                                  Director, Infrastructure and
                                                   Computer Operations

 Ofﬁce of Nuclear             Director              Deputy Director (2)
   Security and                                     Director, Program
Incident Response                                   Management, Policy
  10 CFR § 1.46                                       Development

                                                            Director

                                                        Deputy Director

                                                 Project Director, Nuclear
                                                      Security Policy

(Division of Security                            Project Director, Nuclear
       Policy)                                     Security Operations

                                                    Deputy Director for
                                                     Material Security

                                                   Deputy Director for
                                                   Reactor Security and
                                                       Rulemaking

                                                            Director
    (Division of
                                                    Deputy Director (2)
 Preparedness and
     Response)                                     Deputy Director for
                                                 Emergency Preparedness

                                                            Director

                                                    Deputy Director for
(Division of Security                               Security Oversight
    Operations)
                                                    Deputy Director for
                                                    Security Programs

=== PAGE 86 ===
562       FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
                 ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

         Ofﬁce         General Position      Reserved Position

                                             Director, Program
                           Director
                                             Management, etc.

                                          Deputy Director, Program
                       Deputy Director
                                             Management, etc.

                                            Associate Director,
 Ofﬁce of Nuclear                           Operating Reactor
Reactor Regulation                        Oversight and Licensing
  10 CFR § 1.43
                                          Associate Director, Risk
                                           Assessment and New
                                                  Projects
                                             Associate Director,
                                           Engineering and Safety
                                                  Systems

 (Division of Safety                              Director
      Systems)                               Deputy Director (2)

(Division of License                              Director
     Renewal)                                 Deputy Director

    (Division of                                  Director
 Operating Reactor
     Licensing)                              Deputy Director (2)

   (Division of                                   Director
  Inspection and
 Regional Support)                           Deputy Director (2)

  (Division of New                                Director
 Reactor Licensing)                          Deputy Director (2)

       (Division of                               Director
      Engineering)                           Deputy Director (3)

  (Division of Risk                               Director
    Assessment)                              Deputy Director (2)

 (Division of Policy                              Director
  and Rulemaking)                            Deputy Director (2)

=== PAGE 87 ===
                         Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       563

                     Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

      Ofﬁce                General Position              Reserved Position

   (Division of                                              Director
   Component
    Integrity)                                           Deputy Director

  Ofﬁce of New                                   Assistant to the Director for
    Reactors                   Director
                                                  Transition Management
  10 CFR § 1.44

 Ofﬁce of Nuclear                                        Director, Program
                               Director
Material Safety and                                        Planning, etc.
   Safeguards
  10 CFR § 1.42            Deputy Director

                                                    Chief, Special Projects
                                                            Branch
 (Division of Fuel
                                                      Chief, Safety and
 Cycle Safety and
                                                 Safeguards Support Branch
   Safeguards)
                                                 Chief, Fuel Cycle Facilities
                                                           Branch

   (Division of                                     Chief, Rulemaking and
  Industrial and                                      Guidance Branch
 Medical Nuclear                                 Chief, Materials Safety and
     Safety)                                         Inspection Branch

                                                 Deputy Director, Licensing
(Division of High                                     and Inspection
  Level Waste
Repository Safety)                                Deputy Director, Technical
                                                   Review Directorate (2)

                                                  Deputy Director, Technical
(Spent Fuel Project                                  Review Directorate
      Ofﬁce)                                     Deputy Director, Licensing
                                                      and Inspection

 Ofﬁce of Federal
and State Materials            Director                  Deputy Director
and Environmental
   Management                                            Director, Program
     Programs                                              Planning, etc.
  10 CFR § 1.41

=== PAGE 88 ===
564    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
             Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce          General Position       Reserved Position

                                                  Director

                                             Deputy Director,
 (Division of Waste                         Decommissioning (2)
  Management and
                                              Deputy Director,
   Environmental
                                               Environmental
    Protection)
                                               Protection (2)

                                          Chief, Environmental and
                                          Performance Assessment
   (Division of                                   Director
  Materials Safety
    and State
   Agreements)                                Deputy Director

     (Division of                                 Director
 Intergovernmental
     Liaison and
    Rulemaking)                               Deputy Director

                                             Director, Program
                          Director           Management, etc.
                                            Deputy Director for
                      Deputy Director
                                           Materials Engineering
                                            Deputy Director for
                         Regional
                                           Engineering Research
                      Administrator (4)
                                               Applications
                                          Deputy Director for New
  Ofﬁce of Nuclear                             Reactors and
    Regulatory                            Computational Analysis
     Research
   10 CFR § 1.45                            Deputy Director for
                                           Probabilistic Risk and
                                               Applications
                                            Deputy Director for
                                          Operating Experience and
                                               Risk Analysis
                                           Deputy Director for
                                           Radiation Protection,
                                          Environmental Risk and
                                            Waste Management

=== PAGE 89 ===
                         Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                        565

                     Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce               General Position              Reserved Position

                                                    Chief, Generic Safety
                                                       Issues Branch
                                                     Chief, Electrical,
                                                  Mechanical, and Materials
                                                          Branch
   (Division of                                     Chief, Structural and
   Engineering                                     Geological Engineering
   Technology)                                             Branch
                                                      Chief, Materials
                                                     Engineering Branch
                                                     Chief, Engineering
                                                    Research Applications
                                                           Branch
                                                         Deputy Director

                                                  Chief, Advanced Reactors
(Division of Systems                                   and Regulatory
   Analysis and                                          Effectiveness
    Regulatory                                    Chief, Safety Margins and
   Effectiveness)                                 Systems Analysis Branch
                                                          Chief, Radiation
                                                          Protection, etc.
                                                         Deputy Director
                                                     Chief, Operating
 (Division of Risk
                                                  Experience Risk Analysis
   Analysis and
                                                          Branch
   Application)
                                                   Chief, Probabilistic Risk
                                                      Analysis Branch
 (Division of Risk                                           Director
 Assessment and
 Special Projects)                                  Assistant Director (2)

 (Division of Fuel,                                          Director
 Engineering and
   Radiological
     Research)                                           Assistant Director

=== PAGE 90 ===
566    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
             Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce              General Position            Reserved Position

  Ofﬁce of Small
 Business and Civil                                        Director
      Rights
   10 CFR § 1.37

    Advisory
  Committee on
                         Executive Director       Deputy Executive Director
Reactor Safeguards
  10 CFR § 1.13

                                                       Deputy Regional
                                                       Administrator (5)

                                                   Director, Division of Fuel
                                                      Facility Inspection

                                                     Director, Division of
                                                     Reactor Projects (4)
                                                  Deputy Director, Division of
                                                     Reactor Projects (5)
  Regional Ofﬁces                                    Director, Division of
   10 CFR § 1.47                                      Reactor Safety (4)

                                                  Deputy Director, Division of
                                                      Reactor Safety (4)
                                                     Director, Division of
                                                  Nuclear Materials Safety (3)
                                                  Deputy Director, Division of
                                                   Nuclear Materials Safety

                                                  Deputy Director, Division of
                                                    Radiation Safety, etc.

                    Social Security Administration (143)
       Ofﬁce              General Position            Reserved Position

                       Executive Counselor to
    Ofﬁce of the         the Commissioner
   Commissioner
 33 Fed. Reg. 5828      Deputy Chief of Staff
       (1968)          Director for Regulations

=== PAGE 91 ===
                           Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       567

                     Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

        Ofﬁce                General Position              Reserved Position

                           Senior Advisor to the
   Ofﬁce of the               Commissioner
  Commissioner—
    Continued             Senior Advisor to the
                          Deputy Commissioner

      Ofﬁce of
   International          Associate Commissioner
     Programs                for International
63 Fed. Reg. 41888               Programs
       (1998)

Ofﬁce of Executive
    Operations                                         Assistant Inspector
56 Fed. Reg. 15888                                          General
      (1991)

                              Chief Actuary
 Ofﬁce of the Chief
                          Deputy Chief Actuary,
      Actuary
                              Long-Range
42 U. S. C. § 902(c)(1)
 33 Fed. Reg. 5828        Deputy Chief Actuary,
                              Short-Range

 Ofﬁce of the Chief                                     Director, Ofﬁce of
                    Deputy Chief Information
Information Ofﬁcer                                   Information Technology
                            Ofﬁcer
 33 Fed. Reg. 5829                                       Systems Review

      Ofﬁce of
    Information
                              Associate Chief
    Technology
                            Information Ofﬁcer
    Investment
    Management

 Ofﬁce of Budget,         Deputy Commissioner
   Finance and
   Management
                             Assistant Deputy
60 Fed. Reg. 22099
                              Commissioner
      (1995)

Ofﬁce of Acquisition
    and Grants       Associate Commissioner
60 Fed. Reg. 22099

=== PAGE 92 ===
568     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
              Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce              General Position      Reserved Position

                       Associate Commissioner
  Ofﬁce of Budget
 60 Fed. Reg. 22099       Deputy Associate
                           Commissioner

 Ofﬁce of Facilities   Associate Commissioner
    Management            Deputy Associate
 60 Fed. Reg. 22099        Commissioner

 Ofﬁce of Financial    Associate Commissioner
     Policy and
     Operations           Deputy Associate
 56 Fed. Reg. 15888        Commissioner

      Ofﬁce of         Associate Commissioner
  Publications and
     Logistics
                          Deputy Associate
    Management
                           Commissioner
 60 Fed. Reg. 22099

     Ofﬁce of             Assistant Deputy
  Communications           Commissioner
 62 Fed. Reg. 9476
      (1997)                Press Ofﬁcer

      Ofﬁce of
  Communications
    Planning and       Associate Commissioner
     Technology
 63 Fed. Reg. 15476
  Ofﬁce of Public
     Inquiries         Associate Commissioner
 62 Fed. Reg. 9477

 Ofﬁce of Disability   Deputy Commissioner
  Adjudication and        Assistant Deputy
      Review               Commissioner

 Ofﬁce of Appellate
     Operations
                         Executive Director
 53 Fed. Reg. 29778
       (1988)

=== PAGE 93 ===
                      Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       569

                 Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

      Ofﬁce             General Position              Reserved Position

Ofﬁce of the General
      Counsel
                     Deputy General Counsel
65 Fed. Reg. 39218
       (2000)

 Ofﬁce of General
       Law         Associate General Counsel
65 Fed. Reg. 39218

  Ofﬁce of Public
    Disclosure
                       Executive Director
67 Fed. Reg. 63186
      (2002)

Ofﬁce of Regional
  Chief Counsels   Regional Chief Counsel (7)
65 Fed. Reg. 39219

 Ofﬁce of Human       Deputy Commissioner
    Resources           Assistant Deputy
60 Fed. Reg. 22128       Commissioner

   Ofﬁce of Civil
 Rights and Equal
                     Associate Commissioner
   Opportunity
60 Fed. Reg. 22128

  Ofﬁce of Labor   Associate Commissioner
 Management and       Deputy Associate
Employee Relations     Commissioner

                     Associate Commissioner
Ofﬁce of Personnel
60 Fed. Reg. 22128      Deputy Associate
                         Commissioner

 Ofﬁce of Training
                     Associate Commissioner
60 Fed. Reg. 22128

   Ofﬁce of the      Deputy Inspector General
Inspector General
42 U. S. C. § 902(e) Counsel to the Inspector
60 Fed. Reg. 22133           General

=== PAGE 94 ===
570    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
             Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce              General Position      Reserved Position

                         Assistant Inspector
                          General for Audit
   Ofﬁce of Audits
 60 Fed. Reg. 22133       Deputy Assistant
                        Inspector General for
                               Audit

                         Assistant Inspector
                               General

                          Deputy Assistant
      Ofﬁce of          Inspector General for
   Investigations        Field Investigations
 60 Fed. Reg. 22133
                         Deputy Assistant
                       Inspector General for
                       National Investigative
                            Operations

Ofﬁce of Legislation
 and Congressional     Senior Advisor to the
      Affairs          Deputy Commissioner
60 Fed. Reg. 22152

Ofﬁce of Legislative
   Development       Associate Commissioner
65 Fed. Reg. 10846

                       Deputy Commissioner
Ofﬁce of Operations
60 Fed. Reg. 22107        Assistant Deputy
                           Commissioner

     Ofﬁce of
Automation Support Associate Commissioner
60 Fed. Reg. 22108

                       Associate Commissioner

  Ofﬁce of Central        Deputy Associate
     Operations            Commissioner
 63 Fed. Reg. 32275      Assistant Associate
                           Commissioner

=== PAGE 95 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       571

                    Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

      Ofﬁce               General Position              Reserved Position

                         Assistant Associate
 Ofﬁce of Central
                          Commissioner for
  Operations—
                          Management and
    Continued
                         Operations Support

Ofﬁce of Disability    Associate Commissioner
  Determinations          Deputy Associate
67 Fed. Reg. 69288         Commissioner

Ofﬁce of Electronic
     Services
                       Associate Commissioner
66 Fed. Reg. 29618
      (2001)

  Ofﬁce of Public      Associate Commissioner
   Service and
Operations Support
                          Deputy Associate
59 Fed. Reg. 56511
                           Commissioner
      (1994)

Ofﬁce of Telephone     Associate Commissioner
     Services             Deputy Associate
60 Fed. Reg. 22108         Commissioner

                            Regional
                         Commissioner (10)
Ofﬁce of Regional
                         Deputy Regional
  Commissioner
                         Commissioner (10)
60 Fed. Reg. 22108
                         Assistant Regional
                         Commissioner (15)

                        Deputy Commissioner

Ofﬁce of Retirement       Assistant Deputy
   and Disability         Commissioner (2)
       Policy
                         Senior Advisor for
                         Program Outreach
Ofﬁce of Disability
    Programs           Associate Commissioner
67 Fed. Reg. 69289

=== PAGE 96 ===
572     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
              Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce              General Position      Reserved Position
      Ofﬁce of
    Employment
 Support Programs      Associate Commissioner
 64 Fed. Reg. 19397
       (1999)

  Ofﬁce of Income      Associate Commissioner
 Security Programs        Deputy Associate
 67 Fed. Reg. 69288        Commissioner

  Ofﬁce of Medical
   and Vocational      Associate Commissioner
     Expertise
 Ofﬁce of Research,
   Evaluation and
     Statistics        Associate Commissioner
 61 Fed. Reg. 35847
       (1996)
                       Deputy Commissioner
 Ofﬁce of Systems
60 Fed. Reg. 22116        Assistant Deputy
                           Commissioner

 Ofﬁce of Disability   Associate Commissioner
      Systems             Deputy Associate
 61 Fed. Reg. 35849        Commissioner
      Ofﬁce of
                       Associate Commissioner
    Supplemental
  Security Income
      Systems             Deputy Associate
 67 Fed. Reg. 37892        Commissioner
 Ofﬁce of Earnings,
                       Associate Commissioner
  Enumeration and
   Administrative
      Systems             Deputy Associate
 67 Fed. Reg. 37892        Commissioner
 Ofﬁce of Enterprise
                       Associate Commissioner
      Support,
  Architecture and
    Engineering           Deputy Associate
 67 Fed. Reg. 37892       Commissioner (2)

=== PAGE 97 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       573

                    Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

      Ofﬁce               General Position              Reserved Position
Ofﬁce of Retirement Associate Commissioner
   and Survivors
Insurance Systems      Deputy Associate
 67 Fed. Reg. 37892     Commissioner

 Ofﬁce of Systems      Associate Commissioner
Electronic Services       Deputy Associate
66 Fed. Reg. 10766         Commissioner
                        Deputy Commissioner         Chief Quality Ofﬁcer
 Ofﬁce of Quality         Assistant Deputy         Deputy Chief Quality
   Performance             Commissioner                  Ofﬁcer
63 Fed. Reg. 32035
                                                        Deputy Associate
                                                         Commissioner
 Ofﬁce of Quality
                       Associate Commissioner
Data Management

                       Associate Commissioner
 Ofﬁce of Quality
  Improvement             Deputy Associate
                           Commissioner
                       Associate Commissioner
 Ofﬁce of Quality
     Review               Deputy Associate
                           Commissioner

Ofﬁce of the Chief
 Strategic Ofﬁcer                                  Chief Strategic Ofﬁcer
67 Fed. Reg. 79950

                    National Labor Relations Board (60)

      Ofﬁce               General Position              Reserved Position

                         Director, Ofﬁce of
                       Representation Appeals       Executive Secretary
                            and Advice
Ofﬁce of the Board                                      Deputy Executive
29 U. S. C. § 153(a)          Solicitor
                                                           Secretary
                       Deputy Chief Counsel to
                                                        Inspector General
                         Board Member (4)

=== PAGE 98 ===
574       FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
                 ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

         Ofﬁce             General Position         Reserved Position
Ofﬁce of the Board—
    Continued                                    Chief Information Ofﬁcer

Ofﬁce of the General
      Counsel         Deputy General Counsel
 29 U. S. C. § 153(d)
                          Associate General      Deputy Associate General
                              Counsel                    Counsel
      (Division of
                                                 Deputy Associate General
      Enforcement
                                                 Counsel, Appellate Court
       Litigation)
                                                          Branch
                                                 Director, Ofﬁce of Appeals
                                                 Associate General Counsel
(Division of Advice)                             Deputy Associate General
                                                         Counsel

   (Division of                                          Director
  Administration)                                    Deputy Director
                                                 Associate General Counsel
       (Division of
                                                 Deputy Associate General
       Operations
      Management)                                    Assistant General
                                                        Counsel (6)
  Regional Ofﬁces
                                                   Regional Director (33)
 29 U. S. C. § 153(b)

                 Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (44)

         Ofﬁce             General Position         Reserved Position

                       Executive Director
     Ofﬁce of the
                       Deputy Executive
 Executive Director
                           Director
  18 CFR § 1.101(e)
        (2009)      Deputy Chief Information
                            Ofﬁcer
 Ofﬁce of General          General Counsel
     Counsel
 18 CFR § 1.101(f)      Deputy General Counsel

=== PAGE 99 ===
                          Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       575

                      Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce                General Position              Reserved Position
                           Associate General
 Ofﬁce of General             Counsel (3)
    Counsel—                Deputy Associate
    Continued              General Counsel (4)
                                Solicitor

                                Director
                            Deputy Director
                          Director, Tariffs and
 Ofﬁce of Energy
                         Market Development (3)
Market Regulation
      18 CFR            Director, Policy Analysis
 § 376.204(b)(2)(ii)        and Rulemaking
                        Director, Administration,
                         Case Management, and
                           Strategic Planning

                                                    Director, Dam Safety and
                                Director
                                                           Inspections
                        Principal Deputy Director
                            Deputy Director
                          Director, Hydropower
Ofﬁce of Energy                 Licensing
     Projects
                            Director, Pipeline
     18 CFR
                               Certiﬁcates
§ 376.204(b)(2)(iii)
                             Director, Gas
                            Environment and
                              Engineering
                          Director, Hydropower
                           Administration and
                               Compliance

                                                     Chief Accountant and
     Ofﬁce of                   Director             Director, Division of
   Enforcement                                       Financial Regulations
     18 CFR
§ 376.204(b)(2)(vi)                                       Chief, Regulatory
                            Deputy Director
                                                          Accounting Branch

=== PAGE 100 ===
576      FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
                ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
               Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

        Ofﬁce              General Position            Reserved Position

                        Director, Investigations

                           Deputy Director,
      Ofﬁce of              Investigations
   Enforcement—
     Continued              Director, Audits

                        Director, Energy Market
                               Oversight

                                Director
  Ofﬁce of Electric         Deputy Director
      Reliability
       18 CFR             Director, Compliance
  § 376.204(b)(2)(iv)    Director, Logistics and
                                Security

      Ofﬁce of                Director
   Administrative
     Litigation     Director, Technical Division
 64 Fed. Reg. 51226 Director, Legal Division
       (1999)
 68 Fed. Reg. 27056     Senior Counsel for
       (2003)               Litigation

                        Federal Trade Commission (31)

        Ofﬁce              General Position            Reserved Position

    Ofﬁce of the
     Chairman                  Secretary
 16 CFR § 0.8 (2010)

    Ofﬁce of the          Executive Director       Deputy Executive Director
 Executive Director
   16 CFR § 0.10         Chief Financial Ofﬁcer    Chief Information Ofﬁcer

                        Principal Deputy General Deputy General Counsel for
                                 Counsel               Policy Studies
Ofﬁce of the General
                     Deputy General Counsel
      Counsel
                         for Litigation
   16 CFR § 0.11
                     Deputy General Counsel
                       for Legal Counsel

=== PAGE 101 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       577

                  Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

      Ofﬁce              General Position              Reserved Position

     Ofﬁce of                Director
  International
     Affairs
                         Deputy Director
  16 CFR § 0.20

                        Associate Director
                     Associate Director, Policy
    Bureau of
   Competition          Assistant Director,
  16 CFR § 0.16            Mergers (2)
                        Assistant Director,
                           Compliance
                                                  Associate Director for
                             Director
                                                  International Division

                        Deputy Director (2)

                      Associate Director for
                      Privacy and Identity
                           Protection

                      Associate Director for
                      Advertising Practices

Bureau of Consumer    Associate Director for
    Protection         Marketing Practices
  16 CFR § 0.17
                      Associate Director for
                       Financial Practices

                       Associate Director for
                      Consumer and Business
                            Education

                      Associate Director for
                     Planning and Information

                      Associate Director for
                          Enforcement
                       Deputy Director for
    Bureau of
                         Research and
    Economics
                        Development and
  16 CFR § 0.18
                          Operations

=== PAGE 102 ===
578      FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
                ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
               Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

        Ofﬁce            General Position           Reserved Position

                        Deputy Director for
       Bureau of            Antitrust
      Economics—       Associate Director for
       Continued      Consumer Protection and
                             Research

    Ofﬁce of the
 Inspector General                                  Inspector General
   16 CFR § 0.13

                Consumer Product Safety Commission (16)
        Ofﬁce            General Position           Reserved Position

                                                    Assistant Executive
                         Deputy Executive
                                                Director for Compliance and
                             Director
    Ofﬁce of the                                 Administrative Litigation
 Executive Director                                Associate Executive
  16 CFR § 1000.18                                  Director for Field
                       Chief Financial Ofﬁcer
       (2010)                                          Operations

                                                   Executive Assistant

Ofﬁce of Compliance
     and Field
                          Deputy Director
    Operations
 16 CFR § 1000.21

                                                   Assistant Executive
                                                         Director
                                                Deputy Assistant Executive
                                                        Director
  Ofﬁce of Hazard                                  Associate Executive
 Identiﬁcation and                                Director for Economic
     Reduction                                          Analysis
 16 CFR § 1000.25
                                                   Associate Executive
                                                 Director for Engineering
                                                         Sciences
                                                   Associate Executive
                                                Director for Epidemiology

=== PAGE 103 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       579

                  Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce             General Position              Reserved Position

  Directorate for
                       Associate Executive
  Health Sciences
                            Director
 16 CFR § 1000.27
  Directorate for
                       Associate Executive
Laboratory Sciences
                            Director
 16 CFR § 1000.30
     Ofﬁce of
   International
  Programs and
                                                           Director
Intergovernmental
      Affairs
 16 CFR § 1000.24
      Ofﬁce of
  Information and                                  Assistant Executive
Technology Services                                      Director
 16 CFR § 1000.23
Ofﬁce of the General
      Counsel            General Counsel
 16 CFR § 1000.14
                 Federal Labor Relations Authority (14)
       Ofﬁce             General Position              Reserved Position

                                               Director, Human Resources,
   Ofﬁce of the                                  Policy and Performance
    Chairman                                           Management
5 CFR § 2411.10(a)
                                                         Chief Counsel
      (2010)
                                                        Senior Advisor
   Ofﬁce of the
    Solicitor                                              Solicitor
5 CFR § 2417.203(a)
Ofﬁces of Members
                                                       Chief Counsel (2)
5 U. S. C. § 7104(b)

   Ofﬁce of the
Executive Director
                                                   Executive Director
5 U. S. C. § 7105(d)
  5 CFR § 2421.7

=== PAGE 104 ===
580      FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
                ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
               Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

        Ofﬁce             General Position         Reserved Position

  Federal Service
  Impasses Panel                                  Executive Director
 5 U. S. C. § 7119(c)

    Ofﬁce of the
  General Counsel                               Deputy General Counsel
 5 U. S. C. § 7104(f)

  Regional Ofﬁces
 5 U. S. C. § 7105(d)                            Regional Director (5)
   5 CFR § 2421.6

                 National Transportation Safety Board (14)
        Ofﬁce             General Position         Reserved Position

   Ofﬁce of the                                   Managing Director
 Managing Director                                Associate Managing
 49 CFR § 800.2(c)                                Director for Quality
      (2009)                                          Assurance

    Ofﬁce of the
  General Counsel         General Counsel
 49 CFR § 800.2(c)

      Ofﬁce of                                         Director
   Administration                                 Director, Bureau of
 60 Fed. Reg. 61488                              Accident Investigation

                                                   Deputy Director,
  Ofﬁce of Aviation                           Technology and Investment
       Safety                                         Operations
  49 CFR § 800.2(e)                            Deputy Director, Regional
                                                      Operations

 Ofﬁce of Research                                     Director
 and Engineering
 49 CFR § 800.2( j)                                Deputy Director

    Ofﬁce of Chief
  Financial Ofﬁcer
                                                 Chief Financial Ofﬁcer
 49 U. S. C. § 1111(h)
   49 CFR § 800.28

=== PAGE 105 ===
                          Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       581

                      Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce                General Position              Reserved Position

 Ofﬁce of Safety
Recommendations
      and                                                     Director
Accomplishments
49 CFR § 800.2(k)

Ofﬁce of Railroad,
   Pipeline and
    Hazardous
                                                              Director
    Materials
 Investigations 49
CFR §§ 800.2(f), (i)

     National
                                                              Director
  Transportation
   Safety Board
     Academy                                        President and Academic
 49 U. S. C. § 1117                                          Dean

Performance-Based Organization for the Delivery of Federal Student
                   Financial Assistance (13)
       Ofﬁce                General Position              Reserved Position

                         Deputy Chief Operating      Director, Student Aid
                                Ofﬁcer                    Awareness

                         Chief Financial Ofﬁcer

                        Chief Compliance Ofﬁcer
                         Director, Policy Liaison
                        and Implementation Staff
Ofﬁce of the Chief
Operating Ofﬁcer              Audit Ofﬁcer
   20 U. S. C.
                           Director, Financial
  §§ 1018(d)–(e)
                           Management Group

                         Director, Budget Group

                        Deputy Chief Information
                                Ofﬁcer

                          Director, Application
                          Development Group

=== PAGE 106 ===
582        FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
                  ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
                 Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

          Ofﬁce               General Position        Reserved Position

                           Internal Review Ofﬁcer

Ofﬁce of the Chief           Director, Strategic
Operating Ofﬁcer—          Planning and Reporting
    Continued                      Group

                               Senior Adviser

                        Merit Systems Protection Board (11)

          Ofﬁce               General Position        Reserved Position

Ofﬁce of the Clerk of
     the Board
5 CFR § 1200.10(a)(4)                                 Clerk of the Board
       (2010)

 Ofﬁce of Financial
 and Administrative
    Management                                                Director
       5 CFR
   § 1200.10(a)(8)

 Ofﬁce of Policy and
     Evaluation
                                                              Director
       5 CFR
   § 1200.10(a)(6)

         Ofﬁce of
       Information
        Resources
                                                              Director
      Management
          5 CFR
      § 1200.10(a)(9)

 Ofﬁce of Regional                                            Director
     Operations
       5 CFR
                                                     Regional Director (6)
   § 1200.10(a)(1)

=== PAGE 107 ===
                          Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       583

                      Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

                         Ofﬁce of Special Counsel (8)

       Ofﬁce                General Position              Reserved Position

                                                    Associate Special Counsel
                         Deputy Special Counsel       for Investigation and
                                                         Prosecution (3)

                                                    Senior Associate Special
                                                    Counsel for Investigation
                                                        and Prosecution
  Ofﬁce of Special
      Counsel                                       Associate Special Counsel,
  5 U. S. C. § 1211                                  Planning and Oversight
                                                    Associate Special Counsel
                                                     for Legal Counsel and
                                                              Policy
                                                    Director of Management
                                                          and Budget

                      Postal Regulatory Commission (10)*

       Ofﬁce                General Position              Reserved Position

    Ofﬁce of the            General Counsel
  General Counsel
  39 CFR § 3002.13
                        Assistant General Counsel
       (2009)

                                Director

                           Assistant Director,
     Ofﬁce of             Analysis and Pricing
 Accountability and             Division
    Compliance
                           Assistant Director,
                          Auditing and Costing
                                Division



   *The ofﬁcers in this agency are part of the “excepted service,” but enjoy
tenure protection similar to that enjoyed by career SES appointees. See
5 U. S. C. § 2302(a)(2)(B); Plum Book, p. v (distinguishing “excepted serv­
ice” from “Schedule C”); id., at 202 (describing schedule C positions).

=== PAGE 108 ===
584    FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
              ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
             Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce              General Position          Reserved Position

  Ofﬁce of Public
    Affairs and
  Governmental                Director
     Relations
 39 CFR § 3002.15
                     Secretary and Director
    Ofﬁce of the
                    Assistant Director, Human
   Secretary and
                          Resources and
   Administration
                          Infrastructure
 48 Fed. Reg. 13167
       (1983)          Assistant Director,
                     Strategic Planning, etc.
    Ofﬁce of the
 Inspector General        Inspector General
 39 CFR § 3002.16

                      Federal Maritime Commission (8)
       Ofﬁce              General Position          Reserved Position

    Ofﬁce of the
 Managing Director
 46 CFR § 501.3(h)
                              Director
       (2010)
 75 Fed. Reg. 29452
       (2010)
    Ofﬁce of the
     Secretary                                          Secretary
 46 CFR § 501.3(c)
    Ofﬁce of the                                Deputy General Counsel for
  General Counsel                                 Reports, Opinions and
 46 CFR § 501.3(d)                                      Decisions
     Bureau of
  Certiﬁcation and
                                                         Director
     Licensing
46 CFR § 501.3(h)(5)
  Bureau of Trade
     Analysis                                            Director
46 CFR § 501.3(h)(6)

=== PAGE 109 ===
                           Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       585

                    Appendix B to opinion of Breyer, J.

       Ofﬁce                 General Position              Reserved Position

    Bureau of                                                  Director
   Enforcement
46 CFR § 501.3(h)(7)                                       Deputy Director

     Ofﬁce of
  Administration
                                                               Director
 70 Fed. Reg. 7660
      (2005)

                        Surface Transportation Board (4)

       Ofﬁce                 General Position              Reserved Position

    Ofﬁce of the
                             Director of Public
     Chairman
                         Assistance, Governmental
  49 CFR § 1011.3
                          Affairs and Compliance
       (2009)

  Ofﬁce of the               General Counsel
 General Counsel
     49 CFR
                         Deputy General Counsel
  § 1011.6(c)(3)

    Ofﬁce of
   Proceedings                   Director
49 CFR § 1011.6(h)

        Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (1)

       Ofﬁce                 General Position              Reserved Position

    Ofﬁce of the
  General Counsel
                             General Counsel
29 CFR § 2706.170(c)
       (2009)

          Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (1)

       Ofﬁce                 General Position              Reserved Position

    Ofﬁce of the
  General Counsel
                             General Counsel
40 CFR § 1600.2(b)(3)
      (2009)

=== PAGE 110 ===
586      FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
                ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
               Appendix C to opinion of Breyer, J.

                          National Mediation Board (1)

         Ofﬁce               General Position        Reserved Position

    Ofﬁce of the
 General Counsel
                             General Counsel
29 CFR § 1209.06(e)
       (2009)

                         Commission on Civil Rights (1)

         Ofﬁce               General Position        Reserved Position

 Ofﬁce of the Staff
      Director            Associate Deputy Staff
     42 U. S. C.                 Director
  § 1975b(a)(2)(A)

                         Board of Veterans Appeals (1)

         Ofﬁce               General Position        Reserved Position

  Ofﬁce of the Vice
     Chairman                                            Vice Chairman
 38 U. S. C. § 7101(a)


                               C
  According to data provided by the Ofﬁce of Personnel
Management, reprinted below, there are 1,584 ALJs in the
Federal Government. Each of these ALJs is an inferior of­
ﬁcer and each is subject, by statute, to two layers of for-cause
removal. See supra, at 542–543. The table below lists the
28 federal agencies that rely on ALJs to adjudicate indi­
vidual administrative cases. The source is available in the
Clerk of Court’s case ﬁle. See supra, at 543.

                                                         TOTAL NUMBER
                         AGENCY
                                                            OF ALJs
      Commodity Futures Trading Commission                      2
            Department of Agriculture                           4

=== PAGE 111 ===
                     Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                  587

                 Appendix C to opinion of Breyer, J.

                                                     TOTAL NUMBER
                  AGENCY
                                                        OF ALJs
          Department of Education                         1
  Department of Health and Human Services
                                                          7
       (Departmental Appeals Board)
  Department of Health and Human Services
                                                          1
      (Food and Drug Administration)
  Department of Health and Human Services
                                                          65
  (Ofﬁce of Medicare Hearings and Appeals)
  Department of Homeland Security (United
                                                          6
           States Coast Guard)
Department of Housing and Urban Development               2
         Department of the Interior                       9
  Department of Justice (Drug Enforcement
                                                          3
              Administration)
 Department of Justice (Executive Ofﬁce for
                                                          1
          Immigration Review)
Department of Labor (Ofﬁce of the Secretary)              44
        Department of Transportation                      3
      Environmental Protection Agency                     4
    Federal Communications Commission                     1
   Federal Energy Regulatory Commission                   14
     Federal Labor Relations Authority                    3
        Federal Maritime Commission                       1
   Federal Mine Safety and Health Review
                                                          11
                Commission
         Federal Trade Commission                         1
       International Trade Commission                     6
       National Labor Relations Board                     39
    National Transportation Safety Board                  4
   Occupational Safety and Health Review
                                                          12
                Commission
  Ofﬁce of Financial Institution Adjudication             1
    Securities and Exchange Commission                    4

=== PAGE 112 ===
588      FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
                ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
               Appendix D to opinion of Breyer, J.

                                                       TOTAL NUMBER
                       AGENCY
                                                          OF ALJs
          Social Security Administration                       1,334
           United States Postal Service                          1
                        TOTAL                                  1,584


                                D
   The table below lists 27 departments and other agencies
the heads of which are not subject to any statutory for-cause
removal provision, but that do bear certain other indicia of
independence.
   The table identiﬁes six criteria that may suggest independ­
ence: (1) whether the agency consists of a multimember com­
mission; (2) whether its members are required, by statute, to
be bipartisan (or nonpartisan); (3) whether eligibility to serve
as the agency’s head depends on statutorily deﬁned qualiﬁ­
cations; (4) whether the agency has independence in submit­
ting budgetary and other proposals to Congress (thereby by­
passing the Ofﬁce of Management and Budget); (5) whether
the agency has authority to appear in court independent of
the Department of Justice, cf. 28 U. S. C. §§ 516–519; and
(6) whether the agency is explicitly classiﬁed as “independ­
ent” by statute. See generally Breger & Edles 1135–1155;
supra, at 546–548. Unless otherwise noted, all information
refers to the relevant agency’s organic statute, which is cited
in the ﬁrst column. The list of agencies is nonexhaustive.

 Department or        Multi-  Bi-    Statutory    OMB Litigation Explicit
    Agency           Member partisan Eligibility Bypass Authority Statement
                                      Criteria

  Securities and                                  Yes
                                                             Yes
    Exchange                                       12
                      Yes      Yes                       15 U. S. C.
   Commission                                   U. S. C.
                                                            § 78u
 15 U. S. C. § 78d                               § 250

=== PAGE 113 ===
                               Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                         589

                        Appendix D to opinion of Breyer, J.

 Department or          Multi-  Bi­    Statutory    OMB Litigation Explicit
    Agency             Member partisan Eligibility Bypass Authority Statement
                                        Criteria

Architectural and
 Transportation
    Barriers                              Yes (related
                        Yes                                      Yes
   Compliance                             experience)
     Board
 29 U. S. C. § 792

Arctic Research                           Yes (related
  Commission            Yes               knowledge,
15 U. S. C. § 4102                        experience)

  Broadcasting                                 Yes
    Board of                              (citizenship;
                        Yes        Yes                                         Yes
   Governors                                 related
22 U. S. C. § 6203                        knowledge)

     Central
                                                                               Cf.
   Intelligence
                                                                            Freytag,
     Agency
                                                                            501 U. S.,
    50 U. S. C.
                                                                           at 887, n. 4
     § 403–4

 Commission of
                                          Yes (related
   Fine Arts            Yes
                                          knowledge)
40 U. S. C. § 9101

   Commodity
Futures Trading                           Yes (related            Yes
                        Yes        Yes                                         Yes
   Commission                             knowledge)           § 2(a)(4)
7 U. S. C. § 2(a)(2)

Defense Nuclear                                Yes
Facilities Safety                         (citizenship;
                         Yes       Yes                                         Yes
     Board                                   expert
42 U. S. C. § 2286                        knowledge)

     Equal
  Employment
                                                                  Yes
  Opportunity
                         Yes       Yes                         § 2000e–
  Commission
                                                                  5(f)
   42 U. S. C.
   § 2000e–4

=== PAGE 114 ===
590      FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
                ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
               Appendix D to opinion of Breyer, J.

 Department or         Multi-  Bi­    Statutory    OMB Litigation Explicit
    Agency            Member partisan Eligibility Bypass Authority Statement
                                       Criteria

 Export-Import
  Bank of the                                                       Yes
                       Yes      Yes                                           Yes
 United States*                                                 § 635(a)(1)
12 U. S. C. § 635a

  Farm Credit
 Administration                              Yes                   Yes
                       Yes      Yes                                           Yes
   12 U. S. C.                          (citizenship)           § 2244(c)
  §§ 2241, 2242

     Federal
Communications
                                             Yes                   Yes
   Commission          Yes      Yes
                                        (citizenship)            § 401(b)
47 U. S. C. §§ 151,
       154

 Federal Deposit
                                             Yes
   Insurance
                                        (citizenship;    Yes       Yes
  Corporation          Yes      Yes
                                           related      § 250   § 1819(a)
   12 U. S. C.
                                        experience)
  §§ 1811, 1812

Federal Election                                                   Yes
                                            Yes       Yes
  Commission           Yes      Yes                               § 437d
                                         (general) § 437d(d)
2 U. S. C. § 437c                                                 (a)(6)

Federal Housing                                          Yes
Finance Agency                                          § 250
   12 U. S. C.                                          (2006
                                                                              Yes
§ 4511 (2006 ed.,                                        ed.,
    Supp. IV)                                           Supp.
                                                         IV)

     Federal
   Retirement
                                 Cf.
      Thrift                            Yes (related
                       Yes     § 8472
   Investment                           knowledge)
                               (b)(2)
      Board
 5 U. S. C. § 8472



  *See Lebron, 513 U. S. 374.

=== PAGE 115 ===
                             Cite as: 561 U. S. 477 (2010)                       591

                       Appendix D to opinion of Breyer, J.

 Department or         Multi-  Bi­    Statutory    OMB Litigation Explicit
    Agency            Member partisan Eligibility Bypass Authority Statement
                                       Criteria

  International                              Yes
      Trade                             (citizenship; Yes         Yes
                       Yes       Yes                                       Yes
   Commission                              expert     § 2232   § 1333(g)
19 U. S. C. § 1330                      knowledge)

Marine Mammal
                                        Yes (related
  Commission           Yes
                                        knowledge)
16 U. S. C. § 1401

   Millennium
                                  Cf.      Yes
   Challenge
                       Yes     § 7703(c) (related
  Corporation†
                                 (3)(B) experience)
22 U. S. C. § 7703

 National Credit
      Union                             Yes (related    Yes
                       Yes       Yes                                       Yes
 Administration                         experience)    § 250
12 U. S. C. § 1752a

    National
  Archives and
    Records                             Yes (related
                                 Yes                                       Yes
 Administration                         knowledge)
   44 U. S. C.
  §§ 2102, 2103

National Council
                                        Yes (related
 on Disability         Yes
                                        experience)
29 U. S. C. § 780

National Labor-
 Management                             Yes (related
                       Yes
     Panel                              knowledge)
29 U. S. C. § 175

National Science
  Foundation
                                        Yes (related
  42 U. S. C.          Yes                                                 Yes
                                         expertise)
 §§ 1861, 1863,
      1864


  †See Lebron, supra.

=== PAGE 116 ===
592     FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
               ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
              Appendix D to opinion of Breyer, J.

 Department or        Multi-  Bi­    Statutory    OMB Litigation Explicit
    Agency           Member partisan Eligibility Bypass Authority Statement
                                      Criteria
  Peace Corps
   22 U. S. C.                                                      Yes
    § 2501–1
 Pension Beneﬁt
    Guaranty
                      Yes                                 Yes
  Corporation‡
29 U. S. C. § 1302
    Railroad
  Retirement
                      Yes                                 Yes       Yes
     Board
45 U. S. C. § 231f




  ‡See Lebron, supra.
