
=== PAGE 1 ===
                               United States General Accounting Office

GAO                            Testimony
                               Before the Senate Finance Committee




For Release on Delivery
Expected at 2:00 p.m.,
Wednesday, February 27, 2002   PRIVATE PENSIONS

                               Key Issues to Consider
                               Following the Enron
                               Collapse

                               Statement of David M. Walker
                               Comptroller General of the United States




GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 2 ===
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:

I am pleased to be here today to provide you with preliminary
observations on some of the challenges facing our nation’s private pension
system. Pension income is crucial to American retirees’ standard of living.
About half of Americans over 65 receive payments from pensions and
savings plans, and such income represents about 18 percent of their total
income. Over 70 million workers participate in pension and savings plans,
and such plans in 1997 represented about $3.6 trillion in retirement
savings.

The federal government encourages employers to sponsor and maintain
pension and savings plans for their employees. The private pension system
is voluntary and consists of defined benefit plans and defined contribution
plans. Defined benefit plans promise to provide a level of retirement
income that is generally based on salary and years of service. Defined
contribution plans are based on the contributions to and investment
returns on the individual accounts. Such plans include thrift savings plans,
profit-sharing plans, and employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs).

The financial collapse of the Enron Corporation and its effect on the
company’s workers and retirees suggests certain vulnerabilities in these
selected savings mechanisms. Enron’s retirement plans, which included a
defined benefit cash balance plan, a defined contribution 401(k) plan, and
an ESOP, caused Congress to question specifically the use of employer
stock as the company match, the continued existence of floor offsets, and
the practice of investment freezes or lockdowns during changes in plan
administrators. The financial losses suffered by participants in Enron’s
retirement plans have raised questions about the benefits and limitations
of such private pension and savings plans and the challenges employees
face in saving for retirement through their employer-provided plans.

You asked me here today to help provide context for considering how to
address the vulnerabilities the Enron case may suggest. Accordingly, I will
discuss three areas that, because of the experience with Enron, appear
particularly salient to policymakers’ decisions: (1) the importance of
investment diversification and related investor education issues; (2) the
crucial role of disclosure, and what information employees need and can
expect about their company and their pension plans; and (3) the
importance of fiduciary rules in safeguarding employee pension assets. In
discussing these three issues, I will also address certain plan design issues
such as floor-offsets, using company stock in pension plans, and plan
operation issues, such as investment freezes or lockdowns. My

Page 1                                                           GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 3 ===
observations are based on prior GAO work, a preliminary review of
Enron’s and other public companies’ plans, discussions with industry
experts and senior regulatory officials, and my personal experience,
including my former position as Assistant Secretary of Labor for Pension
and Welfare Benefit Programs.

In summary, the collapse of the Enron Corporation and the accompanying
loss of Enron employees’ retirement savings appear to highlight
vulnerabilities in the private pension system and help focus attention on
strengthening several aspects of this system. Diversification of pension
assets is crucially important, particularly in a world where the use of
defined contribution plans—those plans in which employees bear the
investment risk—is increasing. If both the employees’ 401(k) contributions
and the company match are largely in employer stock, as was the case at
Enron, employees risk losing not only their jobs should the company go
out of business, but also a significant portion of their retirement savings.
The Enron situation suggests the importance of encouraging employees to
diversify but any action would have to be balanced against the desires of
employers and employees to maintain a portion of retirement savings in
company stock. In addition, the Enron situation illustrates the need to
provide employees with investment education and advice that will enable
them to better manage their retirement savings.

Workers need clear and understandable information about their pension
plans to make wise retirement saving decisions. While disclosure rules
state that plan sponsors must provide plan participants with a summary of
benefits and rights under their pension plan and notification when plan
benefits are changed, such information is not always clear, particularly in
describing complex plans, like floor-offset arrangements. We have also
observed in earlier work that wide variation exists in the type and
amounts of information workers receive about plan changes that can
potentially reduce pension benefits, and enhanced disclosure
requirements may be warranted. Furthermore, employees, like other
investors, need reliable and understandable information about a
company’s financial condition and prospects.

Finally, fiduciary standards form the cornerstone of private pension
protections. These standards require plan sponsors to act in a manner that
is solely in the interest of plan participants and beneficiaries. In the end,
investigations of Enron’s actions related to its plans will determine
whether plan fiduciaries acted in accordance with these responsibilities.
In light of Enron, policymakers may wish to consider whether current
fiduciary standards are sufficient or whether they require strengthening,

Page 2                                                           GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 4 ===
             and act accordingly to address these fundamental principles of pension
             management.

             The Enron collapse provides the Congress with clear examples of issues it
             may wish to consider when deciding whether and how to strengthen the
             security of plan benefits. These issues include employees’ need for
             enhanced education and appropriate investment advice, plan designs such
             as floor-offset arrangements and the use of employer stock in retirement
             savings plans, and plan operations, such as plan investment freezes and
             lockdowns. Addressing these issues will require balancing the need for
             greater participant protections with the potential increase in employer
             burden that could undermine their willingness to sponsor or contribute to
             such plans.


             The Internal Revenue Code (IRC) defines pension plans as either defined
Background   benefit or defined contribution and includes separate requirements for
             each type of plan. The employer, as plan sponsor, is responsible for
             funding the promised benefit, investing and managing the plan assets, and
             bearing the investment risk. If a defined benefit plan terminates with
             insufficient assets to pay promised benefits, the Pension Benefit Guaranty
             Corporation (PBGC) provides plan termination insurance to pay
             participants’ pension benefits up to certain limits.

             Under defined contribution plans, employees have individual accounts to
             which employers, employees, or both make periodic contributions. Plans
             that allow employees to choose to contribute a portion of their pre-tax
             compensation to the plan under section 401(k) of IRC are generally
             referred to as 401(k) plans. In many 401(k) plans employees can control
             the investments in their account while in other plans the employer
             controls the investments. ESOPs may also be combined with other
             pension plans, such as a profit-sharing plan or a 401(k) plan.1 Investment
             income earned on a 401(k) plan accumulates tax-free until an individual
             withdraws the funds. In a defined contribution plan, the employee bears
             the investment risk, and plan participants have no termination insurance.

             The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the Pension and Welfare Benefits
             Administration (PWBA) of the Department of Labor (DOL) are primarily
             responsible for enforcing laws related to private pension plans. Under the


             1
                 When an ESOP is combined with a 401(k) plan, it is called a KSOP.



             Page 3                                                                  GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 5 ===
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), as amended,
IRS enforces coverage and participation, vesting , and funding standards
that concern how plan participants become eligible to participate in
benefit plans, earn rights to benefits, and reasonable assurance that plans
have sufficient assets to pay promised benefits. IRS also enforces
provisions of the IRC that apply to pension plans, including provisions
under section 401(k) of the IRC. PWBA enforces ERISA’s reporting and
disclosure provisions and fiduciary standards, which concern how plans
should operate in the best interest of participants.

Since the 1980’s, there has been a significant shift from defined benefit
plans to defined contribution pension plans. Many employers sponsor both
types of plans, with the defined contribution plan supplementing the
defined benefit plan. However, most of the new pension plans adopted by
employers are defined contribution plans. According to the Department of
Labor, employers sponsored over 660,000 defined contribution plans as of
1997 compared with about 59,000 defined benefit plans. As shown in figure
1, defined contribution plans covered about 55 million participants, while
defined benefit plans covered over 40 million participants in 1997.




Page 4                                                          GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 6 ===
Figure 1: Participants in Private Pension Plans, 1997




                                         The number of employer-sponsored 401(k) plans has also increased
                                         substantially in recent years, increasing from over 17,000 in 1984 to over
                                         265,000 plans in 1997. In 1997, 401(k) plans accounted for 40 percent of all
                                         employer-sponsored defined contribution plans and approximately 37
                                         percent of all private pension plans. Approximately 33.8 million employees
                                         actively participated in a 401(k) plan, and these plans held about $1.3
                                         trillion in assets as of 1997.2

                                         The continued growth in the number of defined contribution plans and
                                         plan assets is encouraging, but concerns remain that many workers who
                                         traditionally lack pensions may not be benefiting from these plans, and the
                                         overall percentage of workers covered by pensions has remained relatively
                                         stable for many years. Furthermore, the trend toward defined contribution
                                         plans and the increased availability of lump-sum payments from pension
                                         plans when workers change jobs raises issues of whether workers will



                                         2
                                          “Private Pension Plan Bulletin: Abstract of 1997, Form 5500 Annual Reports.” US
                                         Department of Labor, Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration. Winter 2001.



                                         Page 5                                                                     GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 7 ===
preserve their pension benefits until retirement or outlive their retirement
assets.

Similar to other large companies, Enron sponsored both a defined benefit
plan and a defined contribution plan, covering over 20,000 employees.
Enron’s tax-qualified pension plans consisted of a 401(k)-defined
contribution plan, an employee stock ownership plan, and a defined
benefit cash balance plan. Under Enron’s 401(k) plan, participants were
allowed to contribute from 1 to 15 percent of their eligible base pay in any
combination of pre-tax salary deferrals or after-tax contributions subject
to certain limitations.3 Enron generally matched 50 percent of all
participants’ pre-tax contributions up to a maximum of 6 percent of an
employee’s base pay, with the matching contributions invested solely in
the Enron Corporation Stock Fund. Participants were allowed to
reallocate their company matching contributions among other investment
options when they reached the age of 50. 4

Enron’s employee stock ownership plan,5 like other ESOPs, was designed
to encourage employee ownership in their company. The plan provided
employee retirement benefits for workers’ service with the company


3
 Participants were immediately fully vested in their voluntary contributions and employees
hired after July 1999 are fully vested in their company contributions after 1 year of service.
4
 For defined benefit plans, ERISA limits the amount of employer stock and real property
that can be held to 10 percent of plan assets. However, defined contribution plans,
including 401(k) plans, ESOPs, and other defined contribution plans with individual
accounts, are generally exempt from this requirement. While the vast majority of 401(k)
plans are thus not subject to any restriction on the amount of employer stock that it may
hold, there are limited circumstances under which the 10 percent limitation could apply to
a 401(k) plan.
5
  The ESOP provided for three subaccounts, (1) a savings subaccount where the plan
allocated shares of Enron stock equal to 10 percent of each participant’s base pay; (2) a
retirement subaccount where the plan allocated shares of Enron stock based on each
participant’s age, years of service, and base pay; and (3) a special subaccount for
participants active on December 31, 1994, where the participants received an allocation to
this account and the defined benefit portion of their retirement plan. This allocation in
total equaled 5 percent of their base pay and was in lieu of an accrual to their 1995 defined
benefit plan. According to Enron plan documents, the vested portion of a participant’s
retirement subaccount was used to offset the benefit they earned from Enron’s cash
balance plan from January 1, 1987 through December 31, 1994. The offset was calculated
using the value of the shares of Enron stock based on the earlier of when the shares were
distributed or when the shares were available to be withdrawn from the ESOP. Once a plan
participant has access to the shares of his or her retirement subaccount, the shares’ value
is used to offset the benefit they have earned from the Enron defined benefit plan for their
service between January 1, 1987, and December 31, 1994.



Page 6                                                                         GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 8 ===
                        between January 1, 1987, and December 31, 1994. No new participants
                        were allowed into the ESOP after January 1, 1995.

                        Finally, Enron sponsored a cash balance plan, which accrued retirement
                        benefits to employees during their employment at Enron. An employee
                        was eligible to be a member of the cash balance plan immediately upon
                        being employed. According to DOL officials, the cash balance plan did not
                        have any investments in Enron stock as of the end of 2000. If the plan is
                        unable to pay promised benefits and is taken over by PBGC, vested
                        participants and retirees will receive their promised benefits up to the
                        limit guaranteed under ERISA.

                        The Enron collapse points to the importance of prudent investment
Greater                 principles such as diversification, including diversification of employer
Diversification and     matching contributions. Diversification helps individuals to mitigate the
                        risk of holding stocks by spreading their holdings over many investments
Investment              and reducing excessive exposure to any one source of risk. Many workers
Sophistication May Be   are covered by participant-directed 401(k) plans that allow participants to
Needed                  allocate the investment of their account balances among a menu of
                        investment options, including employer stock. Additionally, many plan
                        sponsors match participants’ elective contributions with shares of
                        employer stock.

                        When the employer’s stock constitutes the majority of employees’ account
                        balances and is the only type of matching contribution the employer
                        provides, employees are exposed to the possibility of losing more than
                        their job if the company goes out of business or into serious financial
                        decline. They are also exposed to the possibility of losing a major portion
                        of their retirement savings. For example, DOL reports that 63 percent of
                        Enron’s 401(k) assets were invested in company stock as of the end of
                        2000. These concentrations are the result both of employee investment
                        choice and employer matching with company stock. The types of losses
                        experienced by Enron employees could have been limited if employees
                        had diversified their account balances and if they had been able to
                        diversify their company matching contributions more quickly.

                        Companies prefer to match employees’ contributions with company stock
                        for a number of reasons. First, when a company makes its matching
                        contribution in the form of company stock, issuing the stock has little
                        impact on the company’s financial statement in the short term. Second,
                        stock contributions are fully deductible as a business expense for tax
                        purposes at the share price in effect when the company contributes them.
                        Third, matching contributions in company stock puts more company

                        Page 7                                                          GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 9 ===
shares in the hands of employees who some officials feel are less likely to
sell their shares if the company’s profits are less than expected or in the
event of a takeover. Finally, companies point out that matching with
company stock promotes a sense of employee ownership, linking the
interests of employees with the company and other shareholders.

Some pension experts have said that easing employer restrictions on when
employees are allowed to sell their company matching contributions
would increase their ability to diversify. In 1997, a majority of the Pension
and Welfare Benefits Administration Advisory Council working group on
employer assets in ERISA plans recommended that participants in 401(k)
plans be able to sell employer stock when they become vested in the plan.6
Additionally, legislation has recently been introduced that would limit the
amount of employer stock that can be held in participants’ 401(k)
accounts and provide participants greater freedom to diversify their
employer matching contributions. Proponents of allowing employees to
diversify employer stock matching contributions more quickly say that this
would benefit both employers and employees by maintaining the tax and
financial benefits for the company while providing employees with more
investment freedom and increased retirement benefit security. However,
others have expressed concern that further restrictions on employer plan
designs may reduce incentives for employers to sponsor plans or provide
matching contributions.

Even with opportunities to diversify, studies indicate that employees will
need education to improve their ability to manage their retirement savings.
Numerous studies have looked at how well individuals who are currently
investing understand investments and the markets. 7 On the basis of those
studies, it is clear that among those who save through their company’s
retirement programs or on their own, large percentages of the investing
population are unsophisticated and do not fully understand the risks
associated with their investment choices. For example, one study found
that 47 percent of 401(k) plan participants believe that stocks are
components of a money market fund, and 55 percent of those surveyed



6
 Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration Advisory Council on Employee Welfare and
Pension Benefits Plans, Report of the Working Group on Employer Assets in ERISA
Employer-Sponsored Plans, November 13, 1997.
7
 U.S. General Accounting Office, Social Security: Capital Markets and Educational
Issues Associated With Individual Accounts, GAO/GGD-99-115 (Washington, D.C., June
1999).



Page 8                                                                  GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 10 ===
thought that they could not lose money in government bond funds.
Another study on the financial literacy of mutual fund investors found that
less than half of all investors correctly understood the purpose of
diversification. These studies and others indicate the need for enhanced
investment education about such topics as investing, the relationship
between risk and return, and the potential benefits of diversification.

In addition to investor education, employees may need more
individualized investment advice. Such investment advice becomes even
more important as participation in 401(k) plans continues to increase.
ERISA does not require plan sponsors to make investment advice available
to plan participants. Under ERISA, providing investment advice results in
fiduciary responsibility for those providing the advice, while providing
investment education does not. ERISA does, however, establish conditions
employers must meet8 in order to be shielded from fiduciary liability
related to investment choices made by employees in their participant-
directed accounts. In 1996, DOL issued guidance to employers and
investment advisers on how to provide educational investment
information and analysis to participants without triggering fiduciary
liability. DOL recently issued guidance about investment advice making it
easier for plans to use independent investment advisors to provide advice
to employees in retirement plans.

Industry representatives that we spoke with said more companies are
providing informational sessions with investment advisors to help
employees better understand their investments and the risk of not
diversifying. They also said that changes are needed under ERISA to better
shield employers from fiduciary liability for investment advisors’
recommendations to individual participants. ERISA currently prohibits
fiduciary investment advisors from engaging in transactions with clients’
plans where they have a conflict of interest, for example, when the
advisors are providing other services such as plan administration. As a
result, investment advisors cannot provide specific investment advice to
401(k) plan participants about their firm’s investment products without
approval from DOL. Various legislative proposals have been introduced
that would address employers’ concern about fiduciary liability when they
make investment advice available to plan participants and make it easier
for fiduciary investment advisors to provide investment advice to



8
 These include a minimum number of investment options and related material that must be
provided to participants.



Page 9                                                                   GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 11 ===
                      participants when they also provide other services to the participants’
                      plan. However, concerns remain that such proposals may not adequately
                      protect plan participants from conflicted advice.


                      Enron’s failure highlights the importance of plan participants receiving
Enhanced Disclosure   clear information about their pension plan and any changes to it that could
Could Help            affect plan benefits. Current ERISA disclosure requirements provide only
                      minimum guidelines that firms must follow on the type of information they
Employees             provide plan participants. Improving the amount of disclosure provided to
Understand            plan participants and also ensuring that such disclosure is in plain English
                      could help participants better manage the risks they face.
Investment Risks
They Face             Enron’s pension plans illustrate the complex nature of some plan designs
                      that may be difficult for participants to understand. For example, Enron’s
                      pension plans included a floor-offset arrangement. Such arrangements
                      consist of separate, but associated defined benefit and defined
                      contribution plans. The benefits accrued under one plan offset the benefit
                      payable from the other. In 1987, Congress limited the use of such plans.
                      However, plans in existence when the provision was enacted, including
                      Enron’s plan, were grandfathered. In addition, Enron’s conversion of its
                      defined benefit plan from one type of benefit formula to another illustrates
                      the types of changes and their consequent affect on benefits that plan
                      participants need to understand. Enron’s defined benefit plan was
                      converted from a final average pay formula—where the pension benefit is
                      a percentage of the participant’s final years of pay multiplied by his or her
                      length of service—to a cash balance formula, which expresses the defined
                      benefit as a hypothetical account balance. As we have previously reported,
                      conversions to cash balance plans can be advantageous to certain groups
                      of workers—for example, those who switch jobs frequently—but can
                      lower the pension benefits of others. 9

                      The extent to which Enron employees were informed or understood the
                      effect of the floor-offset or the conversion of their defined benefit plan to a
                      cash balance formula is unclear. As stated in a prior GAO report on cash
                      balance plans10, we found wide variation in the type and amounts of
                      information workers receive about plan changes and that can potentially


                      9
                       U.S. General Accounting Office, Private Pension Plans: Implications of Conversions to
                      Cash Balance Plans, GAO/HEHS-00-185, (Washington, D.C., September 2000).
                      10
                           See footnote 9.



                      Page 10                                                                   GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 12 ===
                    reduce pensions benefits. Based in part on our recommendations, the
                    Congress, under the Economics Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act
                    of 2001, required that employers provide participants more timely and
                    clear information concerning changes to plans that could reduce their
                    future benefits. The Treasury Department is responsible for issuing the
                    applicable regulations implementing this requirement. 11

                    Other types of information may also be beneficial to plan participants.
                    Currently, ERISA requires that plan administrators provide each plan
                    participant with a summary of certain financial data reported to DOL. As
                    we previously reported,12 the Secretary of Labor could require that plan
                    administrators provide plan participants with information about the
                    employers’ financial condition and other information. Such information
                    could enable employees to be more fully informed about their holdings
                    and any potential risks associated with them.


                    Under ERISA, fiduciaries are held to high but broad standards. Persons
ERISA Requires      who perform certain tasks, generally involving the use of a plan’s assets,
Fiduciaries to be   become fiduciaries because of those duties. Others, such as the plan
                    sponsor, the plan administrator, or a trustee are fiduciaries because of
Prudent and         their position. Fiduciaries are required to act solely in the interest of plan
Reasonable          participants and beneficiaries. They are to adhere to a standard referred to
                    as the prudent expert rule, which requires them to act as a prudent person
                    experienced in such matters would in similar circumstances. Fiduciaries
                    are required to follow their plan’s documents and act in accordance with
                    the terms of the plan as it is set out. If fiduciaries do not perform their
                    duties in accordance with ERISA standards, they may be held personally
                    liable for any breach of their duty.

                    Yet, even with the high standards and broad guidance provided by ERISA,
                    in some cases the actions of fiduciaries can seem to conflict with the best
                    interests of plan participants. During the period when revelations about
                    Enron’s finances were contributing to the steady devaluation of Enron’s
                    stock price, Enron’s plan fiduciaries imposed a lockdown on the 401(k)
                    plan, preventing employees from making withdrawals or investment


                    11
                         Public Law 107-16.
                    12
                      U.S. General Accounting Office, 401(k) Pension Plans: Extent of Plans’ Investments in
                    Employer Securities and Real Property, GAO/HEHS-98-28 (Washington, D.C., November
                    1997).



                    Page 11                                                                   GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 13 ===
              transfers.13 Enron imposed the lockdown to change recordkeepers, an
              acceptable practice. Some observers, however, have questioned whether
              Enron employees were sufficiently notified about the lockdown.
              Observers have also questioned the equity of treatment between Enron
              senior executives and Enron workers during the lockdown. Enron’s
              employees were unable to make changes to their 401(k) accounts during
              the plan’s lockdown period. However, Enron executives did not face
              similar restrictions on company stock not held in the plan. Fairness would
              suggest that company executives should face similar restrictions in their
              ability to sell company stock during lockdown periods when workers are
              unable to make 401(k) investment changes. This is especially true for
              those executives who serve as pension plan fiduciaries, including plan
              trustees.


              The Enron collapse, although not by itself evidence that private pension
Conclusions   law should be changed, serves to illustrate what can happen to employees’
              retirement savings under certain conditions. Specifically, it illustrates the
              importance of diversification for retirement savings as well as employees’
              need for enhanced education, appropriate investment advice, and greater
              disclosure. All of these may help them better navigate the risks they face in
              saving for retirement.

              In addition to the broad issues of diversification and education, Enron’s
              collapse raises questions about the relationship between various plan
              designs and participant benefit security. In particular, Congress may wish
              to consider whether further restrictions on floor-offset arrangements are
              warranted, whether to provide additional employee flexibility in
              connection with matches in the form of employer stocks, and whether to
              limit the amount of employer stock that can be held in certain retirement
              saving plans. Resolving these issues will require considering the tradeoffs
              between providing greater participant protections and employers’ need for
              flexibility in plan design. Finally, Congress will have to weigh whether to
              rely on the broad fiduciary standards established in ERISA that currently
              govern fiduciary actions or to impose specific requirements that would
              govern certain plan administrative operations such as plan investment
              freezes or lockdowns.


              13
                The Department of Labor is investigating Enron to determine whether there were any
              ERISA violations in the operation of the company’s employee benefit plans. DOL also
              recently reached an agreement with Enron to appoint an independent fiduciary to assume
              control of the company’s retirement plans.



              Page 12                                                                   GAO-02-480T

=== PAGE 14 ===
                  Mr. Chairman this concludes my statement. I would be happy to answer
                  any questions you or other members of the Committees may have.


                  For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Barbara
Contacts and      D. Bovbjerg, Director, or George A. Scott, Assistant Director, Education,
Acknowledgments   Workforce, and Income Security (202) 512-7215. Individuals making key
                  contributions to this testimony include Joseph Applebaum, Jeremy Citro,
                  Tamara Cross, Patrick DiBattista, Raun Lazier, and Roger Thomas.




(130128)
                  Page 13                                                        GAO-02-480T
