
=== PAGE 1 ===
                                            THE FINANCIAL COLLAPSE OF ENRON—Part 1



                                                                             HEARING
                                                                                   BEFORE THE

                                                               SUBCOMMITTEE ON
                                                         OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS
                                                                                       OF THE


                                                    COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
                                                           COMMERCE
                                                    HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
                                                          ONE HUNDRED SEVENTH CONGRESS
                                                                               SECOND SESSION


                                                                              FEBRUARY 5, 2002



                                                                       Serial No. 107–86

                                                 Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce




                                                                                      (
                                           Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.access.gpo.gov/congress/house


                                                                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                            77–985CC                            WASHINGTON : 2002

                                                      For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
                                                   Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800
                                                           Fax: (202) 512–2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402–0001




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002    Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00001     Fmt 5011   Sfmt 5011    W:\DISC\77985     pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 2 ===
                                                           COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
                                                          W.J. ‘‘BILLY’’ TAUZIN, Louisiana, Chairman
                                     MICHAEL BILIRAKIS, Florida                 JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
                                     JOE BARTON, Texas                          HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
                                     FRED UPTON, Michigan                       EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
                                     CLIFF STEARNS, Florida                     RALPH M. HALL, Texas
                                     PAUL E. GILLMOR, Ohio                      RICK BOUCHER, Virginia
                                     JAMES C. GREENWOOD, Pennsylvania           EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
                                     CHRISTOPHER COX, California                FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
                                     NATHAN DEAL, Georgia                       SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
                                     STEVE LARGENT, Oklahoma                    BART GORDON, Tennessee
                                     RICHARD BURR, North Carolina               PETER DEUTSCH, Florida
                                     ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                     BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
                                     GREG GANSKE, Iowa                          ANNA G. ESHOO, California
                                     CHARLIE NORWOOD, Georgia                   BART STUPAK, Michigan
                                     BARBARA CUBIN, Wyoming                     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
                                     JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois                     TOM SAWYER, Ohio
                                     HEATHER WILSON, New Mexico                 ALBERT R. WYNN, Maryland
                                     JOHN B. SHADEGG, Arizona                   GENE GREEN, Texas
                                     CHARLES ‘‘CHIP’’ PICKERING, Mississippi    KAREN MCCARTHY, Missouri
                                     VITO FOSSELLA, New York                    TED STRICKLAND, Ohio
                                     ROY BLUNT, Missouri                        DIANA DEGETTE, Colorado
                                     TOM DAVIS, Virginia                        THOMAS M. BARRETT, Wisconsin
                                     ED BRYANT, Tennessee                       BILL LUTHER, Minnesota
                                     ROBERT L. EHRLICH, Jr., Maryland           LOIS CAPPS, California
                                     STEVE BUYER, Indiana                       MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
                                     GEORGE RADANOVICH, California              CHRISTOPHER JOHN, Louisiana
                                     CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire             JANE HARMAN, California
                                     JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
                                     MARY BONO, California
                                     GREG WALDEN, Oregon
                                     LEE TERRY, Nebraska
                                                             DAVID V. MARVENTANO, Staff Director
                                                             JAMES D. BARNETTE, General Counsel
                                                  REID P.F. STUNTZ, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel



                                                         SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS
                                                         JAMES C. GREENWOOD, Pennsylvania, Chairman
                                     MICHAEL BILIRAKIS, Florida             PETER DEUTSCH, Florida
                                     CLIFF STEARNS, Florida                 BART STUPAK, Michigan
                                     PAUL E. GILLMOR, Ohio                  TED STRICKLAND, Ohio
                                     STEVE LARGENT, Oklahoma                DIANA DEGETTE, Colorado
                                     RICHARD BURR, North Carolina           CHRISTOPHER JOHN, Louisiana
                                     ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
                                       Vice Chairman                        JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan,
                                     CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire           (Ex Officio)
                                     W.J. ‘‘BILLY’’ TAUZIN, Louisiana
                                       (Ex Officio)

                                                                                      (II)




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00002   Fmt 0486   Sfmt 0486   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 3 ===
                                                                           CONTENTS

                                                                                                                                           Page
                                     Testimony of:
                                         Powers, William C., Jr., Chairman, Special Investigative Committee,
                                           Board of Directors, Enron Corporation .......................................................    15

                                                                                        (III)




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00003    Fmt 0486    Sfmt 0486   W:\DISC\77985    pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 4 ===
VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00004   Fmt 0486   Sfmt 0486   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 5 ===
                                     THE FINANCIAL COLLAPSE OF ENRON—Part 1

                                                                   TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 2002

                                                              HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
                                                       COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE,
                                               SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS,
                                                                                       Washington, DC.
                                        The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room
                                     2322, Rayburn House Office Building, James C. Greenwood (chair-
                                     man) presiding.
                                        Membes present: Representatives Greenwood, Stearns, Burr,
                                     Whitfield, Bass, Tauzin (ex officio), Deutsch, Stupak, DeGette,
                                     John, Rush, and Dingell (ex officio).
                                        Also present: Representatives Barton and Green.
                                        Staff present: Tom DiLenge, majority counsel; Mark Paoletta,
                                     majority counsel; Michael Geffroy, majority counsel; Jennifer
                                     Safavian, majority counsel; Casey Hemard, majority counsel;
                                     Brendan Williams, legislative clerk; William Carty, legislative
                                     clerk; Peter Kielty, legislative clerk; Chris Knauer, minority coun-
                                     sel; and John Cordone, minority counsel.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. This hearing of the Energy and Commerce
                                     Committee, the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations will
                                     come to order. The Chair recognizes himself for purposes of an
                                     opening statement.
                                        Today, we engage in the first part of a multi-day hearing into the
                                     financial collapse of the Enron Corporation. The principal focus of
                                     this stage of our investigation will be a series of transactions be-
                                     tween Enron and several partnerships created and controlled by
                                     senior Enron officers and employees. By now, some key events that
                                     precipitated Enron’s collapse have become familiar, though not yet
                                     fully understood by the public. These events serve as the point of
                                     entry into our hearing today.
                                        In October, Enron, which until recently was considered to be one
                                     of America’s largest and most profitable corporations, announced
                                     an unexpected after-tax charge against earnings of more than $500
                                     million and a reduction in shareholder equity of more than $1 bil-
                                     lion. The losses stem from Enron’s transactions with an entity
                                     about which we will hear a great deal over the next few days:
                                     LJM2. It was an entity whose named was formed using the initials
                                     of the spouse and children of its creator, Andy Fastow, who at that
                                     time was Enron’s chief financial officer.
                                        The news of this financial bombshell and the curious role played
                                     by Enron’s CFO in it prompted immediate concern in the market
                                     and in the media and resulted in the SEC opening an inquiry into
                                     the transactions involving LJM2. Enron’s CFO was put on leave
                                                                                      (1)




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00005   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 6 ===
                                                                                          2

                                     and subsequently fired, in Ken Lay’s words, quote, ‘‘To restore in-
                                     vestor confidence.’’
                                        Already reeling from this management debacle and with its stock
                                     trading at sharply lower levels, Enron suffered an even greater em-
                                     barrassment when in November of last year the corporation was
                                     obligated to restate its financial statements for the years 1997
                                     through 1999. Now, instead of showing a strong balance sheet, the
                                     company was reporting multibillion dollar losses in earnings and in
                                     equity. The accounting practices, behind which these losses had
                                     until then been hidden, had also been used to mask huge losses in
                                     two other partnerships inspired by Mr. Fastow. These were the
                                     LJM Cayman partnership, also known as LJM1, and yet another
                                     related party entity, known as Chewco Investments.
                                        The second admission by Enron’s corporate team effectively for-
                                     feited any remaining market for investor confidence in the com-
                                     pany. Enron’s stock took its final plummet, forcing yet more debts
                                     to come due. In a matter of weeks, a firm which had until only re-
                                     cently been hailed as a shining example of American enterprise
                                     was now forced to declare bankruptcy. An astounding $70 billion
                                     in market value evaporated seemingly overnight, bringing financial
                                     ruin to thousands of employees and investors.
                                        In recent weeks, committee investigators have sorted through
                                     Enron’s wreckage, and in particular the Chewco, LJM1, LJM2 and
                                     associated deals, to learn what happened. We have discovered that
                                     while thousands of hardworking employees suffered terribly, there
                                     was a small group at the top who carted away millions from these
                                     very deals that ultimately led to Enron’s collapse. And we have dis-
                                     covered a disturbing pattern of activity that directly contributed to
                                     the demise of this company: a web of apparent misrepresentations,
                                     half truths, deceit and self-dealing in which a significant number
                                     of company leaders became entangled.
                                        You will have an opportunity to hear explanations from some of
                                     those in positions of responsibility at the continuation of this hear-
                                     ing on Thursday, but today we will focus on the findings of Enron’s
                                     Special Investigative Committee. The Special Investigative Com-
                                     mittee was set up by Enron’s Board of Directors to conduct an inde-
                                     pendent examination of the very transactions the committee is now
                                     investigating. Its 200-page report released over the weekend draws
                                     a very disturbing picture of Enron’s activities which, sadly, appears
                                     to confirm our own findings to date.
                                        The report describes a series of highly questionable transactions
                                     that enriched a small number of corporate bigwigs at the expense
                                     of the company and of its shareholders. More disturbing still, it de-
                                     scribes a complicated set of transactions by these individuals which
                                     were portrayed at the time as actions designed to guard against
                                     Enron’s future losses. But its own true purpose was to hide large
                                     and increasingly unmanageable amounts of debt and liability.
                                        The report uses the word ‘‘obtuse’’ to describe investor disclosures
                                     that failed miserably to accurately convey the true financial state
                                     of the company or the risks attendant to the off-the-book dealings
                                     with various partnerships. It exposes a troubling lack of govern-
                                     ance and management oversight and the failure on the part of out-
                                     side advisors, the accountants and legal experts responsible for
                                     evaluating these transactions to make clear to investors what inde-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00006   Fmt 6633       Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 7 ===
                                                                                          3

                                     pendent experts now comprehend. Enron’s accounting tactics went
                                     well beyond the aggressive, apparently violating or circumventing
                                     several of the accounting professions most basic rules.
                                       Clearly, there is much troubling information in this report for us
                                     to consider as we move forward. Our sole witness today is William
                                     C. Powers, Dean of the University of Texas Law School. Dean Pow-
                                     ers was appointed to Enron’s Board of Directors just this past Octo-
                                     ber to Chair this special committee. He has graciously accepted our
                                     invitation to testify as to the report’s troubling findings. I am cer-
                                     tain that Dean Powers’ informed testimony will contribute to the
                                     factual backdrop for subsequent hearings with current and former
                                     Enron and Andersen officials. I thank him for his hard work in pre-
                                     paring this report in such an expedited time schedule and for his
                                     testimony today.
                                       The Chair recognizes the ranking member of this subcommittee,
                                     the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Deutsch.
                                       Mr. DEUTSCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
                                     you for holding this very important hearing, and I also want to
                                     thank our staffs, both the majority and minority, who are working
                                     very closely together. We actually know more than we knew last
                                     week when this subcommittee held the first hearing on the demise
                                     of Enron, and I am sure we will know more by the end of the week
                                     as well.
                                       This is some of the things that we are disclosing—or uncovering
                                     at this point in time. This is from Enron’s documents that our staff
                                     uncovered, and it is a simplified diagram of 1 of the 4,000 partner-
                                     ships. I mean a simplified diagram is almost comical to try to un-
                                     derstand that one partnership.
                                       You know, I have had the opportunity to read through a large
                                     part of the report, as well as the summary, and obviously it is ex-
                                     tensive. It is extensive in terms of understanding of what hap-
                                     pened, but I am going to quote from something I read this morning
                                     that Arthur Levitt (ph) just wrote: ‘‘Yet for all their excesses, ana-
                                     lysts don’t have a fiduciary duty to shareholders; board of directors
                                     do.’’ Enron’s board failed the smell test. Millions lost money and ca-
                                     reers were destroyed while the company and its directors began to
                                     question mutual beneficial arrangements.
                                       The SEC and stock exchanges must now revisit the issue of
                                     board and audit committee responsibility. Consulting contracts for
                                     directors should be barred as well as seductions in the form of cor-
                                     porate jet usage and support for directors’ favorite charities. Most
                                     important, at least half of every board must be independent by the
                                     most rigorous definition of the term.
                                       I think what we know at this point is that these partnerships
                                     were used as a deception for people to understand what the status
                                     of the company was. And what this report, Mr. Powers’ report, does
                                     is lays out some of these interlocking relationships between man-
                                     agement and people who got direct benefits by these partnerships.
                                     And one of the questions—and it is not just understanding Enron,
                                     but I think the issue for the committee and for the Congress and
                                     really beyond that, for the country as well, is, No. 1, are there
                                     other Enrons out there? Because if Enron and the people involved
                                     in Enron figured out the use of these partnerships as a way to ef-
                                     fectively get millions, in fact, collectively, billions of dollars in per-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00007   Fmt 6633       Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 8 ===
                                                                                          4

                                     sonal theft, then the motivation is probably out there for other
                                     companies to be doing the same thing.
                                        But the system should not allow it. I mean I think what is clear
                                     from your report is that both management and the board of direc-
                                     tors had to have been knowing what was going on. And, in fact, if
                                     officers claim they don’t know the truth, they are not telling the
                                     truth. No one has ever accused these people of being stupid.
                                        Now, Business Week recently wrote, ‘‘This is corruption on a
                                     massive scale. Tremendous harm has befallen innocent employees
                                     who have seen their retirement savings disappear as a few at the
                                     top cashed out. Terrible things have happened to the way business
                                     is conducted under the scope of deregulation. Serious damage has
                                     been done to ethical codes of conduct held by once trusted business
                                     professionals.’’
                                        It is difficult not to contrast professionalism of modestly paid fire
                                     fighters and police doing their duty on September 11 with the se-
                                     cretive and squirrely behavior of 6- and 7- figure accountants, law-
                                     yers, CEOs, bankers, financial analysts who failed at their duty
                                     with Enron. And, again, I emphasize their duty because the system
                                     is set up for this never to have happened in the first place.
                                        Mr. Chairman, after reading this report, I do not believe that
                                     Enron can emerge from bankruptcy until its entire top manage-
                                     ment has been removed. They all played a role in creating the envi-
                                     ronment that allowed this debacle, and they cannot be expected to
                                     now change their stripes.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                     nizes the chairman of the full committee, the gentleman from Lou-
                                     isiana, Mr. Tauzin.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and my particu-
                                     larly thanks, first, to Mr. Dingell again for the extraordinary cor-
                                     roborative work that our investigative teams are doing in a bipar-
                                     tisan fashion on this issue, and to Dean Powers for taking on this
                                     awesome responsibility and for executing within the limits of his
                                     capabilities. We have noted very carefully you had not the power
                                     to subpoena or to compel testimony of witnesses or documents. You
                                     didn’t have access to all the partnership papers, and you mentioned
                                     that your report is only as good as the information provided to you.
                                     But you have done an excellent job and your report tracks what
                                     our investigators on both sides of the aisle are finding in this case,
                                     and I want to thank you for that.
                                        But what you have basically found, and we will get into it a lot
                                     more tomorrow and Thursday, is an aberration, I hope, in Amer-
                                     ican corporate history, an extraordinary aberration. But it is an old
                                     story. It is a story of insider theft, just using new wrapping and
                                     new forms and procedures to carry it out. It is a story, as you point
                                     out over and over again in your report, of the failure to follow ac-
                                     counting principles, to circumvent the accounting principles, to or-
                                     ganize these structures improperly. Time after time you talk about
                                     the fact that had they followed the rules this wouldn’t have hap-
                                     pened, that Chewco was improperly constructed and JEDI failed
                                     for the same reason, and all of these structures that were created
                                     to put debt off the balance sheets ended up being shams at the end,
                                     because they didn’t follow the integrity of the accounting principles




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00008   Fmt 6633       Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 9 ===
                                                                                          5

                                     that everyone else in the country, every other corporation in Amer-
                                     ican tends to follow.
                                        I want to use the rest of my time in opening, Mr. Chairman,
                                     however, to speak directly to Mr. Ken Lay. Mr. Lay, wherever you
                                     are, I am sorry your attorneys were offended by anything Mr. Dor-
                                     gan and I had to say on Meet the Press this weekend. I have got
                                     a little excuse for being tired. I got rear-ended by a drunk driver
                                     that night and then attended the Washington Mardi Gras until 2
                                     a.m. in the morning before I read your report, Mr. Powers. But Mr.
                                     Dorgan was not tired, and neither he nor I misstated the facts.
                                        Your report, Mr. Powers, points to the high probability of secu-
                                     rity fraud at Enron. And your report lays the blame for what hap-
                                     pened on a host of parties, and you didn’t leave Mr. Lay out. You
                                     reminded him of his responsibility as the head of the organization,
                                     to be a better supervisor, to actually know what was going on if
                                     he didn’t.
                                        And I am sorry if that offended your lawyers, Mr. Lay, but let
                                     me, please, ask you to consider for your own good, if when Sherron
                                     Watkins reported to you in August of 2001 in a lengthy meeting
                                     that Enron was about to implode in an accounting scandal, if
                                     Sherron Watkins was kind enough to tell you in that memo in 2001
                                     in a private meeting with you, Mr. Lay, that your company had
                                     been robbing the bank and for the last 2 years was trying to pay
                                     it back, that is how bad things were, that is how big the cancer was
                                     eating away at the Enron Corporation, its employees and everyone
                                     who counted and trusted in it and invested in it, if that wasn’t
                                     enough for your lawyers to be concerned about your testimony be-
                                     fore a congressional committee, get yourself some new lawyers, sir.
                                        If when the SEC announced it was beginning an informal inquiry
                                     and then a formal inquiry into the operations of the security trad-
                                     ing at Enron and the sham proceedings that went on there, if your
                                     lawyers weren’t sufficiently concerned about your potential liability
                                     and involvement in this matter, get yourself some new lawyers, sir.
                                        If when the Justice Department announced that it was con-
                                     ducting a formal Justice inquiry into illegalities, potential illegal-
                                     ities at Enron and when the FBI arrived in Houston to look at your
                                     books and at Arthur Andersen books only to find out that Shredco
                                     had been hired by Enron to destroy documents and Enron’s offi-
                                     cials—Arthur Andersen officials, rather, had put out a retention
                                     and destruction policy that went right through the SEC subpoena,
                                     if that wasn’t enough to warn you and your attorneys that there
                                     was real problems for all of you, get yourself some new attorneys.
                                        And if when Dean Powers, hired by Enron, by you and the Board
                                     of Directors at Enron to find out what went wrong and who wrote
                                     this report indicating that accounting principles were ignored, cir-
                                     cumvented and violated right and left in all these dealings and the
                                     American public was told that you had a billion dollars of income
                                     you didn’t have and debt was hidden from investors who should
                                     have known that the value at Enron wasn’t there, if all of that
                                     wasn’t enough for you to understand you had legal problems, and
                                     testifying in front of Congress was a risky business, then get your-
                                     self some new lawyers.
                                        And I have got a suggestion for you. Maybe your family is right,
                                     maybe you are broke, and maybe you can’t afford to hire some law-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00009   Fmt 6633       Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 10 ===
                                                                                          6

                                     yers, maybe you can sell a house in Aspen and buy yourself some
                                     new lawyers. But if that doesn’t work, maybe you ought to get a
                                     hold of Mr. Fastow and Mr. Skilling and they can put together an-
                                     other little partnership for you and get some investors in and get
                                     yourself some lawyers, sir, because somebody is going to need some
                                     lawyers in this case, somebody needs them desperately. And it took
                                     Mr. Dorgan and I on Meet the Press to say the obvious, that the
                                     Powers report indicates the high probability of security fraud in
                                     this case, this awful aberration in corporate America, that account-
                                     ing principles were flaunted, ignored and circumvented right and
                                     left to the detriment of every investor and every employee of this
                                     company, if it took that, if took Mr. Dorgan and I saying that on
                                     television for you to understand that you were at some risk coming
                                     to testify in Congress without the benefit of legal counsel or per-
                                     haps even the Fifth Amendment, then get yourself some new law-
                                     yers, sir.
                                        Mr. Powers, thank you for your contribution. As you point out,
                                     this is just the beginning. Your report would change dramatically
                                     if you had all the facts. We have got the advantage of subpoena
                                     power, we have got the advantage of compelling the production of
                                     documents, those that haven’t been destroyed, and we are going to
                                     find out who owns those partnerships and those special entities,
                                     and we are going to find out what happened, because we have some
                                     powers working with the FBI and the SEC that perhaps you didn’t
                                     have. But you did a heck of a job for us already, and we thank you
                                     for it. Thank you.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                     nizes for an opening statement the ranking member of the full com-
                                     mittee, Mr. Dingell.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the courtesy. I com-
                                     mend you again for this hearing, and it is my hope that this hear-
                                     ing will lead to a complete inquiry into the matters that are now
                                     before us, including legislative and administrative changes that
                                     need to be made in the process.
                                        I wish to begin by thanking you, Mr. Powers, and your counsel
                                     for presenting a very useful report on the related party trans-
                                     actions and other matters. You have done a fine job. I am troubled
                                     that some of those who were involved refuse to cooperate. I believe
                                     that raises questions into which the committee must go. I am also
                                     concerned about the limitations raised by the participation of Mr.
                                     Herbert Winokur, a long-time director. I will note the report is a
                                     devastating document. It outlines an extraordinary web of cor-
                                     porate chicanery and deceit. It provides a very useful starting point
                                     for this committee and a significant road map for this committee’s
                                     efforts to unravel this sorry mess.
                                        I will observe that it reminds me of what used to be said by one
                                     of baseball’s greats, ‘‘This is deja vu all over again.’’ It brings me
                                     back to the days of Mr. Sam Insel and also, perhaps, to Mr. Ponzi
                                     and other people of this kind. For those who don’t remember Mr.
                                     Insel, and I have only vague remembrance of him, he was a fellow
                                     who built enormous pyramids, which he built and milked for the
                                     benefit of himself and his friends. It led to significant changes in
                                     the law, including the creation of the SEC, the passage of the dif-
                                     ferent securities laws, the Public Utility Holding Company Act and




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00010   Fmt 6633       Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 11 ===
                                                                                          7

                                     a wide array of other statutory changes to protect investors, con-
                                     sumers, employees and pensioners. And it looks like something of
                                     that kind has to be done again to address the efforts of those who
                                     have brought Enron, its investors, its employees, and its pensioners
                                     to such a sorry state today.
                                        Your report, in often numbing detail, describes some of the finan-
                                     cial sleights of hand that Enron executives used to hide the result
                                     of either stunningly inept business decisions or outrageously cor-
                                     rupt behavior by themselves and their friends. It also describes the
                                     disgusting self-enrichment by senior executives who sold out their
                                     fiduciary duties to the shareholders. And, it describes an extraor-
                                     dinary laxity, if not worse, of those responsible for keeping such be-
                                     havior in check.
                                        One must ask, how were senior Enron executives able to use the
                                     company as their personal financial plaything? First, because of a
                                     massive failure of corporate governance. Was the highly paid board
                                     of directors simply asleep, or was it corrupt, or was it both? Second,
                                     because of an extraordinary failure by accounting and legal profes-
                                     sionals to provide objective, independent, and forceful advice. Why
                                     were they acting like trained seals to the management? Again,
                                     were they incompetent, were they corrupt? We hope that this pro-
                                     ceeding and others will lead us to some intelligent answers. Third,
                                     because of a massive failure by so-called experts in the credit rat-
                                     ing agencies, the investment banks and the brokerage houses. Why
                                     didn’t they ask tough questions?
                                        What we learn today will set the stage for a much more exten-
                                     sive inquiry into these matters. For example, we will also need to
                                     learn much more about whether weakness in government regula-
                                     tion of markets for financial instruments and vital commodities
                                     may have allowed this rascality to flourish. And we will need to re-
                                     examine the special protections that the Congress provided ac-
                                     countants in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995,
                                     which came forth from this committee with the enthusiastic sup-
                                     port of some of the people who are still on the committee. I am sure
                                     that they will enjoy explaining their support of that proposal and
                                     also their support of proposals which have constrained the SEC in
                                     its efforts to lead to a more vigorous, truthful, effective, and pro-
                                     public accounting industry.
                                        In any event, Mr. Powers, we are grateful to you for a very use-
                                     ful report, and for your appearance here today. Mr. Chairman, I
                                     thank you.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                     nizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Burr, for an opening
                                     statement.
                                        Mr. BURR. Thank the chairman. Dean Powers, welcome.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Thank you.
                                        Mr. BURR. This almost makes law school seem fun, doesn’t it?
                                     Clearly, you have gone through some tough changes since October;
                                     so have the employees of Enron and the confidence of the investor
                                     in America. Let me commend you for the work of your committee.
                                        I think there were many that thought that reports that came out
                                     on Enron’s downfall might have a lot to do about the definition of
                                     shredding or the definition of revenues or debt. And in fact what
                                     you found in your investigation, the only 3 months it took, was




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00011   Fmt 6633       Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 12 ===
                                                                                          8

                                     more than, in fact, the auditors found in 4 years. It took them 4
                                     years to make some of the changes that you identified in 3 months.
                                     It took the Enron management 4 years to fess up to real revenue
                                     and debt numbers that you found accurately in a three-money pe-
                                     riod. These revisions contributed greatly to the lack of confidence
                                     that the investors had in Enron as a company.
                                        I am convinced that there was one thing that you did uncover:
                                     That at Enron there was a two-headed coin. On both sides of that
                                     coin was Mr. Fastow. No matter how you flipped it he always won.
                                     He won because of his presence at Enron, he won because of his
                                     presence at the partnerships that were created, and Mr. Fastow ap-
                                     parently looked after one person, that person who was on both
                                     sides of that coin. He profited when everybody else lost. Mr. Kopper
                                     profited when everybody else lost. A select few profited when every-
                                     body lost.
                                        I am confident that this committee and this Congress will not
                                     quit until we get all the facts. I am confident that the law enforce-
                                     ment that is appropriate will not quit until they find the guilty
                                     parties. I am confident that it is not going to be fun to be a board
                                     member at Enron during that period. But I want to thank you for
                                     your willingness to go through the process that you have just gone
                                     through and to encourage you to be diligent as we complete this
                                     process, however long it takes. Thank you, Dean Powers.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Thank you.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                     nizes the gentleman, Mr. Stupak, for an opening statement.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 2 weeks
                                     ago, we heard from Arthur Andersen and their role about shred-
                                     ding documents associated with the collapse of Enron. Today, we
                                     hear from Mr. Powers about many of the questionable and often-
                                     times repulsive financial dealings that occurred within Enron lead-
                                     ing up to their bankruptcy. Mr. Chairman, we have learned
                                     through the media that even Enron has shredded documents. I
                                     hope that this committee will have a hearing on Enron’s shredding
                                     of documents, what documents were shredded?
                                        We have only focused on Enron’s role here in the United States
                                     but what about Enron’s worldwide holdings, corporations, limited
                                     partnerships overseas? Who got bilked overseas, who cooked the
                                     books overseas? I hope this committee will explore these rooms in
                                     Enron’s house of cards through the committee’s jurisdiction under
                                     the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. We certainly must review these
                                     aspects on Enron’s dealings, not only here in the U.S. but also
                                     overseas.
                                        I appreciate the fact that Mr. Powers has the gumption to come
                                     here before our committee to tell us what he and his colleagues
                                     found in their review of Enron’s accounting schemes. It is no won-
                                     der they had so many schemes when we have learned they have
                                     had close to 1,000 accountants working at Enron. While I believe
                                     that Mr. Powers had the best intentions in providing the Enron
                                     Board with a comprehensive picture of Enron’s business practices
                                     over the last 5 years, I am troubled by the fact that the report does
                                     not include full disclosure, input from Mr. Fastow and Mr. Kopper,
                                     who had key roles in creating and managing the special-purpose
                                     entities of LJM and Chewco, which contributed to massive




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00012   Fmt 6633       Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 13 ===
                                                                                          9

                                     misstatements of Enron’s financial security. The report focuses on
                                     only a few of these special-purpose entities, and I have been told
                                     that Enron has had literally thousands of them.
                                        The Powers report, even without full cooperation of many of the
                                     key Enron employees and without the full cooperation of Andersen
                                     officials or Enron’s outside auditors, provides us with an extremely
                                     disturbing tale of greedy executives, lax oversight by senior man-
                                     agement and a board of directors, or maybe we should call them
                                     ‘‘board of enablers’’ who appear to have not taken their roles very
                                     seriously.
                                        The board of directors gave serious flexibility, serious, dangerous
                                     flexibility to Mr. Fastow, allowing him to establish the LJM and by
                                     not following up on the few strings that they attached to Mr.
                                     Fastow’s deal. The report shows how they robbed Peter to pay Paul
                                     and in some cases, relating to asset transfers, then transferred
                                     back to Peter again. As I stated in the hearing we had with Ander-
                                     sen officials 2 weeks ago, I believe the Securities Litigation Reform
                                     Act of 1995, or the Securities Rip-off Act, as many of us refer to
                                     it, had significant impact on the way corporations approach their
                                     business deals.
                                        Prior to the so-called reform, companies would likely not have
                                     risked many of the transactions in these aggressive accounting
                                     techniques, because they knew there was a very good chance they
                                     would be held accountable. Now, however, corporations are willing
                                     to take additional risk in their business dealings, because the 1995
                                     reform bill insulated them from legal actions by putting up so
                                     many roadblocks for shareholders and employees to take legal ac-
                                     tion against them.
                                        Mr. Chairman, I fear the Powers report, even with its very seri-
                                     ous admonitions, only scratches the surface of what is a thick layer
                                     of deceit atop perhaps the worst case of corporate officer malfea-
                                     sance in recent memory. In their wake lies thousands of Enron em-
                                     ployees and retirees with shattered financial lives, while many of
                                     the corporate executives, many of whom who are still working at
                                     Enron, have lined their pockets. It will be difficult, if not impos-
                                     sible, for Enron to emerge as a credible company from bankruptcy
                                     without a comprehensive purging of Enron executives and board
                                     members who were at the helm during this debacle. They must be
                                     held accountable. I hope the investors in Enron will get themselves
                                     a new board of directors and a new senior management team.
                                        I look forward to having the opportunity to question Andrew
                                     Fastow, Michael Kopper, Richard Causey and others later this
                                     week with regard to the issues in the Powers report. I hope they
                                     will come before our committee on Thursday and be open, honest
                                     and as aggressive in answering our questions as they were in pur-
                                     suing their own financial futures. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
                                     I thank our witness for being here today.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                     nizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Whitfield, for an opening
                                     statement.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Mr. Pow-
                                     ers, we appreciate you being here today. I don’t think any of us
                                     would have very many compliments for the Board of Enron, but I
                                     think that they obviously were forced into a situation where they




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00013   Fmt 6633       Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 14 ===
                                                                                      10

                                     asked you to Chair a group that would do an investigation and
                                     come forth with findings.
                                        We understand, obviously, that you did not have any subpoena
                                     powers and that you were not able to go in as much detail as you
                                     would like to have done, but I think the thing that comes out of
                                     this investigation, as in your own words, it is appalling to think
                                     that Mr. Fastow walked away with $30 million. In one instance, he
                                     put down $25,000 and less than 2 months later walked away, or
                                     his family’s foundation did, with $4.5 million. Mr. Kopper put down
                                     $5,800 or so and walked away with $1 million in 2 months. In
                                     order to try to meet the code of ethics of Enron, knowing full well
                                     that they did not comply with those codes, removed Mr. Kopper
                                     and put in his domestic partner in some of these transactions. So
                                     I think it is very clear that these people were not stunningly inept
                                     but they knew precisely what they were doing, and it is a pure ex-
                                     ample of corporate greed. And it is really sad because it has basi-
                                     cally wiped out the pension funds of thousands of employees who
                                     were depending upon this upon their retirement.
                                        So I am delighted that you are here today, and I look forward
                                     to your testimony. I yield back the balance of my time.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                     nizes the gentlelady from Colorado for an opening statement.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I would
                                     ask unanimous consent to put my entire opening statement in the
                                     record.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Without objection.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you. When I read the report Mr. Powers
                                     and his colleagues put together this weekend, I was stunned both
                                     by the duplicitous nature of these deals, these limited partnerships,
                                     which were designed to mask losses and to accentuate profits. I
                                     was also stunned by the breathtaking oblivion, apparently, evi-
                                     denced by the Enron Board of Directors when they looked at these.
                                     The report indicates that Mr. Fastow and also Jeffrey Skilling, who
                                     was Enron’s former CEO and at times COO, misled the board of
                                     directors by not appropriately disclosing their ownership in special-
                                     purpose entities. In particular, today, I would like to discuss the
                                     gap between the level of ignorance displayed by the board and the
                                     basic fiduciary duties of any corporation.
                                        What jumped out at me when I was reading the Powers report
                                     was how little the board of directors seemed to know about the spe-
                                     cial entities transactions. We know now from the report, and we
                                     are all very grateful to Mr. Powers and a little amazed he was able
                                     to do what he was without subpoena power or any of the other
                                     powers, but nonetheless the board waived Enron conflict of interest
                                     rules for Mr. Fastow to allow him partial ownership and manage-
                                     rial duties in Chewco and LJM while still on the payroll of Enron
                                     as a senior executive. A provision of the waiver approval included
                                     a set of conditions that Mr. Fastow would be required to meet, but
                                     Mr. Skilling was supposed to oversee Mr. Fastow’s activities—a lit-
                                     tle like the fox guarding the henhouse, I may add. The report con-
                                     tends, though, that the board had no knowledge of the inappro-
                                     priate nature of certain related party transactions. It is hard for us
                                     to believe that today, in retrospect, but perhaps, Mr. Chairman,




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00014   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 15 ===
                                                                                      11

                                     when the committee receives the information we will be able to get
                                     with our subpoena power, we will be able to add to this knowledge.
                                        All of us know that boards of directors of corporations are re-
                                     quired to serve in a fiduciary capacity. They are entrusted with the
                                     responsibility of acting in the best interest of shareholders and
                                     their employees, and when you look at the minutes of the Enron
                                     board meetings, dating back to 1997, it appears that the board’s
                                     knowledge of questionable transactions involving Chewco, LJM,
                                     Raptor and other special entities that are detailed in the Powers
                                     report as having substantial problems.
                                        Now, I was looking at the structures of a lot of these trans-
                                     actions, and it is pretty amazing to me that the board would actu-
                                     ally approve these. Mr. Deutsch showed the simplified Whitewing
                                     transaction. Here is the Chewco transaction. And if you look at
                                     those, those transactions are both structured completely differently
                                     in ways which are designed, in my opinion and I think in probably
                                     Mr. Powers’ opinion, to mask losses and to maximize profits. This
                                     is a diagram, it looks elegant in its simplicity compared to the
                                     other two, of the Rhythms transaction, which I am interested in be-
                                     cause it involves—it is the first transaction, and it involves a Colo-
                                     rado-based company.
                                        What strikes me is all of these transactions were approved by the
                                     Enron Board, and I was trying to think about the investors who
                                     had Enron stock in their 401(k) programs and their other pro-
                                     grams. And to think about an unsophisticated investor trying to re-
                                     view Enron’s financial status and trying to understand these very
                                     complex leveraging transactions. It is clear to me that when you
                                     have a corporation as large as Enron and when you have trans-
                                     actions as complex as these, it is incumbent upon the board of di-
                                     rectors to exercise their fiduciary duty and to review these trans-
                                     actions in depth, not to simply rubber stamp these things, and es-
                                     pecially when corporate employees and officers have financial inter-
                                     est.
                                        This is what we need to learn as a committee, both today and
                                     as we go forward, what did the board know and was it simple neg-
                                     ligence on a breathtaking level or was there much more there? And
                                     so I look forward to hearing Mr. Powers’ testimony today. I prom-
                                     ise, Mr. Powers, I will not ask you to analyze each of these trans-
                                     actions in depth for us at this hearing, we only have 5 minutes to
                                     question, but perhaps at a later date. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and recog-
                                     nizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Stearns.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, Dean
                                     Powers. We appreciate your coming here to speak. I read your re-
                                     port yesterday, and I looked for the word ‘‘criminal’’ in the report,
                                     and obviously I would not find that, and I understand that. In fact,
                                     this committee here is not here to look for criminality but to inves-
                                     tigate and let the Justice Department, and we are well aware of
                                     what our function is, is to highlight the problem.
                                        But I did look at some of your testimony yesterday, and it was
                                     reported in the Washington Post where you said, ‘‘Dealing with the
                                     Raptor partnerships,’’ this is what you said, ‘‘Enron hid the prob-
                                     lem and, ‘gave the false impression that Raptor had enough money
                                     to pay Enron what they owed,’ ’’ Now, that is euphemistically for




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00015   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 16 ===
                                                                                      12

                                     not only did they hide the fact but they didn’t tell the truth. Obvi-
                                     ously, you are dean of the law school there at the University of
                                     Texas, and you understand when they don’t tell the truth that is
                                     lying. So the euphemistic statements you are using there are some-
                                     thing I think the committee and the American public should realize
                                     that even within your report, while you are not using the word
                                     ‘‘criminal,’’ you are indicating indirectly that these people were not
                                     telling the truth.
                                        When you have a report like this, which is based upon volun-
                                     teers, it is not going to get to the substance of this case, and that
                                     is why this committee and the Banking Committee and the Senate
                                     committees are making the right decision to have these folks come
                                     forward and to speak the truth under oath. This whole Enron thing
                                     is much like a financial Hindinburgh (ph). It was a marvel in the
                                     eyes of Wall Street, yet ultimately went up in flames, with employ-
                                     ees and investors getting burned. And I think it is also apparent
                                     that this staff on this committee has done an excellent job in trying
                                     to extricate the facts here, and I think your report, Dean Powers,
                                     is helping also.
                                        But reading through your report, I also had the feeling of the
                                     would have, could have, should have type of philosophy. When you
                                     have people who are volunteering to give information they are
                                     going to present, which is basically people not telling the truth,
                                     self-enrichment, failures at many level, they are going to give a pic-
                                     ture which is not totally accurate. So as much as your report is
                                     helpful, it is really just very, very first step here.
                                        You mentioned that there is failures of many levels and many
                                     people. I am not sure that it was a conspiracy that involved people
                                     right down to the middle or lower management. I think, based
                                     upon what we heard earlier in hearings on this committee and
                                     oversight, there were some people at the very top steering this
                                     whole basic series of misstatements and actually in violation of
                                     Enron’s own code of conduct. You point out in the report that the
                                     Enron chief accounting officer failed to provide complete informa-
                                     tion to the Audit Committee, Enron’s senior risk officers failed to
                                     adequately scrutinize these transactions for economic risk, and the
                                     board of directors, the board of directors failed to provide adequate
                                     oversight, and yet they were making large sums of money, and
                                     they had a fiduciary responsibility to make sure that they had
                                     proper oversight, and, last, of course, Arthur Andersen failed to
                                     provide objective accounting judgment. So this is a flawed, flawed
                                     company.
                                        I am concerned that because the Special Investigative Committee
                                     lacked the power to compel parties, Dean Powers, that some of this
                                     information, while very good, is not necessarily going to be as rel-
                                     evant as it should, but I do commend for your honest effort here,
                                     and I appreciate, again, you coming here this morning. Thank you,
                                     Mr. Chairman.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                     nizes for an opening statement the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
                                     John.
                                        Mr. JOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and also thank you for
                                     convening this hearing into the findings of the SIC, the Special In-
                                     vestigative Committee.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00016   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 17 ===
                                                                                      13

                                        I believe before this committee or any other person prejudges
                                     what went wrong at Enron, who is to blame and what Congress
                                     can do about it, I think common sense dictates that we closely re-
                                     view all of the available facts. The report produced here today by
                                     Mr. Powers is an important piece of the puzzle that our constitu-
                                     ents, Americans and certainly former Enron employees are de-
                                     manding that we solve. I think it is very apparent and clear from
                                     the report that, at a minimum, a systematic failure of checks and
                                     balances within Enron and between the company and its outside
                                     advisors allowed certain of its current and former employees and
                                     officers to engage in related party transactions that put self-enrich-
                                     ment before the interests of the company and its shareholders. It
                                     seems unimaginable to me that and many Americans and anyone
                                     who is following what has gone on that so many people involved,
                                     from the directors, senior management, auditors and lawyers, could
                                     have been completely unaware of what was happening and that the
                                     blame rests with only a few bad actors.
                                        Beginning with the formation of Chewco, Enron became a Ponzi
                                     scheme of self-dealing partnerships which were designed, in your
                                     own words, to mislead investors about the true financial state of
                                     the company and ultimatly resulted in its financial implosion. Mr.
                                     Chairman, the investigative report clearly shows that there was
                                     not simply a worm in Enron’s apple; it was instead rotten to the
                                     core.
                                        The question for this committee is why thousands of employees
                                     and investors had to lose just about everything that they owned be-
                                     fore anyone knew of this mess. Either the accounting system did
                                     not provide warnings of Enron’s troubles or it was too easy to ma-
                                     nipulate the rules to hide information from public scrutiny. Either
                                     way, I believe this report raises many more questions than it pro-
                                     vides answers.
                                        Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working with you to find out the
                                     answers of what has gone on here, and I thank Mr. Powers for his
                                     report; it was very enlightening.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                     nizes the gentleman from New Hampshire, Mr. Bass.
                                        Mr. BASS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr. Powers
                                     for being here today, and I will be brief so you can get on with your
                                     testimony.
                                        To say that your report is troubling would probably be the under-
                                     statement of the century, and, as you know, market confidence is
                                     based on expectations of firm accounting principles and honorable
                                     corporate governance, both of which obviously have not occurred in
                                     this particular situation. Legal and management structure of enti-
                                     ties like Enron, accounting entries, accounting restatements and so
                                     on, really need to become know to this committee. It is part of a
                                     fact-finding nature of what we are attempting to do. But I also be-
                                     lieve that we need to, as quickly as possible, develop the facts, find
                                     out what went wrong, find out who is to blame, but what is more
                                     important about this subcommittee’s and full committee’s challenge
                                     is to come up with policy recommendations for changes to make
                                     sure that, first of all, this sort of thing isn’t going on as we speak
                                     still, and, second, that we can take action legislatively if necessary
                                     to make sure that the public is protected and the capital markets’




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00017   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 18 ===
                                                                                      14

                                     confidence is regained so that we can move forward in 2001 and
                                     2002 with more confidence.
                                        So I appreciate your taking the time, which will be quite a lot
                                     of time, to be here today. I appreciate the efforts that you have un-
                                     dertaken as a member of the Board of Directors of Enron to
                                     produce this report, which is long and thorough. We will get to the
                                     bottom of this, and hopefully we will move forward with something
                                     that will be productive in the very near future. Thank you, Mr.
                                     Chairman.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                     nizes the gentleman, Mr. Rush.
                                        Mr. RUSH. Thank you, Dean Powers, for your attendance here
                                     and for your report, and I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
                                     holding this hearing on the findings of the so-called Enron Powers
                                     Report, or in Superbowl terminology, the Enron play-by-play book.
                                        Mr. Chairman, I, like most observers of the Enron collapse, was
                                     appalled to hear that thousands of Enron employees whose savings
                                     disappeared while top Enron executives cashed in their stock for
                                     millions with the release of the Powers report that shock has
                                     turned to utter outrage and disbelief. This report is a crucial piece
                                     to the puzzle of Enron in that it reveals a culture where every self-
                                     imposed standard enacted by Enron was broken. All of this was
                                     simply done in an attempt to satisfy a gluttonous appetite for cor-
                                     porate wealth.
                                        In particular, I commend the Powers Committee for its unflinch-
                                     ing criticism of Kopper and Fastow who created a profiteering net-
                                     work of friends and associates designed to bleed Enron at the ex-
                                     pense of its investors. And while I believe that this criticism is
                                     well-deserved, I am also interested in the degree to which the
                                     board of directors have escaped close scrutiny and criticism.
                                        In raising this issue, I do not question the integrity of Mr. Pow-
                                     ers, who I know is a well-respected legal scholar. What I do ques-
                                     tion is the betrayal of Ken Lay who holds a Ph.D in economics as
                                     a naive and absent-minded professor who simply goofed by not
                                     spotting all of the evil-doings going on all around him. In the case
                                     of LJM transaction, I question the casting of the board of directors
                                     as a group of well-meaning and trustworthy corporate Governors
                                     who, despite their negligence, were unwitting victims of Andy
                                     Fastow and Michael Robert Kopper.
                                        That said, I await the various detailed responses that this report
                                     will certainly bring about from Arthur Andersen and others. I also
                                     await testimony from those parties who refuse to participate in this
                                     study, and with those responses I am certain that a more full and
                                     accurate picture of who knew what and when will emerge.
                                        Mr. Chairman, at the end of the day, I suspect that Mr. Lay and
                                     the rest of the Enron board will not be viewed as a hapless bunch
                                     of know-nothings, but rather as a group of well-educated, well-sea-
                                     soned and shrewd business people who intentionally blinded them-
                                     selves to a situation which reeks so badly that it couldn’t help but
                                     be detected by even the most novice of business student.
                                        Whether Enron was a ship of pirates, a ship of fools or a com-
                                     bination of the two, it is my hope that today’s hearing takes us a
                                     step closer to enacting bold, new legislation. Indeed, that legisla-
                                     tion should ensure that no ship which is destined to sink with the




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00018   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 19 ===
                                                                                      15

                                     life savings of thousands of innocent investors ever, ever, ever sets
                                     sail again in this nation. Thank you, and I yield back the balance
                                     of my time.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and the
                                     Chair thanks Mr. Powers for your forbearance this morning. Mr.
                                     Powers, you are aware that the committee is holding an investiga-
                                     tive hearing and when doing so has had the practice of taking testi-
                                     mony under oath. Do you have any objection to testifying under
                                     oath?
                                        Mr. POWERS. None whatsoever.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Appreciate that. The Chair then advises you
                                     that under the rules of the House and the rules of the committee
                                     you are entitled to be advised by counsel. Do you desire to be ad-
                                     vised by counsel during your testimony today?
                                        Mr. POWERS. No, I don’t.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. In that case, if you would please rise and
                                     raise your right hand, I will swear you in.
                                        [Witness sworn.]
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Appreciate that. You are now under oath, and
                                     you may give a 5-minute summary of your written statement. We
                                     thank you.

                                     STATEMENT OF WILLIAM C. POWERS, JR., CHAIRMAN OF THE
                                      SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF DI-
                                      RECTORS OF ENRON CORPORATION
                                        Mr. POWERS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, distin-
                                     guished members of the subcommittee, my name is William Pow-
                                     ers, and I am the dean of the University of Texas Law School. As
                                     you know, for the last 3 months, I have served as the chairman of
                                     the Special Investigative Committee of the Board of Directors of
                                     Enron, and I very much appreciate the opportunity to come here
                                     today and testify.
                                        During October of last year, questions were raised about Enron’s
                                     transactions with partnerships that were controlled by its chief fi-
                                     nancial officer, Andrew Fastow. In the middle of October, Enron
                                     announced that it was taking an after-tax charge of more than
                                     $500 million against earnings because of transactions with one of
                                     those partnerships. Enron also announced a reduction in share-
                                     holder equity of more than a billion dollars.
                                        At the end of October, the Enron board established a special com-
                                     mittee to investigate these matters. It then asked me if I would
                                     join the board for the purpose of chairing that committee and con-
                                     ducting that investigation. With the help of counsel and profes-
                                     sional accounting advisors, we have spent the last 3 months doing
                                     that, conducting the investigation we were charged to conduct.
                                        Our committee’s report was filed on Saturday. It covers a lot of
                                     ground and I hope it will be a helpful starting point for the nec-
                                     essary further investigations by congressional committees, by the
                                     Securities and Exchange Commission and by the Department of
                                     Justice. As several members of the subcommittee have noted in
                                     their statements, we see this report as just a start, merely a begin-
                                     ning. A copy of the executive summary of our report is attached to
                                     my statement here.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00019   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 20 ===
                                                                                      16

                                        Many questions currently part of the public discussion, such as
                                     questions dealing with the employees’ retirement savings—and let
                                     me add, matters dealing with the employees’ retirement savings
                                     and their loss of their savings nest egg is one of the most tragic
                                     aspects of this story—that is an important issue that requires
                                     much investigation. Also public questions about sales and trading
                                     in securities of Enron by Enron insiders, those also are important
                                     public questions. There were, however, questions beyond the scope
                                     of the charge we were given, and they are questions beyond what
                                     we could do in a 3-month period. Again, these are matters of vital
                                     importance, but they were not matters we addressed in our report,
                                     and they need further study by relevant congressional committees,
                                     the Department of Justice and other agencies.
                                        What we were charged with was investigating transactions be-
                                     tween Enron and partnerships controlled by its chief financial offi-
                                     cer, or people who worked in his department. That is what our re-
                                     port discusses. And, frankly, Mr. Chairman, as I said before, what
                                     we found was appalling.
                                        First, we found that Fastow, and other Enron employees involved
                                     in these partnerships, enriched themselves, in the aggregate, by
                                     tens of millions of dollars that they should have never received.
                                     Fastow got at least $30 million, Kopper at least $10 million, two
                                     others $1 million each, and still two more in amounts that we be-
                                     lieve were in the range of hundreds of thousands of dollars. So
                                     there was self-enrichment.
                                        Second, we found transactions that were improperly structured.
                                     But if they had been structured correctly, Enron could have kept
                                     assets, under accounting rules, especially debt, off of its balance
                                     sheet. But Enron did not follow those accounting rules.
                                        Finally, we found something more troubling than individual in-
                                     stances of misconduct or a failure to follow accounting rules. We
                                     found a systematic and pervasive attempt by Enron’s management
                                     to misrepresent the Company’s financial condition. Enron manage-
                                     ment used these partnerships to enter into transactions that it
                                     could not, or would not, have done with unrelated commercial enti-
                                     ties. Many of the most significant transactions apparently were not
                                     designed to achieve bona fide economic objectives.
                                        As our report demonstrates, these transactions were extremely
                                     complex. And I won’t try to describe them in detail here, but I do
                                     think it would be useful if I could give just one example. It involves
                                     efforts by Enron to hedge against losses on investments that Enron
                                     had.
                                        Enron is not just a pipeline and energy trading company. It also
                                     had large investments in other businesses, some of which had ap-
                                     preciated substantially in value. These were volatile investments,
                                     and Enron was concerned because it had recognized the gains
                                     when these investments appreciated, and it didn’t want to recog-
                                     nize the losses if the investments declined. Therefore, Enron pur-
                                     ported to enter into certain hedging transactions in order to avoid
                                     recognizing losses from the investments. The problem was that the
                                     hedges weren’t real. The idea of a hedge is normally to contract
                                     with a creditworthy outside party that is prepared, for a price, to
                                     take on the economic risk of an investment. If the value of the in-
                                     vestment goes down, that other party will bear the loss, but that




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00020   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 21 ===
                                                                                      17

                                     is not what happened here. If you cut through the complexity of
                                     these partnerships and transactions, here Enron was essentially
                                     hedging with itself.
                                        The outside parties with which Enron hedged were the so-called
                                     Raptors. The purported outside investor in them was a Fastow
                                     partnership. In reality, these were entities in which only Enron
                                     had a real economic stake, and whose main assets were Enron’s
                                     own stock. The notes of Enron’s corporate secretary, preparing for
                                     the minutes from a meeting of the Financial Committee of the
                                     board, a meeting that was regarding these Raptors, captures the
                                     reality of these transactions. Those notes say, quote, ‘‘Does not
                                     transfer economic risk but transfers P+L volatility.’’
                                        If the value of Enron’s investments fell at the same time that the
                                     value of Enron stock fell, the Raptors would be unable to meet
                                     their obligations, and the hedges would fail. This is precisely what
                                     happened in late 2000 and early 2001 when two of these Raptor
                                     vehicles lacked the ability to pay Enron on the hedges. Even if the
                                     hedges had not failed, though, in the sense I just described, the
                                     Raptors still would have paying Enron with the stock that Enron
                                     had provided in the first place; that is, Enron would simply be pay-
                                     ing itself back.
                                        By March 2001, it appeared that Enron would be required to
                                     take a charge against earnings of more than $500 million to reflect
                                     the inability of the Raptors to pay. But then rather than take that
                                     loss, Enron compounded the problem by making even more of its
                                     own stock available to the Raptors—$800 million worth. It gave the
                                     false impression that the Raptors had enough money to pay Enron
                                     on the money it owed, on the money that the Raptors owed. This
                                     transaction was apparently hidden from the board, and it certainly
                                     was hidden from the public.
                                        Let me say that while there are questions about who understood
                                     what concerning these many very complex transactions, there is no
                                     question that virtually everyone knew, everyone from the board of
                                     directors on down, everyone understood that the company was
                                     seeking to offset its investment losses with its own stock. That is
                                     not the way it is supposed to work. Real earnings are supposed to
                                     be compared to real losses. As a result of these transactions, Enron
                                     improperly inflated its reported earnings for a 15-month period,
                                     from the third quarter of 2000 through the third quarter of 2001.
                                     It overstated its earnings or inflated its reported earnings by more
                                     than $1 billion. This means that more than 70 percent of Enron’s
                                     reported earnings for this period were not real.
                                        Now, how could that have happened? The tragic consequences of
                                     the related-party transactions and accounting errors were the re-
                                     sult of failures at many levels, by many people: a flawed idea, self-
                                     enrichment by employees, inadequately designed controls, poor im-
                                     plementation, inattentive oversight, simple, and not-so-simple, ac-
                                     counting mistakes, and overreaching culture that appears to have
                                     encouraged pushing the limits.
                                        Whenever this many things go wrong, it is not just the act of one
                                     or two people. There was misconduct, to be sure, by Fastow and
                                     other senior employees of Enron, there were failures in the per-
                                     formance of Enron’s outside advisors, and there was a fundamental
                                     default in leadership and management. Leadership and manage-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00021   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 22 ===
                                                                                      18

                                     ment begin at the top, with the CEO, Ken Lay. In this company,
                                     leadership and management depended as well on the chief oper-
                                     ating officer, Jeff Skilling. And the board of directors failed in its
                                     duty to provide leadership and oversight of the company.
                                       In the end, this is a tragedy that could and should have been
                                     avoided. I hope that our report is a first step. It will take from the
                                     committee and other agencies, but I do hope that our report and
                                     the work of this committee will help reduce the danger that this
                                     tragedy will happen again to some other company. Thank you, Mr.
                                     Chairman.
                                       [The prepared statement of William C. Powers, Jr. follows:]
                                        PREPARED STATEMENT OF WILLIAM C. POWERS, JR., CHAIRMAN OF THE SPECIAL
                                       INVESTIGATIVE COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF ENRON CORPORATION
                                        Mr. Chairman and distinguished Members of the Committee. My name is William
                                     Powers. I am the Dean of the University of Texas Law School. For the past three
                                     months, I have served as Chairman of the Special Investigative Committee of the
                                     Board of Directors of Enron Corporation. I appreciate the opportunity to come and
                                     testify before you today.
                                        As you know, during October of last year, questions were being raised about
                                     Enron’s transactions with partnerships that were controlled by its Chief Financial
                                     Officer, Andrew Fastow. In the middle of October, Enron announced that it was tak-
                                     ing an after-tax charge of more than $500 million against its earnings, because of
                                     transactions with one of those partnerships. Enron also announced a reduction in
                                     shareholder equity of more than a billion dollars. At the end of October, the Enron
                                     Board established a Special Committee to investigate these matters, and then asked
                                     me if I would join the Board for the purpose of chairing that Committee, and con-
                                     ducting that investigation. With the help of counsel and professional accounting ad-
                                     visors, we have spent the last three months conducting that investigation.
                                        Our Committee’s Report was filed on Saturday. It covers a lot of ground and will,
                                     I hope, be a helpful starting point for the necessary further investigations by Con-
                                     gressional Committees, by the Securities and Exchange Commission, and by the De-
                                     partment of Justice. A copy of the Executive Summary of our Report is attached to
                                     my Statement here.
                                        Many questions currently part of public discussion—such as questions relating to
                                     the employees’ retirement savings and sales of Enron securities by insiders—are be-
                                     yond the scope of the charge we were given. These are matters of vital importance,
                                     but they are not matters we addressed in our Report.
                                        We were charged with investigating transactions between Enron and partnerships
                                     controlled by its Chief Financial Officer, or people who worked in his department.
                                     That is what our Report discusses. What we found was appalling.
                                        First, we found that Fastow—and other Enron employees involved in these part-
                                     nerships—enriched themselves, in the aggregate, by tens of millions of dollars they
                                     should never have received. Fastow got at least $30 million, Michael Kopper at least
                                     $10 million, two others $1 million each, and still two more amounts we believe were
                                     at least in the hundreds of thousands of dollars.
                                        Second, we found that some transactions were improperly structured. If they had
                                     been structured correctly, Enron could have kept assets and liabilities (especially
                                     debt) off of its balance sheet. But Enron did not follow the accounting rules.
                                        Finally, we found something more troubling than those individual instances of
                                     misconduct and failure to follow accounting rules. We found a systematic and perva-
                                     sive attempt by Enron’s Management to misrepresent the Company’s financial con-
                                     dition. Enron Management used these partnerships to enter into transactions that
                                     it could not, or would not, do with unrelated commercial entities. Many of the most
                                     significant transactions apparently were not designed to achieve bona fide economic
                                     objectives.
                                        As our Report demonstrates, these transactions were extremely complex. I won’t
                                     try to describe them in detail here. But I do think it would be useful to give just
                                     one example. It involves efforts by Enron to ‘‘hedge’’ against losses on investments
                                     it had made.
                                        Enron was not just a pipeline and energy trading company. It also had large in-
                                     vestments in other businesses, some of which had appreciated substantially in
                                     value. These were volatile investments, and Enron was concerned because it had




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00022   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 23 ===
                                                                                      19
                                     recognized the gains when these investments appreciated, and it didn’t want to rec-
                                     ognize the losses if the investments declined in value.
                                       Therefore, Enron purported to enter into certain ‘‘hedging’’ transactions in order
                                     to avoid recognizing losses from its investments. The problem was that the hedges
                                     weren’t real. The idea of a hedge is normally to contract with a credit-worthy out-
                                     side party that is prepared—for a price—to take on the economic risk of an invest-
                                     ment. If the value of the investment goes down, that outside party will bear the loss.
                                     That is not what happened here; here, Enron was essentially hedging with itself.
                                       The outside parties with which Enron ‘‘hedged’’ were the so-called ‘‘Raptors.’’ The
                                     purported outside investor in them was a Fastow partnership. In reality, these were
                                     entities in which only Enron had a real economic stake, and whose main assets were
                                     Enron’s own stock. The notes of Enron’s corporate secretary, from a meeting of the
                                     Finance Committee regarding the Raptors, capture the reality: ‘‘Does not transfer
                                     economic risk but transfers P+L volatility.’’’
                                       If the value of Enron’s investments fell at the same time that the value of Enron
                                     stock fell, the Raptors would be unable to meet their obligations, and the ‘‘hedges’’
                                     would fail. This is precisely what happened in late 2000 and early 2001 when two
                                     of these Raptor vehicles lacked the ability to pay Enron on the ‘‘hedges.’’ Even if
                                     the hedges had not failed in the sense I just described, the Raptors would have paid
                                     Enron with the stock that Enron had provided in the first place; Enron would sim-
                                     ply have paid itself back.
                                       By March 2001, it appeared that Enron would be required to take a charge
                                     against earnings of more than $500 million to reflect the inability of the Raptors
                                     to pay. Rather than take that loss, Enron compounded the problem by making even
                                     more of its own stock available to the Raptors—$800 million worth. It gave the false
                                     impression that the Raptors had enough money to pay Enron what they owed. This
                                     transaction was apparently hidden from the Board, and was certainly hidden from
                                     the public.
                                       Let me say that while there are questions about who understood what concerning
                                     many of these very complex transactions, there’s no question that virtually every-
                                     one, from the Board of Directors on down, understood that the company was seeking
                                     to offset its investment losses with its own stock. That is not the way it is supposed
                                     to work. Real earnings are supposed to be compared to real losses.
                                       As a result of these transactions, Enron improperly inflated its reported earnings
                                     for a 15-month period—from the third quarter of 2000 through the third quarter of
                                     2001—by more than $1 billion. This means that more than 70 percent of Enron’s
                                     reported earnings for this period were not real.
                                       How could this have happened? The tragic consequences of the related-party
                                     transactions and accounting errors were the result of failures at many levels and
                                     by many people: a flawed idea, self-enrichment by employees, inadequately-designed
                                     controls, poor implementation, inattentive oversight, simple (and not-so-simple) ac-
                                     counting mistakes, and overreaching in a culture that appears to have encouraged
                                     pushing the limits.
                                       Whenever this many things go wrong, it is not just the act of one or two people.
                                     There was misconduct by Fastow and other senior employees of Enron. There were
                                     failures in the performance of Enron’s outside advisors. And there was a funda-
                                     mental default of leadership and management. Leadership and management begin
                                     at the top, with the CEO, Ken Lay. In this company, leadership and management
                                     depended as well on the Chief Operating Officer, Jeff Skilling. The Board of Direc-
                                     tors failed in its duty to provide leadership and oversight.
                                       In the end, this is a tragedy that could and should have been avoided. I hope that
                                     our Report, and the work of this Committee, will help reduce the danger that it will
                                     happen to some other company.
                                       Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you, Dean Powers. We appreciate your
                                     testimony, and we know you testified just yesterday, and expect
                                     you will be testifying for days to come.
                                       The Chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes for purposes of in-
                                     quiry. Chewbaca, JEDI Capital, Kinobi Holdings, Obi Wan Hold-
                                     ings, Enron executives seem to have had a fascination with Star
                                     Wars. My question, Dean Powers, is this: Is Ken Lay the Luke
                                     Skywalker of this of this tale or is he the Darth Vader?
                                       Mr. POWERS. Well, he is not the Luke Skywalker. He certainly
                                     is responsible for allowing this to happen. I think there were red




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00023   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 24 ===
                                                                                      20

                                     flags that certainly should have indicated to him that this was hap-
                                     pening.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Well, let me go right to your testimony. One of
                                     the things you just said was that, ‘‘Virtually everyone from the
                                     board of directors on down understood that the company was seek-
                                     ing to offset its investment with its own stock. This is not the way
                                     it is supposed to be. Real earnings are supposed to be compared to
                                     real losses.’’ So I take it from that you mean that Ken Lay knew
                                     that.
                                        And if you look at the law, the law is pretty clear about what
                                     is deceptive. It is deceptive to employ any device, scheme or artifice
                                     to defraud, to make any untrue statement or material fact or to
                                     admit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the state-
                                     ments made in the light of the circumstances under which they
                                     were made, et cetera. So connect the dots, it seems to me, that here
                                     was a company that in its financial statements was misleading and
                                     that everyone knew, including Ken Lay, that it was misleading its
                                     investors in its financial statements. So how do we get beyond the
                                     assumption, the conclusion, that Mr. Lay is guilty, as guilty as any-
                                     one else of intentionally defrauding his investors?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, it is absolutely true that Mr. Lay fully under-
                                     stood that they were using their own stock to offset these losses in
                                     their other investments. And that is the problem.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Not only that they were doing that, but they
                                     were not sharing that reality with their investors.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Absolutely, that is correct. Well, can I just——
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. You interviewed Mr. Lay. About how much
                                     time did you spend interviewing Mr. Lay?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think it was a couple of hours. Four hours.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Four hours? Okay. And so on this direct line
                                     of questioning about what Mr. Lay understood and when he under-
                                     stood and, as Mr. Tauzin said, certainly we know in August he was
                                     advised of this, what was Mr. Lay’s story about—how did he defend
                                     himself from this obvious line of questioning, which is did he in
                                     fact—was he complicit in intentionally defrauding his investors?
                                        Now, it seems to me when you look at motive, we sort of under-
                                     stand some of Mr. Fastow’s motives, because there was self-dealing
                                     involved. Mr. Fastow seems to be the Betty Crocker of cookbooks.
                                     But Mr. Lay also had a motive, it would seem, for the investors not
                                     to understand that the stock was overvalued, and that is because
                                     he was a holder of millions of dollars of stock.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, when we interviewed Mr. Lay, he certainly
                                     understood that as elaborate as these schemes were, ultimately
                                     they were using Enron stock to hedge against these investment
                                     losses. He understood that. I can tell you what his story was: He
                                     didn’t understand or appreciate that there was anything wrong
                                     with that. I don’t know whether that is credible; I am saying that
                                     was his story, that he didn’t—the story was the accountants had
                                     signed off on it; he assumed it was an okay accounting device.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Was it credible to you? Do you think it is cred-
                                     ible?
                                        Mr. POWERS. It is very hard—we did present him with docu-
                                     ments and in a sense cross examine, but we did not have the de-
                                     vices available to us, and that is a reason why our report is a first




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00024   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 25 ===
                                                                                      21

                                     start. It certainly is something that people would want to go into
                                     a great deal further. It raises questions, I agree.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. You repeatedly note in your report that Ander-
                                     sen, Enron’s outside auditor and internal consultant on these
                                     transactions, refused to fully cooperate with your inquiry by mak-
                                     ing certain documents and persons available for your review. Can
                                     you be more specific about what Andersen provided you with and
                                     what they would not, both in terms of persons and documents?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Okay. When we started the investigation, we start-
                                     ed asking Andersen if we could see documents and interview—see
                                     their work papers and interview their accountant. We wanted to do
                                     that after we developed the basic understanding, but as we went
                                     forward with the investigation, they would say, ‘‘Well, we will do
                                     that,’’ but we never got to interview their accountant. We did see
                                     some of their work papers, we did not see the work papers for
                                     2001, which are crucial; we did not see those. We did see some of
                                     the papers. We asked for copies. A few days later, Enron fired An-
                                     dersen, and we were told that at that point Andersen would no
                                     longer cooperate. By that point, we had not been able to talk and
                                     get their explanations of these work papers. We have not been able
                                     to talk with their accountant.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you, Mr. Powers. The Chair recognizes
                                     the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Deutsch, for purposes of inquiry.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One of the mandates
                                     of your committee was to recommend discipline at Enron. What
                                     discipline is the committee going to recommend?
                                        Mr. POWERS. We did not recommend discipline in the end, and
                                     the reason was we have been going non-stop getting this done. My
                                     testimony had been requested, we wanted to get this report out,
                                     and thought that, frankly, being exhausted at the end of it, we
                                     didn’t want make judgments about discipline. And I think the facts
                                     speak for themselves, and others are going to have to make those
                                     judgments. But we did not, in the end, recommend any discipline,
                                     but we did not mean to imply by that that there should not be dis-
                                     cipline imposed here.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Let me follow-up on some of the comments that
                                     the chairman was mentioning. If the company keeps billions of dol-
                                     lars of potential liability off of its balance sheets so that its share-
                                     holders and investors don’t know about it, as Enron did, isn’t that
                                     fraud?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, there are legitimate accounting devices that—
                                     I am not an expert in the area of securities fraud—but that compa-
                                     nies use to keep transactions and debt, using structured financing,
                                     off their balance sheets. And if they don’t use the proper structures
                                     and don’t reveal the proper structures, then there are serious ques-
                                     tions about fraud.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. So, again, I mean what you are really saying is
                                     that as good the—you are really not an expert in securities fraud.
                                        Mr. POWERS. That is correct, or enforcement of what penalties
                                     should be imposed here.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Let me go directly to the Raptor transactions. You
                                     stated, and I am quoting, ‘‘Virtually everyone from the board of di-
                                     rectors on down understood the company was seeking to offset its
                                     investment loss with its own stock. That is not the way it is sup-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00025   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 26 ===
                                                                                      22

                                     posed to work,’’ closed quote to your statement. If everyone under-
                                     stood that except the shareholders, and it is wrong, isn’t it fraud
                                     on the shareholder?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t feel I am in a position to, under the securi-
                                     ties law, answer that question. The shareholders—there was not
                                     transparent disclosure of what was going on in these transactions
                                     with the shareholders, absolutely.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Let me just stop. By any definition of common
                                     usage would you say it is fraud? Putting away your attorney’s hat
                                     and a securities lawyer, which you are not, I mean I think that is
                                     in a sense what our job is, because that is clearly our intention in
                                     the statute, and fraud is fraud.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Right.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. I mean if people don’t understand it—your quote
                                     of not understanding it except for the shareholders, the whole pur-
                                     pose of the system is the shareholders are supposed to know what
                                     is going on.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Absolutely. My only hesitation is fraud normally re-
                                     quires a certain state of mind, and I am not in a position to ascer-
                                     tain the state of mind of every one of these individuals. If there is
                                     a state of mind——
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. And it doesn’t necessarily require state of mind,
                                     because if you have an instance inferring to that, then you can
                                     infer the state of mind. You said that when an additional $800 mil-
                                     lion of stock was added to the Raptor accounts by Enron so it
                                     wouldn’t have to show a loss, it was, quote, ‘‘apparently hidden
                                     from the board,’’ close quote. What do you mean? Did you interview
                                     all the board members to determine what they knew and what they
                                     didn’t know?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. We interviewed—formally interviewed nine
                                     board members. That was a restructuring deal that—much else
                                     was known by the board, but that was a restructuring deal in early
                                     2001 that there was agreement, as the evidence showed, that was
                                     not brought before the board.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. And can the company issue $800 million in stock
                                     without the approval of the board?
                                        Mr. POWERS. They couldn’t issue the stock. This was stock that
                                     was already owned by the company because of contracts it had
                                     with outside parties. And that avoided the necessity to actually
                                     issue new stock. They transferred stock the company owned to
                                     these structures, and I am sure that is why already-owned stock
                                     was used.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. So, again, I mean clearly an intention to keep that
                                     information from the board itself?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Absolutely. I have no doubt that that was inten-
                                     tional by the people that restructured—Fastow and others. It was
                                     intentionally keeping that from the board, and therefore keeping it
                                     from the public, absolutely.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Let me ask one question, and, again, I didn’t see
                                     it in the report, but it just is a disturbing issue, and, again, you
                                     mentioned the limitations specifically on the 401(k) issue. But as
                                     someone who has spent 3 months—the last 3 months looking at
                                     Enron, one of the real disturbing issues, not just the lock-out provi-
                                     sion on Enron stock but the switching of the managers of the




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00026   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 27 ===
                                                                                      23

                                     401(k)s to basically have a 60-day additional lock-out, which, again,
                                     from an outside-looking-in perspective, I mean there is different
                                     levels of evil that have occurred in this process. I mean that is
                                     about at the highest level that I can think of. I mean have you
                                     looked at that decisionmaking process at all or you were just not
                                     able to look at that?
                                       Mr. POWERS. We did not look at that. We did a great deal. We
                                     reviewed, I think, over 400,000 pages of documents, interviewed 60
                                     people, and we did not look into the 401(k)s and the lockout.
                                       Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
                                     Chair recognizes the chairman, Mr. Tauzin.
                                       Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dean Powers,
                                     when I was attending law school at LSU, it was apparent to me
                                     that Latin was going to be important to me, and in preparation for
                                     that, I took a non-credit Latin course. And the reason I did was be-
                                     cause in the law we use Latin, because it is so precise. Terms like
                                     res judicata and res ipsa loquitur have special meanings in the law
                                     and jurisprudence. But I want to help get away from that, and I
                                     hope you will help me, as dean of law school, to put this in lay
                                     terms so we can understand it in a layman’s sense.
                                       Basically, what you have presented to us is a report that details
                                     how these partnerships and the deals, some two dozen deals struc-
                                     tured by either Chewco or LJM1 and 2—LJM1 and 2, by the way,
                                     I think were the initials of the wife and children of Mr. Andrew
                                     Fastow.
                                       Mr. POWERS. That is correct.
                                       Chairman TAUZIN. Structured by him. These deals structured by
                                     this partnership failed the basic test of structural compliance and
                                     operational compliance with current accounting principles; is that
                                     right?
                                       Mr. POWERS. That is right, and their whole concept was flawed.
                                       Chairman TAUZIN. Now, just for a second, let us think about
                                     what would be a legitimate function of a special-purpose entity, an
                                     SPE, or a partnership like LJM. Legitimately, Enron had some
                                     problems, it had some assets like Rhythms, which they put $10
                                     million in and all of a sudden it was worth $500 million because
                                     of inflation and the value of the stock market and the run-up of
                                     the stocks. Like many corporations holding a risky stock like that,
                                     they probably had a need to put that risk off, to share that risk
                                     with someone else if the stock fell dramatically so it didn’t hurt
                                     their own stock. That is a legitimate function that corporations use
                                     special-purpose entities and they use partnerships in some cases to
                                     do. Isn’t that premised upon the notion, however, that there is a
                                     real independent sharing of the risk, that the company really gives
                                     the risk over to someone else to either take, in whole or in part,
                                     in order to hedge potential loss to its own stockholders if a com-
                                     pany like Rhythms suddenly lost its value, which it did, which it
                                     eventually did? Isn’t that, in layman’s terms, what occurs in these
                                     partnerships, in these SPEs?
                                       Mr. POWERS. I can’t add anything that would clarify it more than
                                     your statement; that is absolutely correct.
                                       Chairman TAUZIN. Now, what you found and we have been find-
                                     ing is that, No. 1, in the case of Chewco, it was structured wrong.
                                     They didn’t have enough outside investment to meet the standards




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00027   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 28 ===
                                                                                      24

                                     of independence. And you also found some clear questions. We have
                                     found many, many clear questions of how independent these oper-
                                     ations were. On Thursday, we will detail, for example, how these
                                     sweetheart deals were being struck between the partnerships and
                                     the corporation, how managers of the partnerships were actually
                                     threatening people at Enron with firing if they aggressively nego-
                                     tiated for Enron. They threatened others with loss of their bonuses.
                                     We had a weird situation where the bonus came from the partner-
                                     ship, and the salary came from Enron. Incredible conflicts of inter-
                                     est where employees were invited in to share in the profits of some
                                     of these outside ventures and profits guaranteed at 2,500 percent
                                     in one case and where the risk to Enron and its shareholders was
                                     never really properly transferred. In fact, Enron continued to guar-
                                     antee the losses to the partnerships. The only person protected was
                                     the manager of the partnerships. It was guaranteed they could
                                     take their money out, plus profit.
                                        So what we have at Enron, as I see from your report, and as we
                                     are beginning to see, is a failure of the independence of these orga-
                                     nizations, or these deals, or these SPEs and the failure to properly
                                     shift the risk away from the corporation when a hedge fund was
                                     created or a put was attempted, if you will, on stock that was kind
                                     of risky, that they were concerned about, in a scheme that guaran-
                                     teed money to the managers of the partnership but nevertheless
                                     left the stockholders of Enron completely at risk, all the while cre-
                                     ating the impression that Enron was making money and was free
                                     of debt when the debt was still there.
                                        Now, if I were a corporation in America using one of these vehi-
                                     cles legitimately, then my company would be protected from that
                                     loss when it occurred; I would have shared that risk with the part-
                                     nership, or the special-purpose entity, and my shareholders would
                                     have been the better off for it. But in the case of these entities that
                                     were created and these deals that were cut, where the risk did not
                                     transfer, can you give me any purpose for doing that, other than
                                     to hide debt from investors, other than possibly to enrich the man-
                                     agers of the business, the account that was doing it, or to create
                                     a false impression of income to the corporation? Can you give me
                                     any other reason to do it?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I cannot, and I would just add that the statement
                                     that you just made, Congressman Tauzin, is exactly correct.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. So, Mr. Chairman, if I can, and I will con-
                                     clude, what you are concluding is what I have concluded, that if
                                     your facts are correct, and if our investigation continues to bolster
                                     the evidence of the situation as I have just described it, there was
                                     no legitimate purpose in the construction of some of these deals, ex-
                                     cept the defrauding of investors who were putting their money into
                                     Enron, and in some cases, the defrauding of investors who were
                                     putting their money into these partnerships, because we have also
                                     found, by the way, that some banks were told they would get spe-
                                     cial bond deals if they would put the money up to fund the partner-
                                     ship.
                                        And I want to end it maybe with this and see if you agree with
                                     me. What we really have here, as I said earlier, is a case of inside
                                     theft. It is a deal where whoever managed the deal was using the
                                     credit of the corporation, which remained liable for the deal, to bor-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00028   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 29 ===
                                                                                      25

                                     row money from other investors to the partnership so that they
                                     could take it and go home with it, while the corporation remained
                                     fully at risk, not only for the new loans but for all the risk of the
                                     stock, such as Rhythms, which might decline in value, and eventu-
                                     ally collapse the corporation.
                                        Mr. POWERS. These partnerships were definitely using Enron’s
                                     assets and credit to then create partnerships that enriched them-
                                     selves.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. And they were benefited two ways. One way,
                                     they got money out of it. Enron was borrowing money, in effect,
                                     that they took home. Enron had debt, but it was called income, mi-
                                     raculously, under these plans. And, second, because they kept the
                                     investing public and the employees of Enron who had their 401(k)
                                     plans tied to the Enron stock, because they kept them in the dark
                                     as to what was going on, Enron stock kept inflating in value, be-
                                     cause we all thought it had a billion dollars of income it didn’t
                                     have, and it had a lot less debt than it had.
                                        So they benefited twice. Their stock values are going up. They
                                     can then sell, even though the employees couldn’t sell it. And they
                                     were sucking money out of the partnerships that Enron was put-
                                     ting up the credit for. Now, how can anybody look at all that and
                                     conclude that the FBI doesn’t need to be over there with the search
                                     warrant and a potential set of handcuffs is beyond me. If there isn’t
                                     consumer fraud here, I don’t know where we are going to find it.
                                     Thank you very much.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the chairman and recognizes
                                     the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Dingell, for pur-
                                     poses of inquiry.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Powers, I begin by compli-
                                     menting you on a fine report. I have limited time so I have got to
                                     ask you questions in a way that you can respond pretty much with
                                     a yes or no, and I say that with apologies to you because of the
                                     respect I have for you.
                                        Now, I would like to go to Vincent & Elkins. Isn’t it true that
                                     they helped to structure many of the deals that were the subject
                                     of your investigation?
                                        Mr. POWERS. They did work on the deals. As I point out in the
                                     report, I disqualify myself from making judgments about those, but
                                     they did work on these deals.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Now, Vincent & Elkins concluded that they facts
                                     in its preliminary investigation revealed it did not warrant, and I
                                     now quote, ‘‘further widespread investigation by an independent
                                     counsel or auditors.’’ Is that right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I believe they did say that in their conclusion.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Now, if you were in Mr. Lay’s position with Mr.
                                     Watkins’ letter in your hand, would you have asked the law firm
                                     that represented your company in many of these transactions to re-
                                     view these same transactions?
                                        Mr. POWERS. If I were in Mr. Lay’s position, I would have asked
                                     for a much more extensive investigation.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. And by somebody who was in fact independent as
                                     opposed to somebody who had been involved in the structuring of
                                     the deal; is that not so?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00029   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 30 ===
                                                                                      26

                                        Mr. POWERS. If I had been Mr. Lay, I certainly would have con-
                                     sidered that.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. That would have been the proper way. Now, Mr.
                                     Jordan Mintz, then general counsel of Enron Global Finance, was
                                     so concerned about the LJM deals that he sought outside counsel
                                     to investigate the structure and the propriety of these transactions.
                                     Were you aware of that fact?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Did you know that Mr. Mintz went out of his way
                                     to hire a firm other than V&E because of the conflicts inherent in
                                     the firm’s relationship with Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. Mr. Mintz did use another firm.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Do you believe that V&E should have had the pro-
                                     fessional judgment to recuse itself from the investigation because
                                     of its role in structuring many of these controversial partnerships?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I disqualified myself from evaluating those,
                                     and I don’t think I have enough information to make a judgment
                                     on that.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. So it would not seem improper that they should
                                     have done the same thing.
                                        Mr. POWERS. I would have to focus on those facts more than I
                                     have.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. All right. Now, isn’t it true that most of Ms. Wat-
                                     kins’ concerns related to accounting issues?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Isn’t it also true that V&E agreed with Enron
                                     management that it wouldn’t examine accounting issues as a part
                                     of its investigation into the Watkins memo?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I would have to go back and look at the letter, be-
                                     cause, again, I haven’t focused on that.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Factually, it would appear to be correct, however.
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t have any reason to disagree.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Does this instill in you great confidence in the
                                     V&E investigation?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Again, I disqualified myself from making judgments
                                     on that, and so I am not informed enough about it.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Would I be unfair in assuming that they should
                                     have followed your wisdom in these matters?
                                        Mr. POWERS. They weren’t asked to do the kind of investigation
                                     that I was asked to do.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Now, how much V&E bill Enron for the investiga-
                                     tion?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t know.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Baxter committed suicide, as you well know,
                                     several weeks ago—a very tragic event. Did V&E ever interview
                                     Mr. Baxter as a part of its investigation into Ms. Watkins’ allega-
                                     tions?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t know whether they did or not.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Did your committee interview Mr. Baxter?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, we did.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Ms. Watkins alleged—I wonder why you would and
                                     they would not interview Mr. Baxter.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, we conducted a very thorough 3-month inves-
                                     tigation.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00030   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 31 ===
                                                                                      27

                                        Mr. DINGELL. Are you telling me they did not?
                                        Mr. POWERS. They didn’t conduct a 3-month investigation, I don’t
                                     think.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Now, Ms. Watkins alleged numerous accounting
                                     failures, but Enron and Vincent & Elkins agreed not to look at
                                     these transactions. How can we call this a complete report?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Our report or——
                                        Mr. DINGELL. No, the Vincent & Elkins report, which did not
                                     look at accounting failures and accounting matters?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Again, I did not myself pursue what they looked
                                     into and what they didn’t. Other people on the committee did.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Do you have any reason to believe that anyone at
                                     Enron took Ms. Watkins’ allegations seriously?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, they responded to some extent. The manage-
                                     ment at Enron didn’t take it seriously enough.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. It is also clear that people at Enron were told not
                                     to worry because Vincent & Elkins was reviewing them; isn’t that
                                     right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t remember, but I have no reason to disagree
                                     with that.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Can you think of another reason why they might
                                     not have taken them seriously?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I am sorry, why the management didn’t take
                                     the——
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Seriously Ms. Watkins’ allegations.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, they were very troubling allegations.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. They were.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. But were they taken seriously? Did you find any
                                     evidence in your inquiry that these allegations were taken seri-
                                     ously by Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think they were not taken seriously enough, cer-
                                     tainly.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Did you find any evidence that Vincent & Elkins
                                     went into these allegations?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Again, I did not, myself, personally. The report
                                     deals with that. I disqualified myself from that, because Vincent &
                                     Elkins has done a tremendous amount of pro bono work for the law
                                     school and has been a supporter of the law school, and I thought
                                     it would be better for the report if I didn’t participate in that.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Well, I applaud that, but I am just curious of did
                                     they—well, never mind. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your kind-
                                     ness. Mr. Powers, I have asked you some rather not so nice ques-
                                     tions, but you continue to enjoy my respect.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, thank you very much.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                     nizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Burr.
                                        Mr. BURR. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dean Powers, you noted
                                     in your report that there were individuals that you did not have
                                     the opportunity to have Q&A with. Was that—that was requested
                                     of those individuals, they just denied to participate; is that correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, especially Fastow and other people in these
                                     partnerships. We tried to interview them and they declined.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00031   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 32 ===
                                                                                      28

                                        Mr. BURR. You also referred to a limited amount of Andersen
                                     documents. Did you make requests for documents from Andersen
                                     that they denied you access to those documents?
                                        Mr. POWERS. We asked them for all of their work papers over
                                     this period of time.
                                        Mr. BURR. And did they produce all their work papers?
                                        Mr. POWERS. They did not. They did not produce work papers
                                     over the period of 2000. We negotiated with them, it dragged on,
                                     and we did not get them.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Will the gentleman yield just for 5 seconds. To
                                     put a point on Mr. Burr’s question on interviewing Mr. Fastow, I
                                     believe, according to your report, you had a brief interview with
                                     Mr. Fastow.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Clarify that.
                                        Mr. POWERS. At some point, Mr. Fastow’s lawyer said that he
                                     would be interviewed, and I was not personally there, but I think
                                     it was an extremely short interview, because he simply wouldn’t co-
                                     operate.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. How short?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I think the—it took an hour, but I don’t think
                                     there were—very little information was forthcoming. Can I correct,
                                     the work papers that we didn’t get were from 2001.
                                        Mr. BURR. And for the papers that you didn’t get, did Andersen
                                     give you an explanation as to why they couldn’t produce them or
                                     wouldn’t produce them?
                                        Mr. POWERS. It dragged out, and then finally we—the company
                                     discharged them, and they called us back and said, ‘‘We won’t co-
                                     operate any further.’’
                                        Mr. BURR. So Andersen refused to cooperate.
                                        Mr. POWERS. From that point on. That was in January.
                                        Mr. BURR. Dean, your committee, in 3 months, discovered a tre-
                                     mendous amount. They discovered some things that it took Ander-
                                     sen 4 years to correct or amend in financial statements. Based on
                                     the information you have, was Andersen misled by Enron manage-
                                     ment?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I am not in a position to say that they were never
                                     misled by Enron management on any details. They certainly had
                                     a great deal of information about the structure of these trans-
                                     actions.
                                        Mr. BURR. Were they in collusion with Enron management?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t think I have the information from our inves-
                                     tigation to know that. They certainly were working contempora-
                                     neously on the accounting of these structures.
                                        Mr. BURR. Were they competent to handle the Enron audit?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think Arthur Andersen is a competent accounting
                                     firm.
                                        Mr. BURR. Let me ask you, Dean, going back to Mr. Dingell’s
                                     questions, relative to V&E and specifically their investigation, and
                                     I understand where you are on it, but there is a news report that
                                     says that individuals from Enron limited greatly what they asked
                                     V&E to look at, that they didn’t ask them to look at accounting
                                     structures; as a matter of fact, the told them not to. Is that your




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00032   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 33 ===
                                                                                      29

                                     understanding of the instructions that were given by Enron man-
                                     agement to V&E on that investigation?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think that is in our report, yes.
                                        Mr. BURR. And you also referred to others within the committee
                                     that looked at V&E, not you.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. BURR. Those others were on your special committee?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct, the other two members and
                                     counsel.
                                        Mr. BURR. And what they found, relative to V&E’s participation,
                                     would be found in your report?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Oh, yes, absolutely.
                                        Mr. BURR. In its entirety.
                                        Mr. POWERS. And the committee investigated that and inter-
                                     viewed people. I just recused myself from it.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, would the gentleman yield, because
                                     he has raised a question, and I think it is valuable?
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Be happy to.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Here is reading from Vincent & Elkins’ document
                                     entitled, ‘‘Preliminary Investigation of Allegations of an Anony-
                                     mous Employee.’’ It says, as follows, in the second page: ‘‘In pre-
                                     liminary discussions with you, it was decided that our initial ap-
                                     proach would not involve second-guessing the accounting advice
                                     and treatment afforded by AA and that there would be no detailed
                                     analysis of each and every transaction and that there would be no
                                     full-scale, discovery-style inquiry.’’ The letter is directed to Mr.
                                     James B. Derrick, Jr., and I believe it would useful, Mr. Chairman,
                                     it goes in the record at a suitable place. And I thank the gentleman
                                     for his patience.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Without objection.
                                        [The information referred to follows:]




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00033   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 34 ===
                                                                                      30




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00034   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 35 ===
                                                                                      31




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00035   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 36 ===
                                                                                      32




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00036   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 37 ===
                                                                                      33




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00037   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 38 ===
                                                                                      34




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00038   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 39 ===
                                                                                      35




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00039   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 40 ===
                                                                                      36




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00040   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 41 ===
                                                                                      37




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00041   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 42 ===
                                                                                      38




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00042   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 43 ===
                                                                                      39

                                        Mr. BURR. Reclaiming my time, Dean, it is my understanding
                                     that under Enron’s code of conduct Mr. Fastow would have to have
                                     received the blessings of Mr. Lay, who was then CEO and chair-
                                     man of the board, to participate in the partnerships. Certainly,
                                     their accounts might have been out of your report, but Mr. Lay said
                                     he was not asked and did not grant his blessings. Is that your un-
                                     derstanding?
                                        Mr. POWERS. My understanding is that he would have to get ap-
                                     proval by the Office of the Chair.
                                        Mr. BURR. And——
                                        Mr. POWERS. And that included——
                                        Mr. BURR. [continuing] Mr. Lay was the Chair.
                                        Mr. POWERS. He was the Chair, but there were three people in
                                     what was called the Office of the Chair.
                                        Mr. BURR. Did you find any of those three that granted permis-
                                     sion to Mr. Fastow?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Even though the structure was to go to the Office
                                     of the Chair, they actually took that to the board on LJM1 and
                                     LJM2, and the board made the findings necessary to permit Mr.
                                     Fastow to participate in those partnerships.
                                        Mr. BURR. So the board of directors actually signed off on it.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. BURR. And did they also sign off on Mr. Kopper’s involve-
                                     ment in partnerships?
                                        Mr. POWERS. No.
                                        Mr. BURR. Was he not under the same code of conduct at Enron,
                                     that he would have had to have received the chairman, CEO or
                                     board’s permission to participate in the partnerships.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, but he did that surreptitiously, I believe.
                                        Mr. BURR. So he got nobody’s approval——
                                        Mr. POWERS. Correct.
                                        Mr. BURR. [continuing] to participate in the partnerships.
                                        Mr. POWERS. That is correct.
                                        Mr. BURR. How much did Andersen play in the actual structure
                                     of the partnerships?
                                        Mr. POWERS. We don’t know how much they actually—whether
                                     they designed them. They were contemporaneously to the develop-
                                     ment; that is, before, for example, Raptor was put in place. They
                                     were doing accounting work—it is hard for us to know exactly what
                                     they were doing. We have their bills, but whether it was actually
                                     designing, doing the accounting, approval work, but they were
                                     doing it contemporaneously to the design of these structures, not
                                     simply after they had been year-end and being audited.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired.
                                        Mr. BURR. I would ask unanimous consent for 1 additional
                                     minute.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Without objection.
                                        Mr. BURR. I thank the Chair. Let me clear up one thing. Now,
                                     Mr. Kopper participated in partnerships, not with the approval of
                                     the CEO, the chairman or the board, but it is my understanding
                                     that Mr. Fastow and Mr. Skilling were aware of his participation
                                     in these partnerships. Is that also your understanding?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Skilling told us that he knew about Chewco and
                                     Kopper’s involvement in Chewco.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00043   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 44 ===
                                                                                      40

                                        Mr. BURR. So he would have to have known——
                                        Mr. POWERS. And Fastow knew, yes.
                                        Mr. BURR. So both of them would have to have know of Mr.
                                     Kopper’s involvement.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. And signed off on it?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Not in anything that is—he may have verbally said,
                                     ‘‘Go ahead and do it.’’ He didn’t sign off on it in a way that the ap-
                                     proval is supposed to be obtained.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. In a document.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. BURR. On 10-6, Enron took a $544 million after-tax charge.
                                     They also, at the same time, reduced shareholder equity by $1.2
                                     billion. Less than a month later, Enron restated its financial state-
                                     ment for 1997 through 2001 because of, and I quote, ‘‘accounting
                                     errors’’ relating to the transactions with these different partner-
                                     ships. Who made the accounting errors, Enron, the partnership,
                                     Andersen or everybody?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Enron, and to the extent that Andersen was doing
                                     the audits, Andersen and Enron.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
                                     Chair recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Stupak.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Chair-
                                     man. Mr. Powers, if your committee isn’t going to make any rec-
                                     ommendations of discipline to the Board of Directors of Enron, then
                                     who is going to make disciplinary or who is going to put forth dis-
                                     ciplinary charges against these people?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I think whether the government brings
                                     charges, the appropriate government officials are going to have to
                                     make, I don’t think—one, frankly, we ran out of time, but I think
                                     many of these questions as to what Enron would do to these people
                                     will become moot. If they don’t, somebody is going to have to make
                                     that determination. We did not.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Whether it does or does not, I guess, sitting from
                                     where we are sitting, it sort of seems like we have seen all the
                                     egregious actions. Someone has a responsibility here to hold people
                                     accountable, at least from an employment setting, but yet we are
                                     looking the other way and let someone else deal with it, and that
                                     seems to be the attitude with Enron——
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. [continuing] we will just look the other way and let
                                     these things go.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I don’t think—I doubt if Enron is going to be
                                     able to look the other way on these. Enron came out with a press
                                     release, I believe, on Saturday, it might have been Sunday, that ap-
                                     pointed a committee to restructure—to look into restructuring the
                                     board, and I would anticipate that process will go forward with the
                                     cooperation of the Creditors Committee.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Was the—the charge you received in your com-
                                     mittee to do this investigation, was that one of your charges, to
                                     make recommendations as to any action that should be taken?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, it was. I believe the understanding would be
                                     that it would be an ongoing company when we finished our inves-
                                     tigation, and that turned out not to be true.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00044   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 45 ===
                                                                                      41

                                        Mr. STUPAK. Well, will your investigation continue now and look
                                     at any of this possible disciplinary action, at least from an employ-
                                     ment setting?
                                        Mr. POWERS. We haven’t made that determination. I will take
                                     the opportunity to say being the dean of the University of Texas
                                     Law School is a demanding, full-time job, and my fervent hope is
                                     I can return to that task.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. But even—and I am sure you will return and do an
                                     incredible job there, but will you remain on the board then at
                                     Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I anticipate that I will not.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Okay. Well, I guess, you know——
                                        Mr. POWERS. I would like to—I need to fulfill my obligations to
                                     the SEC, and I will do that. But otherwise I anticipate that I will
                                     not.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Okay. Well, we just don’t want—you know, I guess
                                     I said in my opening statement, there are a lot of these people who
                                     are responsible for this whole debacle who are still sitting there—
                                     still drawing salaries, still sitting on boards, still sitting in key sen-
                                     ior management positions. And I would think if we are ever going
                                     to clean this thing up and come out of bankruptcy as a credible
                                     company, the board and, as I said in my opening, maybe senior
                                     management should be replaced. I just thought it was odd that
                                     your committee had an opportunity to at least make some rec-
                                     ommendations like that, and once again it was sort of left at the
                                     wayside.
                                        Mr. POWERS. But by not doing that, we did not in any way mean
                                     to indicate that what you are suggesting is not the appropriate out-
                                     come.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. So other than the SEC, who else would take dis-
                                     ciplinary action or action against these individuals?
                                        Mr. POWERS. The Department of Justice I think will be looking
                                     into these.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Okay. You indicated to Mr. Dingell’s question that
                                     in fact you did talk to Cliff Baxter.
                                        Mr. POWERS. I didn’t personally, but the committee did.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Your committee did. And he was the vice president
                                     in Mr. Lay’s office. You said there were three people in there?
                                        Mr. POWERS. He was, for a time, a vice chairman and part of the
                                     Office of the Chair.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Okay. And, actually, in the Watkins memo, I believe
                                     she said that you should talk to Mr. Baxter, especially on the LJM
                                     and Raptor transactions.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. So what did Mr. Baxter say then about—did you
                                     ask him about these two transactions or your committee ask him
                                     about these two transactions in particular?
                                        Mr. POWERS. We interviewed him, and he was troubled by these
                                     transactions and expressed that in his interview as well.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. How long did this interview take place? You said
                                     the one with Mr. Fastow was an hour.
                                        Mr. POWERS. People think a couple of hours. I am not sure the
                                     person who interviewed Mr. Baxter.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00045   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 46 ===
                                                                                      42

                                        Mr. STUPAK. Would these interviews be recorded or would there
                                     be notes of these interviews available?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Would you make them available to the committee?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I certainly would. I would support that. Much of
                                     this is the property of the company, and I am not in a position to
                                     authorize releasing it. I personally, and the committee would cer-
                                     tainly support releasing those; we want to cooperate in every way
                                     we can and provide information to this committee.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. It may be something that we have to talk to the
                                     chairman later, if need be. To cover everyone’s grounds here, we
                                     may have to do a subpoena or something like that. It just looked
                                     like he was a critical part in the Watkins memo, and unfortunately
                                     we will never have a chance to talk with him. So if there is some
                                     interview there that we can review that may give us more leads,
                                     it would probably be prudent——
                                        Mr. POWERS. From my point of view, I am happy to do what I
                                     can to bring that about.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                     nizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Whitfield?
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Dean, from your discussion with those people
                                     who did interview Mr. Baxter, was there anything particular that
                                     stood out with the committee as to your interview with him? Was
                                     there any——
                                        Mr. POWERS. One would not have looked through all of the inter-
                                     views and thought this is somebody who particularly would be in
                                     danger.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Now, what are your areas of expertise in the
                                     law?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I teach torts and products liability, I teach some
                                     legal philosophy, and then I have also taught contracts and some
                                     other subjects.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. I see.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Insurance law.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. In your report, you talk about the two character-
                                     istics of SPEs: One, there must be 3 percent equity by an inde-
                                     pendent group, and, two, that there not be any control by Enron.
                                     And there were a number of those transactions that obviously did
                                     not meet that criteria, which meant that the financial statements
                                     should be consolidated. From your information or from your knowl-
                                     edge, is that a violation of any law?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t know. Whether it is just a violation of ac-
                                     counting principles or law—if it is misrepresented on the finan-
                                     cials, that might pick up the securities reporting laws, but just the
                                     mere accounting violations, I don’t know the answer to that ques-
                                     tion.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. So you are not aware of that?.
                                        Mr. POWERS. I am not, correct.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Now, Vincent & Elkins is no longer legal counsel
                                     for Enron; is that correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t know the answer to that.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. I thought that you had indicated to me that they
                                     had been dismissed by Enron.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00046   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 47 ===
                                                                                      43

                                        Mr. POWERS. No, Andersen. I do know that Andersen was dis-
                                     missed by Enron, because that was the reason they gave us for not
                                     cooperating further.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. What was Mr. Fastow’s position with Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. He was the chief financial officer.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Do you happen to know what his salary was?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t know myself. It was very substantial, but I
                                     don’t have the figure in my head right now.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. But from these independent transactions that he
                                     was involved in, you said that he received at least $30 million from
                                     those.
                                        Mr. POWERS. That is what the evidence indicates to us, yes.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. And when he realized that he was not going to
                                     be able to manage Chewco, he did bring in Mr. Kopper; is that cor-
                                     rect?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. And Mr. Kopper did report directly to Mr.
                                     Fastow; is that correct, at Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, at Enron, that is correct.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. And then once Mr. Kopper took his management
                                     position in the SPE, at some point Enron entered into negotiations
                                     to purchase back the interest of Chewco; is that correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. And the gentleman that was negotiating for
                                     Enron on behalf of Enron’s interest, did he also report to Fastow
                                     at Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. It was Fastow himself who negotiated that, I be-
                                     lieve.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Oh, Fastow himself negotiated with Kopper?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. But wasn’t there one incident in another trans-
                                     action where an employee of Enron was negotiating with Kopper
                                     and Mr. Fastow intervened?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. And that person reported to Mr. Fastow, correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I believe that is correct, yes.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. And Mr. Fastow basically ordered him or told
                                     him to accept the terms as Mr. Kopper offered it; is that correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Right, correct.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Do you know the name of that employee?
                                        [Pause.]
                                        Mr. POWERS. Thank you for your indulgence, Congressman.
                                     There is a lot of detail here, and it is hard to keep it all straight,
                                     and I want to be accurate. In one of them, it was Bill Brown.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Bill Brown?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. In the other, we would want to go back and
                                     check the records, if we have that.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. But Bill Brown did report to Fastow at Enron.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Did Mr. Fastow’s wife work at Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, she did.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Was she in the same general area of the com-
                                     pany that he was in or do you know?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00047   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 48 ===
                                                                                      44

                                        Mr. POWERS. I am not sure. She was in the finance area, gen-
                                     erally.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Okay. So she was in the finance area with Mr.
                                     Fastow?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. And—I see my time has expired here anyway,
                                     so——
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                     nizes the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms. DeGette.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Powers, it looks to
                                     me from Martindale Hubble that your specialty is really products
                                     liability.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. That is your academic specialty, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. That is one of them.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. Certainly not securities issues.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Absolutely.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering was your legal
                                     counsel and Deloitte and Touche was your accounting firm.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Are these three gentlemen behind you with one or
                                     the other of those firms?
                                        Mr. POWERS. They are from Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. I know you have been getting advice from them
                                     today, and I am wondering if you can identify for the record who
                                     they are?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. Bill McLucas, Chuck Davidow and Joe Bren-
                                     ner.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you very much.
                                        Mr. POWERS. And I have just been trying to get factual informa-
                                     tion from them.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. No, you are doing great. You are doing a lot better
                                     than I could do in your position, certainly.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Thank you.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. I want to follow up on a couple of questions that
                                     Chairman Tauzin asked you about Rhythms. In your report, you
                                     noted that the Rhythms transaction was the first business dealing
                                     that Enron had with the LJM partnership, and that it is significant
                                     because, No. 1, it was the first time Enron transferred its own
                                     stock to an SPE and used the SPE to hedge an Enron investment.
                                     No. 2, it was the first and perhaps most dramatic example of how
                                     the purportedly arms-length negotiations between Enron and the
                                     LJM partnerships resulted in economic terms skewed toward LJM
                                     and enriched Fastow and others. And, third, because in Rhythms
                                     the investors included Enron employees who were secretly offered
                                     financial interests by Fastow, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. I want to walk through this a minute, be-
                                     cause I thought the chairman got us to a good point, but I think
                                     we need to talk about why this was inappropriate. The first thing
                                     that happened was in March 1998, Enron invested $10 million in
                                     Rhythms, which was a privately held company, correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00048   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 49 ===
                                                                                      45

                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And then on April 7, 1999, Rhythms went public
                                     at $21 a share, and then it spiked up to $69 that day.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. The second thing that happened was by May
                                     1999, Enron’s investment in Rhythms was worth about $300 mil-
                                     lion, but Enron was prohibited from selling its shares by the end
                                     of 1999, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And so then what happened was Skilling was
                                     afraid that because Rhythms was so volatile he wanted to hedge
                                     the position to capture the value already achieved and to protect
                                     against further volatility, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And, in fact, I can tell you Rhythms was a very
                                     volatile company, because it just went out of business last year.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. So it was very volatile. All of those would be gen-
                                     erally accepted business practices.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Absolutely. There is nothing wrong with that if the
                                     hedges were proper.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Right, there is nothing wrong with that. But here
                                     is where the problem came in and here is where the beginning of
                                     the precedent for the later partnerships started. Enron wanted to
                                     take advantage of the increase in value in Enron stock, but it
                                     can’t—under general accounting principles, it can’t recognize an in-
                                     crease in its own value of its stock as income, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is absolutely correct.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. So what it wanted to do was look at this as a
                                     trapped value, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. That is what they wanted to do.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. So then what happened is Fastow and others de-
                                     veloped a plan to hedge the Rhythms investment by taking advan-
                                     tage of the value in Enron shares covered by the forward contracts,
                                     and that is when they created the limited partnership, SPE, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And it was capitalized with the appreciated Enron
                                     stock, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And that is where the hedging transaction created
                                     the problem, and that is where the problem was, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Absolutely.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And that is against general accepted accounting
                                     principles, as far as we know, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. You have captured it exactly.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And SEC law too, as far as we know.
                                        Mr. POWERS. I would have to look at SEC law, but it certainly
                                     ought to be looked into.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Right. Okay. And this was kind of the model then
                                     for what happened afterwards.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00049   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 50 ===
                                                                                      46

                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. Let me talk to you for a few minutes about
                                     Rick Causey. He is Enron’s chief accounting officer, was and still
                                     is today, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I have heard newspaper reports that he—I heard
                                     reports when I presented this document to the board on Saturday
                                     that he had resigned the week before.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. But he was up until a——
                                        Mr. POWERS. Up until last week.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. [continuing] couple of days ago.
                                        Mr. POWERS. And I don’t know that he—that report may be accu-
                                     rate. I am just saying I got that report.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. You mean you don’t always trust the press.
                                     Based on the accounting advice your investigation received, you
                                     concluded in your report that Mr. Causey’s accounting judgment,
                                     ‘‘went well beyond the aggressive.’’
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. What does that mean?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think Mr. Causey was not providing proper ac-
                                     counting supervision in the company.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. That, in your view, is well beyond the aggressive?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and recog-
                                     nizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Stearns.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am just curious, the
                                     chairman opened up his questions with a reference to Star Wars
                                     and Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader. When you and your col-
                                     leagues interviewed Kenneth Lay, did he feel like he was Darth
                                     Vader? I mean did he feel like he was a bad guy?
                                        Mr. POWERS. He certainly did not indicate that to us.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Did he feel like he was a noble public servant and
                                     doing the right thing?
                                        Mr. POWERS. That certainly was the attitude he conveyed.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. So all during the 4 hours, he felt that he had done
                                     nothing wrong.
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think he felt that he had not been watching care-
                                     fully enough, but he certainly indicated that he thought he—I am
                                     reporting what he said—that——
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Well, that is what I am asking you to do.
                                        Mr. POWERS. [continuing] he had been betrayed and should have
                                     looked more carefully.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. So his position has been that he was betrayed, he
                                     was high above and didn’t know all the details.
                                        Mr. POWERS. That was the position, yes.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Okay. Mr. Winokur served as chairman of Enron’s
                                     Finance Committee.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Did you folks interview Mr. Winokur regarding his
                                     role as chairman of the Finance Committee?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, we did.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. And you went into his understanding of the LJM
                                     transaction?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00050   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 51 ===
                                                                                      47

                                       Mr. STEARNS. Okay. Your committee reports, quote, ‘‘We have
                                     identified some evidence that in three of the transactions where
                                     Enron ultimately bought back LJM’s interest, Enron had agreed in
                                     advance to protect the LJM partnerships against loss.’’
                                       Mr. POWERS. Yes, we say that.
                                       Mr. STEARNS. Okay, you say that. That is on page 12.
                                       Mr. POWERS. And that is correct.
                                       Mr. STEARNS. Okay. How did Enron do this, and if that was true,
                                     and Mr. Winokur is chairman of the Finance Committee, is that
                                     something that he could accept in his role to have them, as you
                                     say, protect LJM’s partnership against loss by guarantying?
                                       Mr. POWERS. Well, we didn’t have any evidence that the Finance
                                     Committee, or the Chair of the Finance Committee, was aware of
                                     those sort of side agreements to buy back from LJM1.
                                       Mr. STEARNS. But wasn’t his role to understand these trans-
                                     actions?
                                       Mr. POWERS. Our understanding was that these were informal
                                     side assurances that don’t worry——
                                       Mr. STEARNS. Well, wait a second. On October 11, 1999, Mr.
                                     Winokur presented the LJM2 proposal to the board of directors.
                                       Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                       Mr. STEARNS. Okay. That is what the minutes show. And he said
                                     that he put in controls, indicated he discussed the controls that
                                     would be used to guaranty LJM/Enron’s transaction would be fair
                                     to Enron.
                                       Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                       Mr. STEARNS. And so he had some knowledge of this, although
                                     you are just saying——
                                       Mr. POWERS. Well, he had knowledge of the structure, and he
                                     had knowledge of the kinds of transactions that would take place
                                     between Enron and LJM, and the committee put in controls to at-
                                     tempt, unsuccessfully, to mitigate the risks of conflict.
                                       Mr. STEARNS. Okay. What kind of controls did he put in place to,
                                     as you say, mitigate, to prevent the loss?
                                       Mr. POWERS. Causey and Rick Buy and Skilling were supposed
                                     to look at these transactions and approve them to ensure that they
                                     were either arms length, or similar to arms length transactions and
                                     were not sweetheart deals. Those were the controls that were put
                                     in place.
                                       Mr. STEARNS. Well, it is one thing to put in controls, but then
                                     you have got to implement them. So what did he do to make sure
                                     and go back—trust and verify, as we would say? What did he do?
                                       Mr. POWERS. Right. I think the board and the committee did
                                     not—I am not saying they did not do anything to go back, but they
                                     certainly—the controls were not followed.
                                       Mr. STEARNS. So you admit that he had no trust and verify of
                                     his controls in place.
                                       Mr. POWERS. Well, I wouldn’t say no trust and verify, inadequate
                                     trust and verify.
                                       Mr. STEARNS. On page 105 of the report, it notes that Jeff
                                     Skilling’s signature is missing from the LJM2 approval sheet for
                                     Raptor I. What knowledge did Skilling have of the Raptor I trans-
                                     action?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00051   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 52 ===
                                                                                      48

                                        Mr. POWERS. Skilling certainly knew about the transaction that
                                     set up the Raptors.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. But why wouldn’t he sign it?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I am sorry?
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Why wouldn’t he sign it?
                                        Mr. POWERS. This is an approval sheet for hedging—individual
                                     hedging deals between the Raptors and Enron after the Raptors
                                     had been set up. It wasn’t an approval sheet to approve the setting
                                     up of the Raptors. The board did that.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. So in your opinion, his signature wasn’t needed?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I am sorry. This was an approval sheet for setting
                                     up that Raptor. He didn’t sign it; he was at the board meeting that
                                     approved it.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. And so why didn’t he sign it? I mean I am not ask-
                                     ing you.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Right.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. I mean just don’t you think that that shows some-
                                     thing?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Right.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. And what do you think that shows, the fact that
                                     he doesn’t sign it, as a lawyer?
                                        Mr. POWERS. He was at the board meeting that approved it. He
                                     was at the board meeting that approved it. I really don’t know
                                     whether—I don’t know why he didn’t sign it.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. But the thing that strikes me here is Winokur was,
                                     as chairman of the Finance Committee, he was responsible for put-
                                     ting in the controls and then making sure the controls were imple-
                                     mented. Now, wasn’t he part of this report? Wasn’t he on your
                                     board on this report?
                                        Mr. POWERS. He was. He did recuse himself from the judgments
                                     about the board. Mr. Troubh and I had several conversations with
                                     counsel independently without Mr. Winokur when we made our
                                     conclusions about the board.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Do you think Skilling knew about these side agree-
                                     ments that were protecting these partnerships and ensuring that
                                     Enron would guaranty them?
                                        Mr. POWERS. From the evidence that I have seen, I don’t know
                                     that I can answer that. There is a great deal of evidence that he
                                     knew about the transactions.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. And you are saying Mr. Winokur had no idea also
                                     about these side agreements, and he never followed up with a trust
                                     and verify, he never did some verification of the controls that he
                                     put in place?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think these are going to take further investiga-
                                     tion. I can say what we were able to ascertain from our interviews
                                     and evidence, and we don’t have any evidence that he was aware
                                     of those side agreements.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Dean.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
                                     Chair recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. John.
                                        Mr. JOHN. Mr. Powers, on Friday, the Wall Street Journal re-
                                     ported that Mr. Lay told other Enron officials that he had never
                                     heard of Chewco. In your 4-hour interview with him, did he indi-
                                     cate anything to that effect or did he tell you that? Chewco.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00052   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 53 ===
                                                                                      49

                                        Mr. POWERS. He was at the Executive Committee meeting that
                                     approved the transaction. He did say at his interview that he didn’t
                                     recall the name.
                                        Mr. JOHN. Thank you. The rest of my questions really are going
                                     to be focused on the accounting side with Mr. Causey, because I
                                     think that it is very important. Your report specifically states that
                                     Mr. Causey was charged by the board of directors with a substan-
                                     tial role in the oversight of Enron’s relationship with the LJM part-
                                     nerships; in fact, he was supposed to review and approve every
                                     transaction——
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Mr. JOHN. [continuing] within LJM to determine if it was in the
                                     best interest of Enron.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. JOHN. And then he was supposed to report that to the board
                                     of directors, correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. JOHN. Mr. Causey told the board everything was fine, even
                                     though his approvals came after the deals were finalized. Without
                                     Mr. Skilling’s signature and your report concludes that many of the
                                     most significant transactions apparently were designed to accom-
                                     plish favorable financial statement results, not to achieve bona fide
                                     economic objectives or a transfer of risk. Again, according to your
                                     report on page 4, the transactions did not follow the applicable ac-
                                     counting rules. What was Mr. Causey’s excuse in your interview
                                     with him for not carrying out these duties?
                                        Mr. POWERS. In this interview, he said that he thought he was
                                     responsible only for signing off on the accounting, which, in our
                                     view, was not consistent with what his charge was by the board.
                                        Mr. JOHN. But he was in fact the chief accounting officer.
                                        Mr. POWERS. He was.
                                        Mr. JOHN. In fact, in one instance, involving a Fastow partner-
                                     ship named Talon, on page 108 in your report——
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. JOHN. [continuing] Mr. Causey actually backdated a docu-
                                     ment of a swap so that Enron would not have to show about $75
                                     million on its quarterly financial statements. Backdating docu-
                                     ments to hide losses from shareholders, is that fraud?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, backdating is extremely serious. I would have
                                     to trace through what was then reported to the shareholders to de-
                                     termine—and backdating the intent does seem easy. And I don’t—
                                     I need to check. There was backdating, we did find evidence of
                                     backdating in some of these transactions, which is, individually,
                                     very serious. I would have to check.
                                        Mr. JOHN. As it relates to Talon.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. That is the first Raptor vehicle, and there were
                                     hedges with the Raptor vehicle, and we found very compelling evi-
                                     dence that some of those transactions were backdated.
                                        Mr. JOHN. And in your own words, these are very serious when
                                     you——
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, very serious.
                                        Mr. JOHN. Mr. Powers, Mr. Causey told our investigators here
                                     that he didn’t see the collapse of Enron coming and awoke to it
                                     once the Wall Street Journal began reporting on the company’s




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00053   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 54 ===
                                                                                      50

                                     troubles in October of last year. In your expert opinion, shouldn’t
                                     the chief accounting officer and the person responsible of approving
                                     every single transaction with Mr. Fastow’s entities, have identified
                                     some warning signs? Don’t you think there should have been some
                                     warning signs before October of last year.
                                         Mr. POWERS. Absolutely.
                                         Mr. JOHN. If so, what do you think he should have seen or did
                                     not come—what do you think—give me maybe an idea of what
                                     maybe he should have at least notified the board of, or Mr. Fastow,
                                     or alerted them?
                                         Mr. POWERS. Well, as we document in the report, these were not
                                     real transactions, and he was the chief accounting officer, and
                                     should and I think did—he certainly knew about the nature of the
                                     transactions. And has subsequently turned out, that structure
                                     made the company extremely fragile economically, because it
                                     wasn’t solidly backed, and he should have warned the board about
                                     that, he should have talked to senior management about it. He was
                                     the chief accounting officer, he should have done something about
                                     it.
                                         Mr. JOHN. Real quick, if you could summarize, I guess, Mr.
                                     Causey’s failures as the lead accountant of the company, how
                                     would that summary read?
                                         Mr. POWERS. He was not an effective check on Mr. Fastow, and
                                     the accountant needs to be an effective check.
                                         Mr. JOHN. Was it a lack of his credentials and his training and
                                     background?
                                         Mr. POWERS. Not to my knowledge.
                                         Mr. JOHN. Thank you.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
                                     Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Hampshire, Mr. Bass.
                                         Mr. BASS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dean Powers, you have ob-
                                     viously overseen a very detailed report here, an investigation, and
                                     in the very end of your testimony, in the last very paragraph, in
                                     the first sentence, you say, ‘‘In the end, this is a tragedy that could
                                     and should have been avoided.’’ Without getting into the kind of de-
                                     tail where you are discussing what individuals did or didn’t do,
                                     who signed what, who was reporting to who, who transferred
                                     money from here to there, how could this tragedy have been avoid-
                                     ed, in your opinion?
                                         Mr. POWERS. Well, as somebody who invests at a very, very mod-
                                     est level myself, I see the idea of statements to the public that
                                     there should be transparency in the financial condition of a com-
                                     pany. And if there was more transparency about the finances of
                                     Enron, the market would have reacted to that and, frankly, ad-
                                     justed in ways that wouldn’t have let Enron get away with it, if
                                     there had been more transparency.
                                         Mr. BASS. Well, then what, in your opinion, aspects of the regu-
                                     latory structure created an environment in which there wouldn’t be
                                     the kind of transparency that should have been with Enron?
                                         Mr. POWERS. I want to give the judgments that I feel I can give.
                                     I am not, in any way, an expert in securities regulation and how
                                     that regulatory structure would have or might have detected some
                                     of these problems.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00054   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 55 ===
                                                                                      51

                                        Mr. BASS. Well, is, in your opinion, the Enron investigation, in
                                     general, then, primarily a criminal or a justice-related investigation
                                     dealing with individuals who may have broken the law? Or are
                                     there thematic conclusions from your report that require increased
                                     or more aggressive oversight on the part of either regulators or pol-
                                     icymakers, like the Congress?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I think there certainly was individual wrong-
                                     doing that needs to be investigated by the proper authorities. But
                                     I think there are larger issues that are raised by what we found
                                     in our report.
                                        Mr. BASS. What larger issues are you thinking about?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, they deal with 401(k) plans, they deal with the
                                     accounting industry. Not having looked into them and not being an
                                     expert, I don’t know that I have particular suggestions, but I do
                                     think those are important issues that the Congress and the com-
                                     mittees need to look into.
                                        Mr. BASS. This may be a repetitive question, but the second sen-
                                     tence in your last paragraph says that you hope that our report
                                     and the work of your committee will help reduce the danger that
                                     it will happen to some other company. How do you think that?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I think by bringing to light what happened,
                                     I hope that your committee, other congressional committees at
                                     least have a starting point as to some of the problems, and that
                                     this will help, in a small way, to focus attention on some of these
                                     problems and that our Congress, State legislators, other regulatory
                                     and policymaking groups will respond to some of these problems.
                                        Mr. BASS. One last question, Dean Powers. Were there any ques-
                                     tions that—are there any questions that have come about as a re-
                                     sult of the report that you are presenting or the investigation that
                                     you conducted that you don’t have answers to at this point?
                                        Mr. POWERS. You mean with respect to the particular events?
                                        Mr. BASS. Yes.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Oh, absolutely. Much more needs to be done. Who
                                     knew what when? We, again, did not have subpoena power, did not
                                     have true cross examination power, and I think this report is just
                                     a start.
                                        Mr. BASS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gen-
                                     tleman from Florida, Mr. Stearns, made reference to a document
                                     that I would, without objection, enter into the record. It is an ex-
                                     cerpt from the October 11 and 12, 1999 Enron Corporation Board
                                     of Directors meeting.
                                        [The information referred to follows:]




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00055   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 56 ===
                                                                                      52




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00056   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 57 ===
                                                                                      53




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00057   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 58 ===
                                                                                      54




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00058   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 59 ===
                                                                                      55

                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Illi-
                                     nois, Mr. Rush.
                                        Mr. RUSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Powers, I want to
                                     commend you on your stamina. This has been a very long session,
                                     and you have certainly stood up quite well.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Thank you.
                                        Mr. RUSH. Again, I commend you for your stamina. Our inves-
                                     tigators were also told that Enron had more than 900 accountants
                                     reporting to Mr. Causey, and I think that my colleague from Lou-
                                     isiana, Mr. John, pointed to this direction. And this 900 account-
                                     ants does not include the nearly 100 accountants that Arthur An-
                                     dersen supplied to audit Enron. How is it possible that Mr. Causey
                                     could not see this train wreck coming when he apparently had al-
                                     most 1,000 accountants on the Enron work force?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think it is that Mr. Causey, as the chief account-
                                     ant, would have seen these problems.
                                        Mr. RUSH. You think that he actually saw this problem.
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think he certainly should have, and I would ex-
                                     pect that he would have.
                                        Mr. RUSH. Okay. Well, with all these accountants, 900 account-
                                     ants of its own, who had access to all these internal records, in
                                     your opinion, how can Enron blame Arthur Andersen alone for not
                                     revealing the accounting shenanigans that were taking place? And
                                     are Enron’s accountants simply incompetent or not well trained or
                                     shouldn’t they have known Enron’s numbers even more than An-
                                     dersen should?
                                        Mr. POWERS. We certainly did not intend to, and I don’t think we
                                     have, made judgments or, as you put it, blamed Andersen alone.
                                     I think the Accounting Department within Enron and people out-
                                     side the Accounting Department, including all of the people in
                                     management and the board, bear responsibility for this.
                                        Mr. RUSH. Well, I want to return quickly, if I could, back to Mr.
                                     Fastow. One conclusion surfaces from our investigation into Enron
                                     is that on one was minding the store. It was almost like the fat rat
                                     was in the cheese factory, and the cat was on vacation. No single
                                     person appeared willing to come forward and say it was their job
                                     to take a big picture view of the multitude of deals and trans-
                                     actions taking place to assess how much risk the company was as-
                                     suming. Shouldn’t that job have been the chief financial officer’s job
                                     or Mr. Fastow’s job?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I think the chief financial officer—I am sorry,
                                     the chief financial officer or the chief accounting officer?
                                        Mr. RUSH. The chief financial officer.
                                        Mr. POWERS. The chief financial officer. Well, the chief financial
                                     officer is certainly responsible for the financial aspects of the com-
                                     pany, and certainly these were within the financial areas of the
                                     company. The problem with Mr. Fastow wasn’t in a position to
                                     mind the store, because he was personally and directly involved in
                                     these transactions.
                                        Mr. RUSH. Well, isn’t it true also, according to your report, you
                                     term Mr. Fastow as a, quote, ‘‘walking conflict of interest,’’ and
                                     that Mr. Fastow got more income from his outside businesses in 2
                                     years than he did from Enron; is that accurate?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00059   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 60 ===
                                                                                      56

                                        Mr. POWERS. He certainly got very substantial income from these
                                     outside investments.
                                        Mr. RUSH. Mr. Fastow, I call him ‘‘Fast Andy,’’ Fast Andy was
                                     known to curse and abuse people who got in the way of his partner-
                                     ships. He told Mr. Jeff McMahon, the treasurer, that he couldn’t
                                     work with him because McMahon was, quote, ‘‘screwing up his
                                     deals.’’ Where was the chairman at in all of this? Why didn’t the
                                     chairman put a stop to this?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, McMahon went and complained to Skilling,
                                     and Skilling then transferred McMahon to another part of the com-
                                     pany. And Skilling, from our information, then didn’t do anything
                                     about McMahon’s very accurate and serious issues that he had
                                     raised with Skilling.
                                        Mr. RUSH. I have one final question, Mr. Chairman, if I could.
                                     I want to get back to the Talon transaction. Mr. Fastow negotiated
                                     directly with Mr. Causey, putting together a deal that gave LJM2
                                     $41 million for basically nothing, according to your report on page
                                     108; is that right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I want to clarify this.
                                        [Pause.]
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think it was Ben Glisan who was involved in that
                                     negotiation, and I don’t want to be inaccurate about the other per-
                                     son involved in it. I would have to go back and look more carefully.
                                        Mr. RUSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gen-
                                     tleman from Texas, Mr. Green, is recognized for 5 minutes.
                                        Mr. GREEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, again, I would like
                                     to thank you for your courtesy as allowing me as the member of
                                     the full committee but not of the subcommittee to come in and ask
                                     questions. I want to continue following up what my colleague from
                                     Chicago mentioned on that LJM2, the $41 million. Sorry, I didn’t
                                     hear the answer. Do you think he violated Mr. Fastow—by negoti-
                                     ating directly, Mr. Causey violated an agreement not to negotiate
                                     with these entities?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think Fastow was negotiating on LJM. There is
                                     lots that Fastow did wrong, but in that negotiation, I believe he
                                     was negotiating on LJM’s side. He was not negotiating——
                                        Mr. GREEN. On Enron’s side.
                                        Mr. POWERS. [continuing] on Enron’s side. Now, the idea of
                                     Fastow and Causey doing a real arms-length negotiation is very
                                     problematic.
                                        Mr. GREEN. Okay. And Mr. Causey, by representing Enron, could
                                     have stopped that negotiation, I guess.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, that kind of negotiation with LJM had been
                                     approved. He and others could have identified the inappropriate
                                     nature of the conflict of the whole structure.
                                        Mr. GREEN. Who else is in a position to stop or disagree with the
                                     inappropriateness, as you said, of the whole structure? Our staff
                                     was told yesterday anyone with an understanding of how general
                                     partners are paid would have quickly understood that Mr. Fastow
                                     would get at least $15 million from the LJM2 alone. Was anyone
                                     at Enron or his board, were they that inexperienced in the world
                                     of finance that they couldn’t do the same calculations?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00060   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 61 ===
                                                                                      57

                                        Mr. POWERS. That is certainly a question that we had. LJM1, I
                                     think the board looked into more carefully. It was a much smaller
                                     partnership, and those calculations came to a much more reason-
                                     able number. When LJM2 was set up, it was a much larger part-
                                     nership. I think there was a sense that it was like LJM1, therefore
                                     let us go ahead and approve it. The problem was it was a much
                                     larger partnership, and if one had run these numbers, it would
                                     have suggested that Fastow might have a quite substantial return.
                                        Mr. GREEN. On page 43 of your report, it indicates Mr. Fastow
                                     had planned to merge Chewco until he was told that the participa-
                                     tion be revealed in Enron’s proxy statement.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Mr. GREEN. And at that point, Mr. Fastow substituted Mr.
                                     Kopper?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. GREEN. If anyone in the company knew this, do you think
                                     the board knew it?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t——
                                        Mr. GREEN. And why do you think they knew it?
                                        Mr. POWERS. We don’t have any evidence that they did.
                                        Mr. GREEN. What are the—a CFO in a corporation, I know they
                                     have typically defined, particularly a company as large as Enron,
                                     have defined responsibilities. Isn’t that person the person the in-
                                     vestors and the shareholders depend on to give a credible picture
                                     of the company’s finances?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, the chief financial officer and the chief ac-
                                     counting officer, yes.
                                        Mr. GREEN. If Mr. Fastow was doing his job properly, would this
                                     train wreck would have happened?
                                        Mr. POWERS. If Mr. Fastow had been doing his job properly, it
                                     would have substantially reduced. I can’t say in hindsight whether
                                     it would have prevented it. They would have never gotten into
                                     these deals if he had been—if he had been raising questions about
                                     them, I think there is a substantial likelihood that this train wreck
                                     would not have happened.
                                        Mr. GREEN. So the debt just kept piling up. So Enron had too
                                     much debt, and too many bad investments kept piling up.
                                        Mr. POWERS. It had a great deal of debt, and it had—I think if
                                     they had taken the—well, one can’t tell what had happened. It
                                     wasn’t just that they didn’t take the loss on the investments and
                                     as they were happening take charges. They had these hedging ar-
                                     rangements that, in a sense, were acting as though those losses
                                     were not there.
                                        Mr. GREEN. Did your committee specifically find out what actions
                                     Mr. Fastow failed to do, to take, as CFO, that might dramatically
                                     have mitigated the events that overtook Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, he should have come forward and disclosed
                                     that he was self-dealing with the company on a much larger scale
                                     than he had ever indicated.
                                        Mr. GREEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
                                     Chair would note his intention to initiate another round of ques-
                                     tions. Mr. Powers, are you good for another half hour or so, or
                                     would you like a break?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00061   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 62 ===
                                                                                      58

                                        Mr. POWERS. No, I am fine, Mr. Chairman.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. In that case, the Chair recognizes him-
                                     self for 5 minutes. Mr. Powers, on page 43 of your report, it reads,
                                     ‘‘Fastow told Enron employees that Jeffrey Skilling, then Enron’s
                                     president and chief operating officer, had approved his participa-
                                     tion in Chewco as long as it would not have to be disclosed in
                                     Enron’s proxy statement.’’ Who are the employees that Fastow told
                                     that to? How do you know that? If you need to consult——
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, let me read the statement. Could I——
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Please.
                                        Mr. POWERS. One of the people he told was Bill Brown, who I
                                     mentioned before, and Mr. Brown has notes that reflect that.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Do you have those notes that you could share
                                     with us?
                                        Mr. POWERS. We don’t have them here, and, again, I will support
                                     cooperating in every way, and I think the company will as well. I
                                     don’t, myself, have the authority to dispose of the company——
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Do you know what Skilling said about that?
                                     Did Skilling comment on that observation?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I believe Skilling said that he didn’t——
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. There is a footnote that says, ‘‘Skilling told us
                                     that he recalled Fastow——
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. Thank you.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. [continuing] proposing that the Chewco outside
                                     investors be members of Fastow’s wife’s family, and Skilling told
                                     Fastow he did not think that was a good idea.’’
                                        Mr. POWERS. Correct.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Thank you.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Special Committee’s report states Jeff
                                     Skilling appeared to be entirely uninvolved in the review of the
                                     Chewco transactions, despite, quote, ‘‘representations made to the
                                     board that he had undertaken a significant role.’’
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. That is from page 10. What were these rep-
                                     resentations and who made them?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I believe these are the LJM transactions. Chewco
                                     was more of an investment fund, and the LJM transactions were
                                     the transactions where there was more self-dealing. And Skilling
                                     represented to the board, or to the Finance Committee, I would
                                     have to clarify that Fastow represented to the board that these con-
                                     trols would be put in place. Skilling was at that board meeting
                                     when those representations were made, and the representations
                                     were that Skilling and Causey and Buy would review the trans-
                                     actions to make sure that they were at arms length and not self-
                                     enriching to Fastow.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Special Committee’s report states that the
                                     critical piece of missing information relating to the Chewco trans-
                                     action was the side agreement for the $6 million Enron
                                     collateralization of the partnership outside $11.4 million equity in-
                                     vestment by Big River Funding, LLC, which is a partnership con-
                                     trolled by Michael Kopper and his domestic partner, William
                                     Dodson. At least one Enron official, Ben Glisan, knew of these
                                     facts. Andersen says it knew nothing about this aspect of the




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00062   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 63 ===
                                                                                      59

                                     Chewco transaction. What evidence did you uncover about who
                                     knew what and when with respect to this side agreement on
                                     Chewco?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, we were able to ascertain that Glisan was in-
                                     volved in setting up—in doing the work around Big River and Lit-
                                     tle River. And he would have known that the loans from Barclay’s
                                     were being backed by reserve accounts that had been provided by
                                     distributions from JEDI, but let me make sure I get this right. I
                                     am told we don’t have notes that definitely pin that down.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. How did you discover this side agreement?
                                     Who found out about that?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, when these issues—there is some unclarity as
                                     to whether we have those notes or not. Let me just clarify. I am
                                     sorry. We do have notes that show that Glisan was at meetings
                                     where the reserve accounts were described.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. And we would ask that you share those notes
                                     with our staff.
                                        Mr. POWERS. The same thing.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you.
                                        The Special Committee’s report also states that if Glisan in fact
                                     knew about the $6 million side agreement, it is, ‘‘implausible that
                                     he or any other knowledgeable accountant would have concluded
                                     that Chewco met the 3 percent standard.’’ That is from page 53.
                                     Since the Special Committee’s report concludes that Glisan knew
                                     about the side agreement, are you in effect saying that he know-
                                     ingly approved faulty accounting for this transaction?
                                        Mr. POWERS. To the extent he was at that meeting and to the
                                     extent that he knew, our view is that a knowledgeable accountant
                                     like Glisan would know that was faulty accounting. We did not
                                     come across anyone who, once they understood the Big River and
                                     Little River loans were backed by essentially Enron dispersements
                                     from JEDI, everybody agreed immediately that that was an im-
                                     properly funded SPE.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. My understanding is that the $6 million side
                                     agreement was not discovered until late October of 2001, after
                                     Enron started to look more closely into this transaction. Do you
                                     know who at Enron discovered this side deal and how the discovery
                                     actually took place?
                                        Mr. POWERS. No, I am sure we do.
                                        [Pause.]
                                        Mr. POWERS. I want to clarify one thing. It may very well be that
                                     people at Enron knew about this before it came up in October. The
                                     larger Enron group, the accounting and legal staff, went back and
                                     started looking into it as events started to unfold in October. And
                                     I don’t have the individuals, but, again, I think——
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Was it found in Enron’s documents? Was it
                                     found in Vincent & Elkins’ documents?
                                        Mr. POWERS. In Enron’s documents and I think both.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Both? Okay. The Chair recognizes the gen-
                                     tleman from Florida, Mr. Deutsch.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know we have been
                                     talking about Mr. Powers, so let me just go back to a question. Ac-
                                     tually, Mr. Fastow widely reported questionable activities, directly
                                     or indirectly, paramount to fraud on Enron stockholders. It was his




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00063   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 64 ===
                                                                                      60

                                     concealment of the lack of independent equity in these partnerships
                                     that kept the losses off Enron’s books for at least 2 years. Isn’t that
                                     fraud on the shareholders?
                                        Mr. POWERS. My only hesitation is I don’t know myself the secu-
                                     rities definition of fraud because that is not my field. It is mis-
                                     representing things to the shareholder.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. All right. The Wall Street Journal reported last
                                     week that Mr. Fastow and Mr. Skilling dreamed up all of these
                                     partnerships to hide debt and hedge losses. Mr. Fastow was re-
                                     quired under the company’s code of conduct to reveal his interests
                                     in these partnerships in writing to Mr. Lay and Mr. Skilling. Did
                                     Mr. Skilling received such a document in writing, as required
                                     under the agreement?
                                        Mr. POWERS. The evidence we have is that Skilling got a hand-
                                     written note from Fastow.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Have you seen it?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes—oh, no. That is just reported to us.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Did Mr. Skilling ever ask for legal advice, either
                                     from inside or outside the company, on the procedures for waiving
                                     the code of conduct and what was appropriate and what was not?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t know. Not to my knowledge.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Did Mr. Skilling ever consider that an officer’s loy-
                                     alties might be conflicted if he was receiving more income from his
                                     non-Enron business than from his Enron job?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Did he consider that?
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. That is correct.
                                        Mr. POWERS. The interview with Fastow did not reveal much in-
                                     formation where we could get an answer to that question.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Right, but it would seem Mr. Skilling, in terms of
                                     evaluating where his loyalties would be.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Oh, I am sorry. Yes, certainly, Mr. Skilling and ev-
                                     eryone involved in approving LJM1 and LJM2 understood that
                                     there would be a conflict of loyalties that Fastow had.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. And Mr. Skilling and the board could have re-
                                     quired Mr. Fastow to share his offering documents and reveal his
                                     fee structure; is that correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. That is correct. I believe the board and manage-
                                     ment could have done that.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. And why didn’t they?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Their explanation is that they wanted to make the
                                     LJM partnerships as, ‘‘independent’’ as possible, and looking into
                                     the financial structure of the partnerships would somehow be in-
                                     consistent with that. We still think they could have gotten K-1s
                                     and other information about Mr. Fastow’s remuneration.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Right. And, again, it seems as if your concern is
                                     really a conflict, that would be almost a requirement to understand
                                     that.
                                        Mr. POWERS. I would think, at a minimum, you would want to
                                     know what the compensation for Ms. Fastow would be.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Did Mr. Skilling ever ask to see any of the offering
                                     papers of the Fastow entities?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Not to my knowledge.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. According to a Fortune magazine article, Mr.
                                     Skilling errantly responded to those who questioned how Enron




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00064   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 65 ===
                                                                                      61

                                     made its money by saying, ‘‘People who raise questions are people
                                     who have not gone through our business in detail and who want
                                     to throw rocks at us.’’ Based upon your own investigation, don’t you
                                     think that as chief executive officer, Mr. Skilling himself knew how
                                     Enron was cooking the books?
                                       Mr. POWERS. I think Mr. Skilling knew a great deal about these
                                     transactions and how losses were being hedged with Enron’s own
                                     stock, yes.
                                       Mr. DEUTSCH. And in fact, Mr. Powers, doesn’t your report state
                                     that Skilling, and I quoted from the report, ‘‘had direct responsi-
                                     bility for ensuring that those reporting to him performed their
                                     oversight responsibilities properly and that Skilling did not appear
                                     to have given much attention to these duties.’’ Are you saying that
                                     Mr. Skilling was inattentive and didn’t understand his own com-
                                     pany or—I mean is that the answer or is this again a case of fraud?
                                       Mr. POWERS. Well, at a minimum, he wasn’t attending to his own
                                     company. He claims in his interview that he knew very little about
                                     them. Causey and others say that he was very involved in them.
                                     And to answer that question, I think the proper investigators and
                                     authorities are going to have to ascertain what his state of mind
                                     was.
                                       Mr. DEUTSCH. Right. And the last question: Mr. Skilling was
                                     supposed to review and sign off on each of these deals, these are
                                     the partnerships. He didn’t, but he allowed Mr. Causey to tell the
                                     board that everything was fine. As CEO and also president and
                                     chief operating officer, wasn’t Mr. Skilling’s primary obligations,
                                     again, I mean violated by that action?
                                       Mr. POWERS. Yes. I don’t think he performed his function.
                                       Mr. DEUTSCH. Thank you.
                                       Mr. WHITFIELD [presiding]. The gentleman’s time has expired. At
                                     this time, we will call on the chairman of the entire committee, Mr.
                                     Tauzin.
                                       Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dean Powers, the
                                     New York Times reports that Mr. Skilling may not have been
                                     aware of what was happening, but he was certainly, and this is a
                                     quote, ‘‘in no mood to hear anybody question what went on at
                                     Enron.’’ The quote is, ‘‘In early April, when Enron reported its
                                     freshly scrubbed, and apparently falsified, first quarter profits, Mr.
                                     Skilling bristled when one questioner on the conference call tried
                                     to ask questions about the company’s balance sheet. He used a vul-
                                     garity to describe the question, stunning many who were listening
                                     to the call.’’ We produced documents indicating that when members
                                     in the corporation sent signatures sheets around to indicate ap-
                                     proval of all these transactions that LJM1 and LJM2 were con-
                                     ducting, and everybody signed except one person. There is one sig-
                                     nature missing—Jeffrey Skilling’s. Did you see those documents?
                                     Did you have any questions about why Mr. Skilling didn’t sign
                                     those approval documents?
                                       Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                       Chairman TAUZIN. What did you learn?
                                       Mr. POWERS. He didn’t explain it. He was at the board meeting,
                                     though, that voted on it.
                                       Chairman TAUZIN. Yes. You do know that Jordan Mintz sent him
                                     a memo saying, here are all the documents. Please sign them.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00065   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 66 ===
                                                                                      62

                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Did he explain why he didn’t sign them?
                                     Three times I think he tried to call. Mintz was doing everything
                                     he could to get Mr. Skilling on the record as saying these deals
                                     were okay and everything was honkey-dory, and Mr. Skilling
                                     wouldn’t sign them.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Absolutely. I understand he should have signed
                                     them, it was his responsibility to sign them, and he didn’t sign
                                     them.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. And we just don’t know why.
                                        Mr. POWERS. He didn’t explain that to us.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. I will take you to page 95, because the ques-
                                     tion of corporate self-dealing and profiteering is a pretty interesting
                                     one. In the report you issued, on page 95, you talk about the—I
                                     think it is the South Hampton deal.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. In which a group called the Fastow Family
                                     Foundation, which was composed of people like Glisan. We just
                                     heard about Enron employee, Mr. Glisan, who later became treas-
                                     urer of Enron.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Right. It was the Family Foundation and Glisan.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. And also Mordaunt.
                                        Mr. POWERS. And Mordaunt.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. And Mordaunt and Glisan were part of the
                                     Family Foundation, as well as separate investors, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. No, I don’t think they were part of the Family
                                     Foundation.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Well, let us go back to your report on page 93:
                                     ‘‘The limited partners were the Fastow Family Foundation, signed
                                     by Fastow, the director, Glisan, Mordaunt’’—you mean they were
                                     separate investors.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. They were not part of the foundation.
                                        Mr. POWERS. We don’t know who was in the Family Foundation.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. We don’t know.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. But the Family Foundation puts up 25 grand.
                                     Big Doe Foundation, whatever that is, puts up another bunch of
                                     money, and Glisan and Mordaunt, as well as some of the other
                                     Enron employees, including Yaeger Patel, I think, who was mar-
                                     ried—at the time some of the negotiations were going on, they were
                                     engaged, the two Patels. They later signed as marriage partners,
                                     and they were operating on different sides of the table. Talk about
                                     a sweetheart deal, that was really interesting.
                                        But these players, Glisan and Mordaunt, put up $5,800 each.
                                     Within 6 weeks, they each received $1 million, and they apparently
                                     told you they don’t know—nobody explained to them why they got
                                     such a big return in 6 weeks, but they took the money. And you
                                     asked the question, ‘‘The magnitude of these returns raises serious
                                     questions as to why Fastow and Kopper offered these investments
                                     to other employees.’’ I think the answer comes in the next para-
                                     graph. You talk about what those other employees did. You have
                                     Glisan who has presented to the Raptor I transaction to the board.
                                     He was called the business unit originator and the person negoti-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00066   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 67 ===
                                                                                      63

                                     ating for Enron. He is the guy on the other side of the table, and
                                     Fastow says, ‘‘Come on in and be an investor on this side of the
                                     table, and you make a million dollars as a result in 6 weeks.’’ And
                                     you asked the question why they offered him this deal?
                                        You also asked the question why Mordaunt was involved? Well,
                                     we find out Mordaunt was a lawyer. She was involved in the initial
                                     Rhythm transaction, general counsel structured finance. She be-
                                     comes later the general counsel of Enron Communications and
                                     later the Enron Broadband Services Board where all this
                                     broadband capacity was transferred out to one of these partner-
                                     ships in an attempt to show a lot of profit that never existed. And
                                     you asked why they were interested in bringing her in and letting
                                     her earn a million dollars? Isn’t the answer quite obvious?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, let me say why we asked the question.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Yes.
                                        Mr. POWERS. We tried to be very careful in this report——
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. I know.
                                        Mr. POWERS. [continuing] not to draw surmises and conclusions,
                                     but certainly this is extremely suggestive as to why this happened.
                                     We understand that, and we tried to lay out the facts as best we
                                     could.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. And I alluded to it, and we are going to dis-
                                     cuss it more on Thursday, but you, too, discovered, as we did, that
                                     in some cases, other than offering them a chance to invest, partner-
                                     ships in some cases actually threatened employees with firings and
                                     losses of bonuses; is that correct?
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentleman’s time is expired.
                                        Mr. POWERS. We did find pressure, yes. The exact nature of it I
                                     would have to go back and check, but we did find pressure.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. I think we got some of your answers. Thank
                                     you.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentleman from Michigan is recognized for
                                     5 minutes.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy. I
                                     find at page 9 of your report this footnote which says this: ‘‘One
                                     member of the Special Investigative Committee, Mr. Herbert S.
                                     Winokur, Jr., was a member of the board of the directors and the
                                     Finance Committee during the relevant period. The portions of the
                                     report describing and evaluating the actions of its board and its
                                     committees are solely the views of the other two members of the
                                     committee, Dean William C. Powers, Jr., the University of Texas
                                     Law School, and Raymond S. Troubh.’’ What does that mean, and
                                     why is that there, and what does it tell us?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, when the committee was set up, in fact when
                                     it was originally set up, there were no new directors. I was brought
                                     in to Chair the committee and then Mr. Troubh was brought in to
                                     be on the committee. Other members were taken off the committee,
                                     and Mr. Winokur was left on the committee, so that there was a
                                     majority on the committee of outside, that is, new directors that
                                     didn’t have any involvement in these transactions. We felt that Mr.
                                     Winokur was a very good source of information about the back-
                                     grounds of some of these transactions, and it was invaluable to
                                     have that information. When it came time to——




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00067   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 68 ===
                                                                                      64

                                        Mr. DINGELL. You could have gotten that from him under the co-
                                     operation you were promised from the company, could you not?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, the interviews were for a period of time and
                                     couldn’t go back, and there were lots of—especially early on, there
                                     was a great deal of information that we needed. When it came time
                                     to judging the board, we thought the report would speak more
                                     forcefully if Mr. Troubh and I made those judgments. That was a
                                     judgment we made as to how to best go forward with this inves-
                                     tigation. And I think the report hopefully indicates we had an un-
                                     varnished position.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. I don’t criticize the report, but doesn’t it indicate
                                     that Mr. Winokur was essentially participating in an investigation
                                     of himself?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, it was an investigation of a number of things,
                                     and it did include himself. And when it came to judgments about
                                     the board Mr. Troubh and I had independent meetings of the com-
                                     mittee with counsel and approved and decided what would go in
                                     the report about the board.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Thank you. Mr. Winokur told the board he was fa-
                                     miliar with and recommended approval of a plan by Mr. Skilling
                                     and Mr. Fastow to sell 50 percent interest in JEDI, an affiliate of
                                     Enron and Chewco; isn’t that correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. The minutes record that Mr. Winokur states he
                                     was going to meet further with Mr. Fastow the next day, presum-
                                     ably on this matter since it was the only one on the agenda involv-
                                     ing Mr. Fastow. Did that meeting occur?
                                        Mr. POWERS. During his interview—we did interview Mr.
                                     Winokur; he didn’t recall whether that meeting occurred.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Okay. According to the board’s minutes, Mr.
                                     Fastow reviewed the economics of the project, the financing ar-
                                     rangements, the corporate structure of the acquiring company with
                                     the board. I presume this had previously been reviewed with the
                                     Finance Committee; is that correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I believe so. Yes.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Now, Mr. Fastow told the board that Chewco was
                                     a special purpose vehicle not affiliated with the company or
                                     CalPERS, since the board was approving a bridge loan of $383 mil-
                                     lion and a corporate guaranty of $250 million loan to Chewco, an
                                     unknown entity. Did Mr. Winokur or any board member ask who
                                     controlled Chewco?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I would have to go back to the particular—that was
                                     the Executive Committee, it wasn’t the Finance Committee, and we
                                     don’t know whether they asked those questions.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Was due diligence done by the Enron board officers
                                     or counsel?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t know if I am in a position to say whether
                                     the diligence was due. That is a very complicated legal question,
                                     and——
                                        Mr. DINGELL. It should have——
                                        Mr. POWERS [continuing] we tried to lay out what happened.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Due diligence should have been done on this mat-
                                     ter, should it not?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00068   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 69 ===
                                                                                      65

                                       Mr. POWERS. Due diligence should be done on all corporate mat-
                                     ters.
                                       Mr. DINGELL. Now, Chewco understood that it did not have the
                                     necessary—in your report, you state Enron employees involved in
                                     Chewco understood that it did not have the necessary 3 percent in
                                     outside equity required to stay off Enron’s books. If the employees
                                     understood that, did Mr. Winokur and the Finance Committee also
                                     understand it?
                                       Mr. POWERS. I think that when Chewco was originally set up, it
                                     was widely understood that it did not have the 3 percent equity.
                                       Mr. DINGELL. Did it ever get the 3 percent equity?
                                       Mr. POWERS. Well, then the idea was that it would be reconsti-
                                     tuted or restructured to get the 3 percent equity.
                                       Mr. DINGELL. Did it ever get the 3 percent——
                                       Mr. POWERS. And then they attempted to but did not because of
                                     the guarantees that were given to the loans, to Big River and Little
                                     River.
                                       Mr. DINGELL. Did Mr. Winokur or any other member of the Fi-
                                     nance Committee ever ask who was providing the outside equity?
                                       Mr. POWERS. I don’t know.
                                       Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentleman’s time is expired.
                                       Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, I thank you. There are a lot of
                                     other fine questions here.
                                       Chairman TAUZIN. Would the Chair—I ask unanimous consent
                                     that the gentleman have 30 seconds that could be yielded to me
                                     just to put a fact in the record.
                                       Mr. DINGELL. I yield to my friend, if I get the time.
                                       Chairman TAUZIN. I thank the Chair. I simply wanted to make
                                     sure I had in the record that in the South Hampton deal, the
                                     $25,000 investment in March by the Fastow Family Foundation
                                     paid back $4.5 million in May to that foundation.
                                       Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                       Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                       Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentleman from North Carolina is recog-
                                     nized for 5 minutes.
                                       Mr. BURR. Thank you for your patience and your willingness to
                                     go through all this. You have helped us to sort out a lot of things.
                                       Mr. POWERS. Thank you, Congressman.
                                       Mr. BURR. I am going to try to clarify some things that we have
                                     already been over, so be patient with me. Did your committee
                                     interview Sherron Watkins?
                                       Mr. POWERS. We asked to, but she wouldn’t.
                                       Mr. BURR. She declined.
                                       Mr. POWERS. Right, she declined.
                                       Mr. BURR. Do you or do the folks who are with you know the rea-
                                     son that she chose to decline?
                                       Mr. POWERS. I don’t know if she stated it. We communicated
                                     with her lawyer, and he said that she was going to be interviewed
                                     by a lot of other people and did not want to be interviewed by us,
                                     which I must say I don’t fault her for.
                                       Mr. BURR. To your knowledge, or the knowledge of your com-
                                     mittee, was Sherron Watkins interviewed in any way, shape or
                                     form by V&E when they carried out their investigation?
                                       Mr. POWERS. Yes.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00069   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 70 ===
                                                                                      66

                                        Mr. BURR. And do we know the specifics of whether they agreed
                                     or disagreed with the claims that she had made in the letter to Mr.
                                     Lay?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, they wrote a letter to Mr. Lay reporting on
                                     that.
                                        Mr. BURR. Were you——
                                        Mr. POWERS. I am sorry, to Jim Derrick, who was the chief finan-
                                     cial officer—who was the general counsel.
                                        Mr. BURR. Is it true that the lawyers for V&E were told not to
                                     review the underlying accounting for the partnerships or the very
                                     area that Ms. Watkins had raised questions about?
                                        Mr. POWERS. That is what I understand from the letter. Again,
                                     I haven’t looked into that carefully.
                                        Mr. BURR. So what would a law firm hired to investigate ask Ms.
                                     Watkins if her claims were about the underlying accounting proce-
                                     dures and the lawyers were told not to investigate that? What
                                     could you possibly glean from it if you can’t ask her about the accu-
                                     sations that she made, or at least you were instructed not to?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Right.
                                        Mr. BURR. Is that not your understanding, though, of what they
                                     were told?
                                        Mr. POWERS. It is my understanding from what I have heard
                                     today. I did not focus on what Vincent and Elkins did.
                                        Mr. BURR. Let me go back to the special-purpose entities, if I
                                     could, and I think you agreed with Chairman Tauzin earlier that
                                     there was no economic purpose for the creation of the SPEs in their
                                     structure that they eventually ended up, am I correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, the deals made with the Raptors are where
                                     we say there was—the hedges, there was no economic purpose.
                                     SPEs are very common in business, and there are legitimate rea-
                                     sons to use SPEs.
                                        Mr. BURR. And I realize that, and I think that it will become a
                                     very common word used in the next several months. But, specifi-
                                     cally, the way these were designed, is it safe to say that the archi-
                                     tect of these SPEs would have known it is not for economic pur-
                                     poses?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I would distinguish between Chewco and the
                                     Raptors.
                                        Mr. BURR. Okay.
                                        Mr. POWERS. When we found out what the Raptors were about,
                                     it is apparent to us and our conclusion is they weren’t for economic
                                     purposes. And so somebody who is knowledgeable in accounting
                                     that designed them, I would say they would know that these were
                                     for accounting rather than economic purposes. Chewco I think is
                                     different.
                                        Mr. BURR. In layman’s terms, they were designed to hide debt,
                                     weren’t they?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, the Raptors were designed to offset losses and
                                     therefore show other earnings on the income statement and other
                                     than that didn’t have an economic purpose.
                                        Mr. BURR. Is it safe to say that anybody that participated in the
                                     architecture of these SPEs would have known what the intent was
                                     of creating them?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00070   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 71 ===
                                                                                      67

                                        Mr. POWERS. I would think that the architect, the people that
                                     put together the Raptors understood why they were being put to-
                                     gether.
                                        Mr. BURR. Let me ask you if your committee looked at who par-
                                     ticipated in the compensation packages for Fastow and his involve-
                                     ment in the partnerships, Kopper or any other individual? I mean
                                     Fastow didn’t create his own compensation package within the
                                     partnership, did he?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I assume that was a negotiation with the limited
                                     partners in those partnerships, and we have not had access to
                                     those materials.
                                        Mr. BURR. I think alluded, at least in some of the SPEs that the
                                     board signed off on it, the Board of Enron.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, the board signed off on the creation, and we
                                     are told that the LJM compensation to Fastow was LJM business,
                                     and they didn’t look into it.
                                        Mr. BURR. And is that common practice for a board not to have
                                     interest or did the board not know of Enron’s backdoor exposure?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I think there was interest on the board on
                                     Fastow’s compensation. The thought was, the explanation was that
                                     it would be somehow inappropriate to pierce LJM, because they
                                     were supposed to be independent. We don’t agree with that.
                                        Mr. BURR. Did you have any——
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentleman’s time has expired.
                                        Mr. BURR. If I could finish this question, Mr. Chairman. Were
                                     you aware of whether Skilling knew of the compensation package?
                                        Mr. POWERS. He says he—well, we don’t know.
                                        Mr. BURR. Lay?
                                        Mr. POWERS. He said he didn’t know. Both knew that Fastow
                                     would be getting some return, but the magnitude of the compensa-
                                     tion package Lay says to us he didn’t know.
                                        Mr. BURR. And the board would be a no.
                                        Mr. POWERS. The board did not know. The board says they didn’t
                                     know.
                                        Mr. BURR. I would only say this, Mr. Chairman, in concluding:
                                     I find it unusual, and I hope you do, Dean Powers, that in this case
                                     the two CEOs and chairman of the board could have the structure
                                     of what was created here and, one, been ignorant of the structure
                                     and, two, been ignorant of the compensation package that went
                                     along with it, because, in essence, it was Enron’s money. I thank
                                     you.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Thank you.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentleman from Michigan is recognized for
                                     5 minutes.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Powers, thanks
                                     again for being here and being patient with all of our questions.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Thank you.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. You said earlier in some testimony that Mr. Lay did
                                     not understand that hedging with Enron stock was not okay and
                                     that accountants told him it was okay, therefore he went along
                                     with the accountants; is that right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I said that is what he said to us.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00071   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 72 ===
                                                                                      68

                                        Mr. STUPAK. Okay. That is what he said to you. Did he say who
                                     the accountants were who told him it was okay? Would that be Mr.
                                     Causey?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Certainly Mr. Causey, and I think Andersen.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Andersen Consulting, or the Andersen the firm.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, Arthur Andersen. I believe that is what he
                                     said in his interview.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Okay. Michael Kopper, who is he at Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. He was in the Finance group, and I don’t know ex-
                                     actly what his job was. He was not senior management.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Wasn’t he a former vice president involved in these
                                     partnerships like Chewco and a couple others?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, he was involved—he did have an interest in
                                     Chewco, yes, absolutely.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Okay. And that is the deal that went from $125,000
                                     to, what, $10 million? Mr. Kopper took $125,000 investment into
                                     Chewco, and it went to $10 million?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. How could that—I mean how is that conceivable? I
                                     mean how is that—is that even legal to—I mean the return on that
                                     is astronomical in a short period of time.
                                        Mr. POWERS. That is an extremely abnormal rate of return.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. How quickly did that turn around to $10 million?
                                        Mr. POWERS. A little more than 3 years.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Can you think of any legal way in which you could
                                     do that, take $125,000 and turn it into $10 million in 3 years at
                                     Enron, in the partnerships——
                                        Mr. POWERS. Not without taking on a tremendous amount of
                                     risk, and we don’t see that he did take on risk.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. They took no risk, because it was all backed up by
                                     Enron stock, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I can’t say that he took no risk. These are
                                     very complex transactions. There were ways in which the investors
                                     could lose money. There were options on Enron stock, but little
                                     risk.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. If it is a possibility, did any investor in any of these
                                     partnerships lose any money?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Not that I am aware of.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Okay. Mr. Kopper also received up to $2 million in
                                     management fees relating to Chewco, and yet in your review, you
                                     were unable to identify, and I am going to quote now, ‘‘how these
                                     payments were determined or what, if anything, Mr. Kopper did to
                                     justify these payments.’’
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. How is it possible to have an employee make in ex-
                                     cess of $2 million and no one knows what he did to earn it?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, these were investment funds, and they were
                                     simply managing these investments, and the work would have been
                                     relatively simple back office work, and it was never explained to us
                                     why that would justify a $2 million fee.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. This $2 million, whose money would that be?
                                        Mr. POWERS. That would be——
                                        Mr. STUPAK. It is relating to Chewco and——




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00072   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 73 ===
                                                                                      69

                                        Mr. POWERS. It is very complicated. It would have been paid out
                                     of JEDI——
                                        Mr. STUPAK. Okay.
                                        Mr. POWERS. [continuing] which was another one of these enti-
                                     ties, not related parties, so we didn’t probe into JEDI. It was paid
                                     out of JEDI, but ultimately that is coming out of the interest of
                                     Enron. So when you track it all back, Enron is effectively paying.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. So when we go through this simplified Whitewing
                                     leveraging transaction, all those pyramids and circles and boxes
                                     and squares and parts of South America and all over this country,
                                     that is really—when it is all said and done, that is really Enron’s
                                     money.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, there are some outside investors in these, this
                                     3 percent rule, et cetera, but Enron has very substantial interests
                                     in these entities.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. And Enron is really the employees’ 401(k) plan,
                                     their pension plan and the shareholders who invested in Enron.
                                     They are really the ones who really are left here—after we get done
                                     with all these nice pyramids and everything else, they are the guys
                                     who are left holding the empty promises.
                                        Mr. POWERS. The employees and the shareholders and the people
                                     with their retirement nest eggs and the 401(k) plans are tragic and
                                     terrible victims of this.
                                        Mr. STUPAK. So whether Kopper made $10 million over 3 years
                                     or $2 million for consulting on Chewco, it was those investors—the
                                     bottom line, it was really their money that got——
                                        Mr. POWERS. They were the ones that got hurt.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentleman’s time has expired. The gen-
                                     tleman from Florida is recognized for 5 minutes.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dean Powers, you and
                                     I talked a little bit about Mr. Winokur and his responsibilities, as
                                     he is a board member. Now, I would like you to go to Rick Causey
                                     who was, I understand, the chief accounting officer, an officer of
                                     Enron himself, and then Rick Buy who, as I understand, his title
                                     was chief risk officer.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. So now we are moving into the corporate officers,
                                     the people who worked, the employees of Enron, and I just want
                                     to go into a little bit about what their responsibilities were, and did
                                     you interview both these individuals?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I didn’t personally, but the committee, yes, it did
                                     interview those individuals.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. And were they forthright with you?
                                        Mr. POWERS. They certainly answered our questions.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Causey and Buy stated they participated in the
                                     LJM transaction reviews in a limited capacity.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is what they said.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. And they said this is, I guess, that we on the com-
                                     mittee are having a little trouble understanding. Buy stated that
                                     the Global Finance Group made the strategic decisions regarding
                                     the deals, and that his risk review had nothing to do with the big
                                     picture. Causey stated that his review of the transaction was to
                                     make sure that the accounting treatment was accurate, and he did




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00073   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 74 ===
                                                                                      70

                                     not participate in the strategic decisions. So we have an idea what
                                     they feel. What do you think they did?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think they had very limited review of the trans-
                                     actions between Enron and LJM2, and that they were charged with
                                     the responsibility of having much more robust and substantial re-
                                     view.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. So who charged them with this responsibility? Did
                                     the board of directors?
                                        Mr. POWERS. The board, yes.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. The board of directors, in your opinion, charged
                                     them with the responsibility to have a thorough understanding of
                                     these LJM transactions.
                                        Mr. POWERS. And ensure that there were transactions that would
                                     be for the benefit of Enron.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Why didn’t these two officers who were employees
                                     of the corporation and had the great title of chief accounting officer
                                     and chief risk officer, I mean I would think if you or I had those
                                     titles of risk and accounting, that we would not think, well, we are
                                     not really here to make sure these agreements are accurate. We
                                     don’t participate in strategic decisions. If you are going to be in
                                     charge of risk, you have got to understand what the strategic deci-
                                     sions. So where do you think—am I missing something or as a
                                     dean do you think we are missing something? The board thought
                                     they had the responsibility and yet they are telling you they didn’t
                                     have that responsibility or authority.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Right. In my view, they didn’t fulfill their respon-
                                     sibilities with respect to review of these transactions.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. And why do you think that was?
                                        Mr. POWERS. We don’t know that for certain. I think they were
                                     unwilling to stand up to Andy Fastow.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. And what about—do you think—you think that is
                                     it, that Fastow intimidated them that much; is that it?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t know Fastow. I have talked to people around
                                     the company. He was a very aggressive person and was in charge.
                                     I don’t know this to be the case. The most plausible explanation to
                                     me—we don’t have any evidence that Causey or Buy participated.
                                     Something may come out later, but we didn’t find any evidence of
                                     that.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Dean Powers, in all deference to you, it sounds like
                                     you are suspending disbelief here. I mean either they were intimi-
                                     dated by him or they are complicit in the operation.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I think they certainly understood how LJM
                                     wanted to and how the Raptors were working; certainly, Causey
                                     did. So complicit in that sense I agree with. We didn’t find any
                                     events of financial participation, which does not mean that——
                                        Mr. STEARNS. No, I understand.
                                        Mr. POWERS. [continuing] we will come out. I think they were in-
                                     timidated by Fastow.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. That is what you think.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Partly.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. I am just curious why they didn’t mention the
                                     problem, the accounting problem or the risk problem to the Audit
                                     and Compliance Committee and the Finance Committee.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00074   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 75 ===
                                                                                      71

                                        Mr. POWERS. Because doing so would have brought down scru-
                                     tiny on these deals that Fastow was participating in, and for what-
                                     ever reason they didn’t do that.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. The board of directors was similarly not informed
                                     on March 2001 that Raptor deficit grew to approximately $500 mil-
                                     lion or that it would require a charge against Enron’s earning in
                                     that quarter if not addressed prior to March 31, 2001. The board
                                     of directors was not informed that the Raptors SPEs were restruc-
                                     tured on March 26, 2001 to avoid the anticipated charge to earn-
                                     ings. And the board was not informed about the transfer of ap-
                                     proximately $800 million of Enron stock contracts that was part of
                                     the restructuring. Causey and Buy were aware of the deficit and
                                     restructuring. Why did they fail to mention them to the board? And
                                     you are saying they were totally intimidated. That is what you are
                                     conjecturing.
                                        Mr. POWERS. They wanted to—I think at that point, at the point
                                     that you are describing with the restructuring, I think now they
                                     would have a motivation—I don’t know what happened—of not
                                     having come out all the structures that had been there before.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Dean Powers, my last question.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Did you ever ask him the same questions I am ask-
                                     ing you? Why didn’t they refer—based upon all this restructuring
                                     and all this loss and this $800 million of Enron stock contracts as
                                     part of the restructuring, did your group ever say to Mr. Causey
                                     and Mr. Buy, ‘‘Hey, fellas, why didn’t you tell the board of direc-
                                     tors?’’
                                        Mr. POWERS. We did ask them that question——
                                        Mr. STEARNS. And what was his answer?
                                        Mr. POWERS. [continuing] and his answer, what he said was by
                                     the time of the next board meeting, they had fixed the problem; in
                                     fact, they had and it kept going on. But by the time of the next
                                     board meeting, they thought they fixed it, so they didn’t mention
                                     it. I do not think——
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Who said they fixed the problem?
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentleman’s time has expired.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Okay. Thank you.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentlelady from Colorado is recognized for
                                     5 minutes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Powers, I assume
                                     you are familiar with the corporate governance guidelines of the
                                     Board of Directors of Enron, are you?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. I was just looking over these a little while ago. Dr.
                                     Jaedicke, as I understand, is the chairman of the Audit and Com-
                                     pliance Committee, or was during the relevant time; is that right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, and I believe still is.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. And what these guidelines say is the Audit
                                     and Compliance Committee serves as the overseer of Enron’s finan-
                                     cial reporting process, system of internal controls and corporate
                                     compliance process, and it provides reasonable assurance that
                                     Enron conducts its business in conformance with appropriate legal
                                     and regulatory standards and requirements. Do you think that the
                                     Audit and Compliance Committee met those standards?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00075   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 76 ===
                                                                                      72

                                        Mr. POWERS. If I could just preface it, that the committees of the
                                     board are entitled to rely on statements by management, unless
                                     they have reason to believe those statements by management are
                                     unreliable.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Well, yes, I understand, but——
                                        Mr. POWERS. So whether they met that obligation I don’t know.
                                     I don’t think the board generally looked hard enough into these
                                     very complicated transactions, knowing of these conflicts of inter-
                                     est.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Well, and case in point, annually the Audit and
                                     Compliance Committee was given a deal approval sheet by which
                                     they were supposed to look at the related party transactions, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And that is the sheet we were talking about before
                                     where everybody signed it but Skilling, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. No.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. No?
                                        Mr. POWERS. There is an approval of LJM——
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Right.
                                        Mr. POWERS. [continuing] which Skilling was supposed to ap-
                                     prove—was at the board, he did approve it, he just didn’t sign off
                                     on the sheet.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Right, but he didn’t sign it.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Then there are the—once LJM was set up, there
                                     are the individual hedging deals between Enron.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. Right, right. You are right, you are right.
                                     But did the Audit Committee review those?
                                        Mr. POWERS. They had a meeting where Causey said, ‘‘Here are
                                     the transactions,’’ and they didn’t do anything more than that.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. They didn’t do anything more than that.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Correct.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. That would seem to me, if I were one of the small
                                     investors who had all my 401(k) invested in this Enron stock, I
                                     would think that that would not provide me with reasonable assur-
                                     ance that these deals were being conducted in conformance with
                                     appropriate legal and regulatory standards and requirements. I
                                     don’t know.
                                        Mr. Winokur was the chairman of the Finance Committee, which
                                     under the guidelines reviews and makes recommendations to the
                                     board and management on matters concerning both current and
                                     long-range financial strategy and planning, including, without limi-
                                     tation, budgets, dividends, equity offerings, debt and other financ-
                                     ing, foreign exchange policy, investment policy and trading limits
                                     policy, correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Now, in reviewing everything you have reviewed,
                                     do you think the Finance Committee fulfilled its obligation?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Not knowing the details of the standards of securi-
                                     ties law, I don’t know the answer from a legal point of view.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Yes, but Mr. Powers, you know what happened
                                     here with these financial——
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t think they oversaw these transactions suffi-
                                     ciently.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00076   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 77 ===
                                                                                      73

                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you. Now, do you have any idea what were
                                     the limits of the directors and liabilities insurance that the Enron
                                     Board had? That might be of interest to many of the board mem-
                                     bers.
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think I do, but I would like to check.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you.
                                        Mr. POWERS. I am not absolutely sure. My understanding is it is
                                     $350 million.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you. Now, quickly, I just want to talk about
                                     the South Hampton deal, because we had mentioned that before.
                                     And in your report, you talked about Ms. Mordaunt who is the law-
                                     yer—in-house lawyer for Enron, Kathy Lynn, who is an employee
                                     in the finance area, and Ann Yaeger Patel, who is also an employee
                                     at Enron Global Finance. You said that they appeared to have vio-
                                     lated Enron’s code of conduct by accepting interest in the South
                                     Hampton Place deal without the consent of Enron’s chairman and
                                     CEO, correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. That is correct.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Can you talk for a minute about what the South
                                     Hampton deal was, briefly?
                                        Mr. POWERS. When the Rhythms net was unwound, there was a
                                     partnership formed to take the distributions from that transaction,
                                     and this was a partnership formed to take in some of the distribu-
                                     tions from that unwind.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Now——
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentlelady’s time has expired.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Chairman, could I ask unanimous consent
                                     the gentlelady have 2 additional minutes? I think she is on a good
                                     trail here.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Without objection, the gentlelady has 2 addi-
                                     tional minutes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you very much, and thanks to the chair-
                                     man of the full committee. Didn’t some of these employees also
                                     work for LJM and get bonuses from that partnership?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I believe so, yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And that is the partnership you just said a few
                                     minutes ago in which Mr. Fastow, in exchange for $25,000, got $4.5
                                     million for his Family Foundation, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. That was the South Hampton partnership, yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Right, that is the one we are talking about right
                                     here.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, exactly.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Now, on page 16 of your report, you also say that
                                     two other employees who each invested $5,800 in the South Hamp-
                                     ton deal each received a million dollars in the same time period,
                                     correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Who were those two employees, and how did they
                                     get those returns, if you have any idea?
                                        Mr. POWERS. That was Yaeger—I am sorry, Glisan and
                                     Mordaunt.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Okay.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Glisan and Mordaunt.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00077   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 78 ===
                                                                                      74

                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Now, Mordaunt is a lawyer who worked on some
                                     of these deals for Enron, correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And now when she talked to committee staff, it
                                     is my understanding that she never asked Mr. Kopper what the in-
                                     vestment was, because it was such a small amount of money. Then
                                     1 day Mr. Kopper said, ‘‘Where do we wire the money,’’ and then
                                     low and behold it was a million dollars. She didn’t ask questions
                                     then either. Now, as an attorney for Enron, Mr. Powers, don’t you
                                     think that Ms. Mordaunt had an ethical responsibility to know
                                     where the money was coming from and if it conflicted with her cli-
                                     ent’s interests?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you. No further questions.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. But would the gentlelady——
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Oh, happy to yield.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Before that, the gentlelady yield. Didn’t Ann
                                     Yaeger, later Ann Yaeger Patel, contribute $2,900 and take about
                                     $500,000 back?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, that is my understanding.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. And didn’t Kathy Lynn, another Enron em-
                                     ployee, contribute $2,330 and take back about $500,000 as well?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. And they were in the same position as these
                                     two employees that the gentlelady just discussed; is that right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. They weren’t lawyers.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. They weren’t lawyers, but they were employ-
                                     ees of Enron——
                                        Mr. POWERS. Absolutely.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. [continuing] in violation of the code of ethics,
                                     investing in a partner to whom Enron was dealing and taking out
                                     an extraordinary rate of return. Did you ask them if they ever
                                     questioned why they got so much money back?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. They declined to be interviewed.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Who do they work for?
                                        Mr. POWERS. They work for Enron.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. But for whom at Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. They work for LJM now.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Now, but who did they work for at the time?
                                        Mr. POWERS. They worked for Enron in the Finance Group.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. In the Finance Department.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. And who was their immediate supervisor?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t know who their immediate supervisor was.
                                     Fastow was——
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. I am thinking it was Michael Kopper; is that
                                     correct?
                                        Mr. POWERS. It may be, but I don’t——
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. I would like you to supplement that answer,
                                     if you can determine it, for the record.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Okay.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Thank the gentlelady.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentleman’s time has expired.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Reclaiming my time.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00078   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 79 ===
                                                                                      75

                                        Mr. DINGELL. Could I ask unanimous consent the gentlelady
                                     have 1 additional minute?
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Is the gentleman asking that the chairman have
                                     an additional minute or the lady from Colorado?
                                        Mr. DINGELL. The gentlewoman from Colorado.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Without objection, the gentlelady from California
                                     is recognized for 1 additional minute.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Colorado, please.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. I mean Colorado. What did I say?
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. I yield to my friend from Michigan.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. And I thank my dear friend. I have a curiosity.
                                     How many of these people have cooperated with you and been
                                     fully—of those mentioned, and have been fully forthcoming in
                                     terms of all of the events and the production of records?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Of these people we are talking about? Mordaunt did
                                     talk with us, and I think Mordaunt, even before she talked with
                                     us, did go to talk to the general counsel of the company.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. How about the others?
                                        Mr. POWERS. The others have not cooperated with us.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Would you name then those who have not cooper-
                                     ated?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think Glisan, Yaeger, Patel——
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Lynn?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, Lynn and of course Kopper has not either.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. And I gather that Andersen has not permitted the
                                     committee to review all its working papers too; is that right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, yes. Andersen—we had long negotiations with
                                     Andersen. We have seen some of their papers, we haven’t seen
                                     other papers. We never got to interview them. When Enron finally
                                     discharged them, they then said, ‘‘We are not’’—we had been dis-
                                     cussing interviewing their employees and then they finally said no.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Did Andersen tell you why they are not cooper-
                                     ating with you?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, they told us they weren’t cooperating with us
                                     because Enron discharged them. That was what they said.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Do they not have a continuing fiduciary duty to
                                     their former client to discuss matters which went on between An-
                                     dersen and Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. To be honest, after discharge, whether they do or
                                     not, I don’t know the answer to that question.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. What does your logic tell you?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I think they ought to cooperate fully with getting
                                     to the bottom of this. Legally, whether their fiduciary ends, I just
                                     don’t know the answer to that.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentleman’s time has expired.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. And I thank the gentlewoman; I thank the Chair.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The Chair will now grant himself 5 minutes.
                                     Dean Powers, this relates to the Chewco transaction, and I think
                                     Mr. Greenwood touched on this, but on the issue of trying to meet
                                     the reserve account for the Barclay’s Bank, in your report, you stat-
                                     ed that others told us that those matters involving the $6 million
                                     side agreement and reserve accounts were known openly and dis-
                                     cussed. Could you tell me who those others were, the names of
                                     those others?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00079   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 80 ===
                                                                                      76

                                        Mr. POWERS. I am not sure we know, other than people said that
                                     it was being discussed. Of the people that told us, Shirley Hudler
                                     is one person.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Shirley Hudler?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. I think there may have been other people that
                                     have told us that I don’t recall now.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Okay.
                                        Mr. POWERS. There were also notes from meetings where this
                                     issue was discussed to some extent, and I don’t know now whether
                                     there is an indication of who was at those meetings or if there was,
                                     who they were.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. We would ask that you supply those notes. Can
                                     you do that?
                                        Mr. POWERS. The same thing. It is not my property to dispose of,
                                     but we will certainly address that to Enron.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Okay. You will talk to Enron.
                                        Mr. POWERS. And we will support that request.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Okay. Now, let me ask you this: Do you think
                                     that the transfer by Mr. Kopper of his ownership interest in
                                     Chewco’s limited partner to his domestic partner, William Dodson,
                                     resolved the accounting and disclosure issues, as Enron, Andersen
                                     and Vincent & Elkins apparently all did?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I am not sure we know whether he was his domes-
                                     tic partner at the time, which would be relevant to this. Kopper
                                     and Dodson didn’t talk with us. If it was his domestic partner at
                                     the time, that certainly raises an issue of whether Kopper still had
                                     control.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Would the chairman yield?
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Yes.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. My understanding is our investigators have
                                     determined that they were. I believe that they were.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. I am not saying they weren’t. That was a fact
                                     that we were unable to track down.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Did you find any evidence that despite this
                                     transfer of ownership interest that Mr. Dodson actually exercised
                                     any control over the limited partners or exercised control?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t think we know what Mr. Dodson did.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. So you don’t have any evidence on that. Now, on
                                     page 61 of your report, you discussed the buyout of Chewco by
                                     Enron, in which Enron paid Chewco Kopper $10 million. Did you
                                     find any evidence of improper influence by Fastow or others on
                                     Kopper’s behalf in that transaction?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. Fastow is the one that negotiated with Kopper
                                     on this deal.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. So he was negotiating with the person that re-
                                     ported to him at Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Okay. And what did Mr. McMahon tell you
                                     about his involvement in this transaction and the conversations he
                                     had with others about it, including Mr. Fastow?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I believe he knew about these negotiations and had
                                     complained that $10 million was too much.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00080   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 81 ===
                                                                                      77

                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Did he indicate what he would consider to be the
                                     appropriate price?
                                        Mr. POWERS. My recollection is about a million dollars, but——
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. A million dollars.
                                        Mr. POWERS. About a million dollars.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. So he was aware of that then, okay. You have
                                     already indicated that your conversations with Fastow were quite
                                     short, and that is correct, right?
                                        Mr. POWERS. It took about an hour, but there is very little infor-
                                     mation.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Did he tell you about his involvement in this
                                     deal at all? Did he talk about his involvement in that transaction?
                                        Mr. POWERS. He gave—sorry.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. On page 61, footnote 17, it indicates that,
                                     ‘‘Fastow told us that he had not participated in these negotiations.’’
                                        Mr. POWERS. Right. And then we had a document that dem-
                                     onstrated that wasn’t true, and at that point he stopped talking to
                                     us, or meaningfully talking to us.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. And what was that document?
                                        Mr. POWERS. It was a document that demonstrated he had par-
                                     ticipated in these negotiations.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. And you have that document.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Okay. And we would also like to have that, and
                                     if you would talk to Enron about that and——
                                        Mr. POWERS. Okay.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. [continuing] support us in our efforts.
                                        Mr. POWERS. And I will say we will support providing whatever
                                     information and backup of this information the committee needs.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. And we appreciate that very much. The Special
                                     Committee’s report states how facetious earnings from the Raptors
                                     accounted for more than 80 percent of Enron’s earnings from the
                                     last two quarters of the year 2000. Even if no one knew about the
                                     problems lurking with the Raptors at that time, wouldn’t the very
                                     fact that 80 percent of earnings are coming from transactions with
                                     a partnership headed by Enron’s CFO have been enough to send
                                     off alarms in the investor and analyst communities?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. I think it was a little over 70 percent, but, yes,
                                     I would think that would be something that would have set off con-
                                     cerns in the investor community.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Okay. And what was Enron’s Board of Directors’
                                     understanding regarding the Enron/LJM2 services agreement?
                                        Mr. POWERS. The board members that we talked to said they un-
                                     derstood—well, some said they didn’t know about that. Those who
                                     did said they assumed it was a very minor services agreement for
                                     back office booking of transactions, and that it was not significant.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. And did the members of the board of directors
                                     understand that Enron’s own employees were negotiating on behalf
                                     of LJM2 against Enron?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes. They understood that Fastow was representing
                                     LJM1 and LJM2.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Any others, other than Fastow, that they under-
                                     stood?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00081   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 82 ===
                                                                                      78

                                        Mr. POWERS. They say that they didn’t know that other Enron
                                     employees were then over on the services agreement working for
                                     Fastow and negotiating on the basis of LJM.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. But the entire board was aware of Fastow’s in-
                                     volvement.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Yes, yes.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Okay. All right. That is the end of my questions.
                                     I recognize the gentleman from Illinois for 5 minutes.
                                        Mr. RUSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Powers, I want to get
                                     back to this question of bona fide economic objectives. And in your
                                     estimation, how common is it for corporations to misuse SPEs
                                     merely to accomplish favorable financial results and not achieve
                                     bona fide economic objectives or risks—or transferring risk? And is
                                     this abuse specific to certain industries? And I also would like for
                                     you just to give us some examples of what you would call a bona
                                     fide economic objective or transfer of risk.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Okay. In answer to the first part of your question,
                                     I don’t know how widely used, how they are used by other compa-
                                     nies, and I hope and I am quite sure other companies are looking
                                     into how they are using.
                                        I think there are two different kinds of transactions here. One
                                     is a hedging transaction, and there is nothing inappropriate about
                                     a hedging transaction to take risk from a company. We all do it,
                                     in a sense, when we buy insurance, as long as you are really buy-
                                     ing insurance, rather than just setting up something to look like
                                     a hedging transaction that isn’t accomplishing that purpose. That
                                     is the first issue.
                                        The second are these SPEs to, as we say, put debt off the books,
                                     and I would just give two examples. If I buy 100 shares of Ford
                                     Motor Company, I risk the value of my equity but not all the bal-
                                     ance sheet of the Ford Motor Company when I consolidate it into
                                     my financial statements, and that seems appropriate. If I own al-
                                     most—you know, if I own all of the Ford Motor Company, maybe
                                     it should be different. When I lease equipment rather than buy
                                     equipment, one of the considerations I may take into account is I
                                     don’t want to have the debt on the equipment on my balance sheet.
                                     So these are extremely difficult policy questions for the accounting
                                     industry, for Congress, for the Securities and Exchange Commis-
                                     sion to sort out how these ought to be used. But I do think it would
                                     be unfair to come away with the Enron experience thinking that
                                     all hedges or all special-purpose vehicles are inappropriate. They
                                     are not; they are often and I desperately hope by most people in
                                     the country used in appropriate ways.
                                        Mr. RUSH. With that in mind, I know you are not a securities ex-
                                     pert—you have testified about that on more than one occasion this
                                     afternoon—but do you have an opinion or opinions in terms of how
                                     we, as Members of Congress, can avoid the abuses of SPEs that
                                     were perpetuated by Enron without doing away with what you
                                     have clearly defined as the more legitimate purposes and benefits
                                     of SPEs?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I look at it, from a non-securities expert, as
                                     a fairly simply issue: There ought to be transparency. To the extent
                                     that the problem here is that the existing laws might have been
                                     enforced, then enforcement. To the extent that the existing laws




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00082   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 83 ===
                                                                                      79

                                     aren’t requiring enough transparency, then maybe the existing
                                     laws need to be changed. But transparency is absolutely crucial,
                                     and that was one of the problems here.
                                        Mr. RUSH. I want to try to get quickly back to the question of
                                     Mr. Richard Buy here, who is the Enron senior risk officer. In staff
                                     interviews with Mr. Buy, he suggested, similar to the findings of
                                     your report, that his group was not charged with the responsibility
                                     of evaluating Enron’s big picture risk as it related to all of these
                                     activities in total. What then is the role of someone who is the risk
                                     management officer, the risk manager, is it just to look at a risk
                                     change here or a risk change there or a willy nilly look at this or
                                     do they have to be more focused and more concerted in their ef-
                                     forts?
                                        Mr. POWERS. As I indicated at the outset of my testimony, Enron
                                     isn’t just a pipeline and energy trading company; it has a very sig-
                                     nificant investment portfolio. And a primary, if not only, job of the
                                     risk assessment group was to evaluate the risks of those invest-
                                     ments, diversification, what doing due diligence on the investments
                                     and things like that. I am not an expert on this, but as an invest-
                                     ment manager, that was one of the roles.
                                        Mr. RUSH. Mr. Chairman, one additional question here. Accord-
                                     ing to your report, the board of directors also charged Mr. Buy with
                                     a substantial role in the oversight of Enron’s relationship with the
                                     LJM partnerships, and he was supposed to review and sign off
                                     every deal. Why then was Mr. Buy not in a position to see the mul-
                                     titude of problems and conflicts facing these partnerships and
                                     Enron? Do you any thoughts on that?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I think he was in a position to see that these
                                     were not arms-length deals.
                                        Mr. RUSH. So you say he was in a position.
                                        Mr. POWERS. He might not have been in a position to see the
                                     complexities of the underlying transactions, but he was in a posi-
                                     tion to monitor the arms-length nature of many of these deals.
                                        Mr. RUSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentleman’s time has expired. The gen-
                                     tleman from Texas is recognized for 5 minutes.
                                        Mr. GREEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, Mr. Powers, I ap-
                                     preciate you spending all this time with the subcommittee this
                                     afternoon. I may be the last questioner, but let me ask you some
                                     questions about Arthur Andersen accounting firm. In your report,
                                     it stated that, ‘‘Evidence available to us,’’ and I am quoting, ‘‘sug-
                                     gests that Andersen did not fulfill its professional responsibilities
                                     in connection with its audits and Enron’s financial statements or
                                     its obligations to bring to the attention of Enron’s Board concerns
                                     about Enron’s internal controls.’’ What specifically should Andersen
                                     have been doing that it was not doing?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, we have, throughout the morning and after-
                                     noon, talked about many, many things in the accounting, including
                                     the overall structure of hedging with one’s own stock that were, we
                                     think inappropriate, but at a minimum very questionable. And in
                                     their audit should have brought those to the attention of the Audit
                                     Committee.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00083   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 84 ===
                                                                                      80

                                        Mr. GREEN. Since Arthur Andersen earned $5.7 million in con-
                                     sulting fees to set up the LJM deals, how could they not have
                                     known about the outside equity was bogus?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, they may have known that, but the source of
                                     the money to back the Big River and Little River loans was from
                                     Barclay’s, and the only reason it wasn’t equity was it was backed
                                     with a reserve account that came from a distribution from JEDI in
                                     a very complicated way, and I must say, it is not possible, even in
                                     a thorough audit, to see every little movement of money. Again, I
                                     am not an accountant who goes through these audits. I would not
                                     be surprised by that claim that we didn’t know that. I don’t know
                                     whether it is true or not. And I don’t think—in the report, we have
                                     not stated otherwise. We don’t know whether Andersen was aware
                                     that the Big River and Little River loans in Chewco were backed
                                     by reserve accounts, which made them not equity but debt.
                                        Mr. GREEN. You also mentioned that Andersen participated in
                                     the structuring and accounting treatment of the Raptor trans-
                                     actions and charged again over a million dollars for its services, yet
                                     it apparently failed to provide the oversight to prevent those trans-
                                     actions from going forward. Was Andersen purely—and I hate to
                                     say this about such a great company I thought of so many years,
                                     their partnership—was it purely incompetent in its duties or sim-
                                     ply taking advantage of a company that appears to be out of con-
                                     trol? In other words, was Andersen there as a whistleblower or to
                                     earn fees?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I don’t know why Andersen did not recognize
                                     these issues. What we do say is that as the Raptors, for example,
                                     were being developed, Andersen was providing accounting services
                                     of some sort, whether we call them consulting, or real-time ac-
                                     counting. They were providing real-time accounting as those were
                                     being developed, and they did not bring to the attention of the
                                     board—they did not bring independent judgment to bear on those
                                     transactions. If they did, they didn’t do it adequately.
                                        Mr. GREEN. I guess it is frustrating being from Houston and see-
                                     ing the tragedy and the devastation from Enron and the collapse,
                                     and I guess—and I have read lots of articles—I guess Enron could
                                     be the Michael Milken in a tall, shiny skyscraper in downtown
                                     Houston. And it is just such a shock to watching a company over
                                     15 or 16 years grow and be so successful and aggressive but ag-
                                     gressive to the point where they created these multiple partner-
                                     ships. It is just astonishing, I guess.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, Congressman, being not too far up the road
                                     from Houston and being in Houston quite a bit——
                                        Mr. GREEN. Hundred and sixty-two miles; I have driven it lots
                                     of times.
                                        Mr. POWERS. [continuing] this is a terrible tragedy for Houston
                                     and our part of the country. Yes, there is a lot of technical material
                                     we have talked about today, but I think you are absolutely right
                                     to bring that point that this is a great human tragedy for many in-
                                     dividuals.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. The gentleman’s time has expired.
                                        Mr. GREEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. I understand the chairman of the entire com-
                                     mittee seeks recognition?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00084   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 85 ===
                                                                                      81

                                        Chairman TAUZIN. I seek recognition with the consent of the
                                     members to do something on behalf of our investigation, collec-
                                     tively, and ask the gentleman a few more questions, if you don’t
                                     mind. Would the gentleman yield?
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Without objection.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. On behalf of our investigation, Dean Powers,
                                     has the alleged shredding of documents at Enron impeded the in-
                                     vestigation of your committee in any way?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t think so. We haven’t seen some hole that,
                                     ‘‘Where is that?’’ Having said that—and we haven’t had the oppor-
                                     tunity to go through a lot of documents. We haven’t been able to
                                     download a lot of e-mail. So there is a great deal of material.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Do you admit going in that you had limited
                                     access to documents?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Correct.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Are you aware of why shredding is occurring
                                     at Enron as late as January and what is being shredded? Why did
                                     they hire a company called Shredco to come in and do all this
                                     shredding?
                                        Mr. POWERS. I don’t know. I can’t answer that.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Well, you have not asked that question in the
                                     purview of your investigation? Didn’t it disturb you that all this
                                     shredding is going on while you are trying to do this investigation
                                     for the board?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I mean I read about it in the paper, and we
                                     did ask, are there areas of documents that we are not getting, are
                                     there transactions that we can’t understand? And we came to the
                                     conclusion that we were trying to move ahead expeditiously, that
                                     there were not gaps in our——
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Did you ask the question, why is all this
                                     shredding going on?
                                        Mr. POWERS. We did talk to the FBI about that and cooperated
                                     with the FBI and——
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. This is going on while the FBI is there in
                                     Houston?
                                        Mr. POWERS. No, no. They came in after the——
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. After the shredding?
                                        Mr. POWERS. [continuing] after the shredding had started.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Just to put in this perspective, my under-
                                     standing from the investigators, Mr. Dingell, is that the web site
                                     of the shredding company, Shredco, opens up with a statement,
                                     ‘‘You think you got rid of it, now you are being sued. Call us, we
                                     guarantee destruction.’’ And Enron would hire a company with that
                                     as their invite to come in and shred documents in the middle of all
                                     this. Doesn’t that disturb you?
                                        Mr. POWERS. Well, I agree these allegations of shredding are ex-
                                     tremely serious allegations that the FBI ought to look into.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. And to put this in perspective, because you
                                     had limited access to documents anyhow, you can’t know whether
                                     documents were being shredded that may have aided and assisted
                                     you in understanding the intricacies and the involvement of parties
                                     in these affairs.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00085   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985

=== PAGE 86 ===
                                                                                      82

                                        Mr. POWERS. Right. We can’t know whether some of those docu-
                                     ments would have helped us or whether even if they had not been
                                     shredded we would have gotten them.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Dean, I know you will be disappointed, but that
                                     probably concludes the hearing. And on behalf of the committee, I
                                     want to thank you so much for being here today and testifying.
                                     Your report of the Special Investigative Committee has been par-
                                     ticularly helpful to us as we continue our efforts to get to the bot-
                                     tom of this and to determine what we can do from preventing this
                                     in the future. So thank you very much for joining us.
                                        Mr. POWERS. Thank you.
                                        [Whereupon, at 2:45 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   11:33 May 31, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00086   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77985   pfrm01   PsN: 77985
