
=== PAGE 1 ===
                                             THE FINANCIAL COLLAPSE OF ENRON—Part 4



                                                                              HEARING
                                                                                    BEFORE THE

                                                                SUBCOMMITTEE ON
                                                          OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS
                                                                                        OF THE


                                                        COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
                                                               COMMERCE
                                                        HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
                                                          ONE HUNDRED SEVENTH CONGRESS
                                                                                SECOND SESSION


                                                                                 MARCH 14, 2002



                                                                        Serial No. 107–90

                                                  Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce




                                                                                       (
                                           Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.access.gpo.gov/congress/house


                                                                      U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                             78–506CC                            WASHINGTON : 2002

                                                       For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
                                                    Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800
                                                            Fax: (202) 512–2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402–0001




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00001    Fmt 5011    Sfmt 5011    W:\DISC\78506     pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 2 ===
                                                             COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
                                                            W.J. ‘‘BILLY’’ TAUZIN, Louisiana, Chairman
                                       MICHAEL BILIRAKIS, Florida                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
                                       JOE BARTON, Texas                           HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
                                       FRED UPTON, Michigan                        EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
                                       CLIFF STEARNS, Florida                      RALPH M. HALL, Texas
                                       PAUL E. GILLMOR, Ohio                       RICK BOUCHER, Virginia
                                       JAMES C. GREENWOOD, Pennsylvania            EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
                                       CHRISTOPHER COX, California                 FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
                                       NATHAN DEAL, Georgia                        SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
                                       RICHARD BURR, North Carolina                BART GORDON, Tennessee
                                       ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                      PETER DEUTSCH, Florida
                                       GREG GANSKE, Iowa                           BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
                                       CHARLIE NORWOOD, Georgia                    ANNA G. ESHOO, California
                                       BARBARA CUBIN, Wyoming                      BART STUPAK, Michigan
                                       JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois                      ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
                                       HEATHER WILSON, New Mexico                  TOM SAWYER, Ohio
                                       JOHN B. SHADEGG, Arizona                    ALBERT R. WYNN, Maryland
                                       CHARLES ‘‘CHIP’’ PICKERING, Mississippi     GENE GREEN, Texas
                                       VITO FOSSELLA, New York                     KAREN MCCARTHY, Missouri
                                       ROY BLUNT, Missouri                         TED STRICKLAND, Ohio
                                       TOM DAVIS, Virginia                         DIANA DEGETTE, Colorado
                                       ED BRYANT, Tennessee                        THOMAS M. BARRETT, Wisconsin
                                       ROBERT L. EHRLICH, Jr., Maryland            BILL LUTHER, Minnesota
                                       STEVE BUYER, Indiana                        LOIS CAPPS, California
                                       GEORGE RADANOVICH, California               MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
                                       CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire              CHRISTOPHER JOHN, Louisiana
                                       JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania               JANE HARMAN, California
                                       MARY BONO, California
                                       GREG WALDEN, Oregon
                                       LEE TERRY, Nebraska
                                       — — (Vacancy)
                                                                DAVID V. MARVENTANO, Staff Director
                                                                JAMES D. BARNETTE, General Counsel
                                                     REID P.F. STUNTZ, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel



                                                           SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS
                                                           JAMES C. GREENWOOD, Pennsylvania, Chairman
                                       MICHAEL BILIRAKIS, Florida             PETER DEUTSCH, Florida
                                       CLIFF STEARNS, Florida                 BART STUPAK, Michigan
                                       PAUL E. GILLMOR, Ohio                  TED STRICKLAND, Ohio
                                       RICHARD BURR, North Carolina           DIANA DEGETTE, Colorado
                                       ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 CHRISTOPHER JOHN, Louisiana
                                         Vice Chairman                        BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
                                       CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire         JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan,
                                       — — (Vacancy)                            (Ex Officio)
                                       W.J. ‘‘BILLY’’ TAUZIN, Louisiana
                                         (Ex Officio)

                                                                                          (II)




                                                                                           2




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00002   Fmt 0486    Sfmt 0486   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 3 ===
                                                                                    CONTENTS

                                                                                                                                                                Page
                                       Testimony of:
                                           Astin, Ronald T., Partner, Vinson & Elkins, L.L.P .......................................                             15
                                           Derrick, James V., Jr., Former General Counsel, Enron Corporation .........                                           16
                                           Dilg, Joseph C., Managing Partner, Vinson & Elkins, L.L.P .......................                                     19
                                           Rogers, Rex R., Vice President and Associate General Counsel, Enron
                                             Corporation ....................................................................................................    15
                                           Sefton, Scott M., former General Counsel, Enron Global Finance, Enron
                                             Corporation ....................................................................................................    15
                                           St. Clair, Carol L., former Assistant General Counsel, ECT Resources
                                             Group, Enron Corporation ............................................................................               22

                                                                                                   (III)




                                                                                                     3




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199    PO 00000       Frm 00003      Fmt 0486      Sfmt 0486     W:\DISC\78506        pfrm17     PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 4 ===
VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00004   Fmt 0486   Sfmt 0486   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 5 ===
                                       FINANCIAL COLLAPSE OF ENRON CORPORA-
                                         TION, WITH FOCUS ON ENRON’S INSIDE
                                         AND OUTSIDE COUNSEL

                                                                    THURSDAY, MARCH 14, 2002

                                                                HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
                                                         COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE,
                                                 SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS,
                                                                                          Washington, DC.
                                          The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room
                                       2322, Rayburn House Office Building, James C. Greenwood (chair-
                                       man) presiding.
                                          Members present: Representatives Greenwood, Stearns, Burr,
                                       Whitfield, Bass, Tauzin (ex officio), Deutsch, Stupak, Strickland,
                                       DeGette, and Dingell (ex officio).
                                          Also present: Representatives Markey, Green, and Waxman.
                                          Staff present: Tom Dilenge, majority counsel; Mark Paoletta, ma-
                                       jority counsel; Brendan Williams, legislative clerk; Mike Geffroy,
                                       majority counsel; Will Carty, legislative clerk; Peter Kielty, legisla-
                                       tive clerk; Shannon Vildostegui, majority counsel; David Cavicke,
                                       majority counsel; Brian McCullough, majority professional staff;
                                       Edith Holleman, minority counsel; Consuela Washington, minority
                                       counsel; Chris Knauer, minority investigator; and Jonathan
                                       Cordone, minority counsel.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The hearing will come to order.
                                          Witnesses may be seated at the table. Good morning and wel-
                                       come to the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations’ ongo-
                                       ing inquiry into the financial collapse of the Enron Corporation.
                                          Today we are going to examine elements of Enron’s structure of
                                       corporate governance. The words ‘‘corporate governance’’ describe
                                       the entire architecture of how a modern corporation is managed on
                                       behalf of its investors and stockholders, its customers, and its em-
                                       ployees.
                                          This encompasses executives at every level, corporate accounting
                                       teams, corporate counsel, senior managers, and the Board of Direc-
                                       tors. It also includes the outside expert advice, often consultants,
                                       attorneys, and accountants, that senior management, the Board of
                                       Directors, or the Audit Committee of the Board retained to provide
                                       advice on a wide array of issues. These issues ranged from human
                                       resources to tax analyses to producing an audited financial state-
                                       ment.
                                          Up to this point, our work has focused primarily on what went
                                       wrong at Enron. Through our work we have been able to cast a
                                       considerable amount of light on the people and transactions behind
                                                                                          (1)




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00005   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 6 ===
                                                                                          2

                                       this company’s unparalleled failure. As a result of this effort, we
                                       have been able to slowly parse the complex of self-dealing trans-
                                       actions that contributed to Enron’s dramatic descent into bank-
                                       ruptcy.
                                          We have also acquired a more complete understanding of how
                                       these highly irregular transactions were cloaked behind a curtain
                                       of nearly impenetrable financial arrangements. We know much
                                       more, too, about the individuals who devised and implemented
                                       these schemes.
                                          And it becomes increasingly clear that the collapse of Enron,
                                       which was greeted with such surprise by investors, shareholders,
                                       customers, analysts, and employees alike, was more than mere
                                       happenstance. Instead, a complex infrastructure of ill-defined part-
                                       nerships, hedges, collars, and various other off-the-books trans-
                                       actions were purposefully designed to mislead shareholders about
                                       Enron’s precarious financial position.
                                          Phantom assets and phantom earnings were created in order to
                                       create phantom wealth. Sadly, the investors and employees who
                                       risked their fortunes and their futures were very real, and they
                                       suffered very real losses.
                                          Among the many mysteries yet surrounding this collapse, one in
                                       particular has emerged. What role, whether by omission, commis-
                                       sion, did Enron’s corporate governance team play in the slide into
                                       bankruptcy and the increasing reliance on riskier and riskier trans-
                                       actions to keep Enron afloat?
                                          It is especially important to undertake this examination, since
                                       we now know that many of the seeds of this particular financial
                                       tragedy were sewn years ago. How is it, then, that the Board of Di-
                                       rectors and senior management failed to red flag flagrant issues of
                                       conflict of interest and highly questionable transactions behind sev-
                                       eral key partnerships, such as the Chewco deal and the various
                                       LJM associated transactions?
                                          What we have discovered to date amounts to a systemic failure
                                       on the part of Enron’s legal and accounting personnel, as well as
                                       outside counsel and accountants, both to discover these problems
                                       and to warn of their dangers. Clearly, no actions were taken to pre-
                                       vent the ensuing disaster.
                                          A few courageous individuals attempted to raise the alarm, but
                                       either their warnings came too late or too half-heartedly. Or per-
                                       haps the right people didn’t hear the alarms.
                                          This disserving situation brings us to the question at hand today.
                                       Where were the faithful stewards of Enron? In particular, where
                                       were the people whose fiduciary duty it was to guard against hid-
                                       den dangers and to protect the interests of Enron and its share-
                                       holders? Where were the professionals whose job it was to ferret
                                       out wrongdoing and guard against malfeasance? What, if any, ac-
                                       tions did they either take or recommend to put an end to those ir-
                                       responsible actions which eventually led to Enron’s demise?
                                          This phase of our hearing involves the people who were paid to
                                       have known better, and who should have done more, much more,
                                       the accountants and lawyers. Next week we will have a chance to
                                       hear from the accountants. This morning we have before us the at-
                                       torneys, Enron’s inside and outside counsel.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00006   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 7 ===
                                                                                          3

                                          I look forward to this opportunity to listen to their testimony
                                       about a wide array of issues, particularly their actions and advice
                                       surrounding the many dubious related party transactions. For ex-
                                       ample, I’d like to get a clearer understanding of the attorneys’ as-
                                       sessments and advice on the thorny ethical problems surrounding
                                       the two LJM partnerships which did business with Enron, even
                                       though these partnerships created a clear conflict of interest with
                                       Enron’s former CFO Andy Fastow, who succeeded in having a fi-
                                       nancial stake on both sides of the transactions.
                                          I would like to know why legal counsel worked so hard to mini-
                                       mize what Mr. Fastow disclosed about his financial arrangements
                                       with the partnerships in proxy filings. Was his comfort level about
                                       disclosure more compelling than the interests of Enron and its
                                       shareholders in ensuring that he wasn’t benefiting improperly at
                                       their expense?
                                          I would like to learn about the attorney’s role and advice in the
                                       formation and evidence of the LJM Enron transaction approval
                                       process. It was this document that was supposed to manage the in-
                                       evitable conflicts arising out of such a curious arrangement and en-
                                       sure the fairness of these transactions to Enron and its share-
                                       holders.
                                          Why did it take so long for the lawyers to catch inherent weak-
                                       nesses in the process? And why weren’t these corrected in a timely
                                       manner?
                                          I also want to know why no one seemed to be monitoring the ac-
                                       tions of senior Enron employees working on behalf of outside inter-
                                       ests, and why the LJM2 private placement memorandum, in which
                                       Mr. Fastow and other Enron employees were marketing their ac-
                                       cess to inside information, failed to raise any red flags to those re-
                                       sponsible for looking out for Enron’s interests?
                                          We are not looking at 1 or 2 missteps here, but a pattern of be-
                                       havior characterized by neglect and avoidance by Enron’s legal ad-
                                       visors. We will also look at the series of decisions and actions fol-
                                       lowing Sherron Watkins’ letter to Kenneth Lay. Who made the de-
                                       cision that the investigation of her serious allegations by Enron’s
                                       outside counsel, Vinson & Elkins, should be so limited, and on
                                       whose advice?
                                          We have a lot of ground to cover, so let me thank the witnesses
                                       who have come today. You all have been responsive to our requests
                                       for interviews, and we appreciate that. We also appreciate that you
                                       have come here voluntarily to try to help us understand your role
                                       in these matters. We thank you again.
                                          I will now recognize the ranking member, the gentleman from
                                       Florida, Mr. Deutsch.
                                          [The prepared statement of Hon. James C. Greenwood follows:]
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES C. GREENWOOD, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE
                                                              ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

                                          Good morning, and welcome to the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations’
                                       ongoing inquiry into the financial collapse of the Enron Corporation. Today, we are
                                       going to examine elements of Enron’s structure of ‘‘Corporate Governance’’. The
                                       words Corporate Governance describe the entire architecture of how a modern cor-
                                       poration is managed on behalf of its investors and stockholders, its customers and
                                       its employees.
                                          This encompasses executives at every level, corporate accounting teams, corporate
                                       counsel, senior managers and the Board of Directors. It also includes the outside




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00007   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 8 ===
                                                                                          4
                                       expert advice, often consultants, attorneys and accountants, that senior manage-
                                       ment, the Board of Directors or the Audit Committee of the Board, retain to provide
                                       advice on a wide array of issues.These issues range from human resources to tax
                                       analyses, to producing an audited financial statement.
                                          Up to this point, our work has focused primarily on what went wrong at Enron.
                                       Through our work, we have been able to cast a considerable amount of light on the
                                       people and transactions behind this company’s unparalleled failure.
                                          As a result of this effort, we have been able to slowly parse the complex web of
                                       self-dealing transactions that contributed to Enron’s dramatic decent into bank-
                                       ruptcy.
                                          We have also acquired a more complete understanding of how these highly irreg-
                                       ular transactions were cloaked behind a curtain of nearly impenetrable financial ar-
                                       rangements. We know much more too about the individuals who devised and imple-
                                       mented these schemes.
                                          And it becomes increasingly clear that the collapse of Enron, which was greeted
                                       with such surprise by investors, shareholders, customers, analysts and employees
                                       alike, was more than mere happenstance. Instead a complex infrastructure of ill-
                                       defined partnerships, hedges, collars, and various other off-the-books transactions
                                       were purposefully designed to mislead shareholders about Enron’s precarious finan-
                                       cial position. Phantom assets and phantom earnings were created out of whole cloth
                                       in order to create phantom wealth. Sadly, the investors and employees who risked
                                       their fortunes and their futures were very real and they suffered real losses.
                                          Among the many mysteries yet surrounding this collapse, one in particular has
                                       emerged. What role, whether by omission or commission, did Enron’s corporate gov-
                                       ernance team play in the slide into bankruptcy and the increasing reliance on
                                       riskier and riskier transactions to keep Enron afloat?
                                          It is especially important to undertake this examination, since we now know that
                                       many of the seeds of this particular financial tragedy were sewn years ago. How
                                       is it then that the Board of Directors and senior management failed to red flag fla-
                                       grant issues of conflict of interest and highly questionable transactions behind sev-
                                       eral key partnerships—such as the Chewco deal and the various LJM-associated
                                       transactions?
                                          What we have discovered to date amounts to a systemic failure on the part of
                                       Enron’s legal and accounting personnel, as well as outside counsel and accountants,
                                       both to discover these problems and to warn of their dangers. Clearly no actions
                                       were taken to prevent the ensuing disaster.
                                          A few courageous individuals attempted to raise the alarm, but either their warn-
                                       ings came too late or too half-heartedly. Or perhaps the right people didn’t hear the
                                       alarm. This disturbing situation brings us to the question at hand today:
                                          Where were the faithful stewards of Enron? In particular, where were the people
                                       whose fiduciary duty it was to guard against hidden dangers and to protect the in-
                                       terests of Enron and its shareholders? Where were the professionals whose job it
                                       was to ferret out wrongdoing and guard against malfeasance? What, if any actions
                                       did they either take or recommend to put and end to those irresponsible actions
                                       which eventually led to Enron’s crack-up?
                                          This phase of our hearing involves the people who were paid to have known bet-
                                       ter, and who should have done more . . . much more—the accountants and the law-
                                       yers. Next week we’ll have a chance to hear from the accountants. This morning,
                                       we have before us the attorneys—Enron’s inside and outside counsel.
                                          I look forward to this opportunity to listen to their testimony about a wide array
                                       of issues, particularly their actions and advice surrounding the many dubious ‘‘re-
                                       lated party transactions’’.
                                          For example, I would like to get a clearer understanding of the attorneys’ assess-
                                       ment and advice on the thorny ethical problems surrounding the two LJM partner-
                                       ships, which did business with Enron even though these partnerships created a
                                       clear conflict of interest with Enron’s former CFO Andy Fastow . . . who succeeded in
                                       having a financial stake on both sides of the transactions.
                                          I would like to know why legal counsel worked so hard to minimize what Mr.
                                       Fastow disclosed about his financial arrangements with the partnerships in proxy
                                       filings.
                                          Was his comfort-level about disclosure more compelling than the interests of
                                       Enron and its shareholders in ensuring that he wasn’t benefiting improperly at
                                       their expense?
                                          I would like to learn about the attorneys’ role and advice in the formation and
                                       evolution of the LJM-Enron transaction approval process.it was this process that
                                       was supposed to manage the inevitable conflicts arising out of such a curious ar-
                                       rangement and ensure the fairness of these transactions to Enron and its share-




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00008   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 9 ===
                                                                                          5
                                       holders. Why did it take so long for the lawyers to catch inherent weaknesses in
                                       the process? And why weren’t these corrected in a timely manner?
                                         I also want to know why no one seemed to be monitoring the actions of senior
                                       Enron employees working on behalf of outside interests. And why the LJM2 private
                                       placement memorandum—in which Mr. Fastow and other Enron employees were
                                       marketing their access to insider information—failed to raise any red flags to those
                                       responsible for looking out for Enron’s interests?
                                         We are not looking at one or two missteps here, but a pattern of behavior charac-
                                       terized by neglect and avoidance by Enron’s legal advisors.
                                         We’ll also look at the series of decisions and actions following Sherron Watkin’s
                                       letter to Kenneth Lay. Who made the decision that the investigation of her serious
                                       allegations by Enron’s outside counsel, Vinson & Elkins, should be so limited? And
                                       on whose advice?
                                         We’ve got a lot of ground to cover. So let me thank the witnesses who have come
                                       today. You all have been responsive to our requests for interviews and we appre-
                                       ciate that. We also appreciate that you have come here voluntarily to try to help
                                       us understand your role in these matters. Thank you again.
                                         I will now recognize the Ranking Member.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And the reason I asked
                                       staff to put up this chart is this is a chart that we showed at the
                                       hearing with the Enron executives of one of the 4,000 partnerships.
                                       And we have looked inside of the partnership at this point in time,
                                       and I guess I feel comfortable saying that at least this partnership
                                       was illegal, because if we look inside of the partnership it did not
                                       have a business purpose.
                                          And we can get into the details at a later date, but my under-
                                       standing is that at least the structure of the partnership was ap-
                                       proved by Mr. Derrick and by Mr. Astin. And I guess in the ques-
                                       tioning, I guess I am going to ask you direct questions about if we
                                       now know, or at least you can disagree with my assessment, that
                                       the partnership itself was a violation of security laws. The struc-
                                       ture might not have been, but inside, why did, you know, as attor-
                                       neys representing a client and representing your company, did we
                                       miss that?
                                          And since my understanding is the structure of the partnerships
                                       were not that much different, and we know that some—at least
                                       several of the others that we have been able to understand and
                                       really delve into, also did not have business purposes. Why did that
                                       occur?
                                          So I yield back the balance of my time and look forward to ques-
                                       tions.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman from Florida
                                       and recognizes the Chairman of the full committee, the gentleman
                                       from Louisiana, Mr. Tauzin.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me com-
                                       mend you again for doing such a thorough job throughout this proc-
                                       ess, and for the great assistance the minority has provided and
                                       partnership in which this investigation has occurred.
                                          This subcommittee’s task has been to investigate the reasons be-
                                       hind the sad tale of Enron’s collapse, so that the full committee can
                                       understand what went wrong, so that our committee and our com-
                                       mittees of Congress might address, legislatively if necessary, some
                                       of these problems.
                                          Only by accurately identifying the basic problems can we accu-
                                       rately identify an appropriate remedy. I believe we have gone a
                                       long way toward this goal, but we have more to learn. And we have




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00009   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 10 ===
                                                                                          6

                                       been able to begin exploring remedies because of the subcommit-
                                       tee’s good and instructive work, and I want to thank you for that.
                                          This morning we turn, of course, to the attorneys in the equation,
                                       the people whose duty it was to protect the legal interest of Enron
                                       and its shareholders, and I look forward to hearing what they have
                                       to say for themselves.
                                          Last month when we had Sherron Watkins before us I pointed
                                       out a legal doctrine known as the Doctrine of Last Clear Chance.
                                       It holds that basically, even if you are totally in the right on the
                                       highway, if you had the last clear chance to avoid a crash, you
                                       could be responsible for what happened if you didn’t exercise the
                                       last clear chance to avoid that accident.
                                          Indeed, Sherron Watkins offered Enron’s leadership a last clear
                                       chance to avoid the crash, not to avoid a total loss, not to avoid
                                       damage, but to avoid potentially a total crash. And what strikes me
                                       today about her action as a loyal employee was that Sherron Wat-
                                       kins was not an attorney. She did the right thing, I think, but she
                                       did something that was technically not her job, something that
                                       might more directly be associated with the legal team, counsel’s of-
                                       fice. Vinson & Elkins’ team was responsible, basically, for helping
                                       Enron make the right legal choices.
                                          I think, in some respects, the folks who literally had that respon-
                                       sibility and who could have helped avoid the last clear chance, and,
                                       therefore, this accident, are with us today, and we intend to learn
                                       as much as we can about what went wrong. Why didn’t this team
                                       and the counsel’s office at Enron see these problems as clearly as
                                       a non-attorney, Sherron Watkins, did?
                                          Well, it is clear from my investigations that others in the com-
                                       pany, particularly the Board of Directors, either relied upon the su-
                                       pervision of the legal team and the accounting firm, as Mr. Skilling
                                       claims to have done, or they are hiding behind that assertion to
                                       hide the problems of their own failure to supervise the conduct of
                                       some of their employees.
                                          I understand that arrangements of duties and functions among
                                       attorneys are complex. I am an attorney myself, and I understand
                                       those complexities. Responsibilities, in fact, at Enron were divided,
                                       and I know that Enron was a huge and a complicated operation,
                                       so I want to hear your sides of the story as carefully as we can,
                                       and to understand it as carefully as we can.
                                          But we want to hear about the LJM transactions, the approval
                                       processes, which were meant to prevent the CFO from taking ad-
                                       vantage of the company and its shareholders. All of these controls
                                       the Board told us about, you were asked to examine, when, in fact,
                                       Mr. Lay’s attention was brought to these problems, and he asked
                                       for assistance from his counsel’s office and eventually from the
                                       legal team who were hired to protect the company.
                                          I want to know why the outside counsel, the duty to make sure
                                       these extremely complex transactions would not put Enron at risk,
                                       eventually signed off on it and ended up providing legal cover for
                                       what would turn out to be a very destructive transaction—set of
                                       transactions.
                                          I want to know why when Mr. Lay was advised by Ms. Watkins
                                       that the company was about to implode, that individuals had
                                       breached their fiduciary duty and were investors, and had breached




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00010   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 11 ===
                                                                                          7

                                       their ethical duty and were crossing the line by making money
                                       from these transactions, and she requested that an outside legal
                                       team look at what happened, and she requested that outside audi-
                                       tors look at what happened, why it was that the counsel’s office
                                       ended up, instead, turning to the same legal team whose duty it
                                       had been in the first place to prevent those transactions from en-
                                       dangering the company, turning to them to ask them if it was a
                                       good idea to get an outside legal team and then receiving a reply,
                                       I suppose that you could sort of guess would be coming, that, no,
                                       everything is okay, we don’t need a legal team to look over our
                                       shoulder and tell us we did a good job or a bad job.
                                          Why, instead, wasn’t an outside legal team called in to look at
                                       whether or not people had adequately protected the company? And
                                       why it was, at that point, that counsel’s office said maybe it isn’t
                                       a good idea to get some outside auditors in and check and see
                                       whether the auditors hired by the company had led us astray.
                                          Why, instead, the same legal team is called in to give advice to
                                       the president of the company that, no, you don’t need anybody else
                                       to look at this, everything is okay. It is a pretty serious problem.
                                          Mr. Chairman, I look forward to this hearing and look forward
                                       to giving these important witnesses a chance to clarify these ques-
                                       tions and to help us understand these complex relationships. I
                                       yield back my time.
                                          [The prepared statement of Hon. W.J. ‘‘Billy’’ Tauzin follows:]
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. W.J. ‘‘BILLY’’ TAUZIN, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
                                                                  ENERGY AND COMMERCE
                                          Thank you Chairman Greenwood. And let me commend you for doing such a thor-
                                       ough job throughout this process. This Subcommittee’s task has been to investigate
                                       the reasons behind this sad tale of Enron’s collapse, so that the Full Committee can
                                       understand what went wrong.
                                          Only by accurately identifying the basic problems can we accurately identify an
                                       appropriate remedy. And I believe we’ve gone a long way towards this goal. We have
                                       more to learn, but we’ve been able to begin exploring remedies because of the Sub-
                                       committee’s good and instructive work, and I thank you for that.
                                          This morning we turn to the attorneys—the people whose duty it was to protect
                                       the interests of Enron and its shareholders. I look forward to hearing what they
                                       have to say for themselves.
                                          Last month, when we had Sherron Watkins before us, I pointed to a legal doctrine
                                       known as the last clear chance; this holds that, basically, even if you’re totally in
                                       the right on the highway, if you had that last clear chance to avoid a crash, you
                                       could be responsible for what happened.
                                          Sherron Watkins offered Enron’s leadership that last clear chance to avoid the
                                       crash. And what strikes me today about her action as a loyal employee was that
                                       Sherron Watkins was not an attorney. She did the right thing, but she did some-
                                       thing that was not in her job description, something not directly associated with her
                                       function at Enron.
                                          What also strikes me is that some of the people who should have shown Enron
                                       leadership the proper course—who could have prevented the crash—are sitting be-
                                       fore us today. They could have acted before matters got out of hand. They could
                                       have been more skeptical of the proposals and promises of the business teams. They
                                       could have looked to learn what was really happening, and warned Enron leader-
                                       ship about what they found. But they didn’’t do this. They were not around to pro-
                                       vide a last clear chance to save the company.
                                          I think it says something when you have non-attorneys doing what attorneys are
                                       supposed to be doing. The attorneys are the people others rely upon to make sure
                                       matters are okay, are legal, are not going to put a company at undue risk.
                                          They’re the adult supervision. And it’s clear from our investigation that others in
                                       the company, particularly on the Board of Directors, either relied on this super-
                                       vision, or—as Mr. Skilling seems to have done—hid behind it to excuse their ac-
                                       tions.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00011   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 12 ===
                                                                                          8
                                         Now I understand the arrangements of duties and functions among the attorneys
                                       was complex. Responsibilities were divided. I know that Enron was a huge and com-
                                       plicated operation. And so I want to hear their side of the story.
                                         I want to hear from them about the LJM transaction approval process, which was
                                       meant to prevent the CFO from taking advantage of the company and its share-
                                       holders. I look forward to learning about the attorney reactions to emerging warn-
                                       ings that the process was flawed, that questionable negotiations were taking place,
                                       that there were potentially serious problems to investigate.
                                         I want to know why outside counsel, with the duty to make sure extremely com-
                                       plex transactions would not put Enron at risk, saw fit to sign off—providing the
                                       legal cover for what would turn out to be very destructive transactions indeed.
                                         We do have a lot to cover this morning, Mr. Chairman. And I too would like to
                                       thank the witnesses for coming before us this morning. They’ve been responsive to
                                       our staff’s requests and I thank them for their willingness to help us accurately
                                       identify the problems here.
                                         I yield back.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                       nizes for 3 minutes for an opening statement the gentlelady from—
                                       I beg your pardon. The Chair recognizes the ranking member of the
                                       full committee, the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Dingell.
                                          Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy. I
                                       commend you for these hearings and for the inquiry by this sub-
                                       committee into the matters now under consideration.
                                          I want to depart from my prepared statement just to commend
                                       my friend, the Chairman, also of the full committee for the courage
                                       and the energy which he has brought to the matters before us, and
                                       to express to him my respect and affection.
                                          Mr. Chairman, one of the things that struck me as we get deeper
                                       and deeper into the Enron investigation is the ability of almost all
                                       of the people involved to disclaim knowledge of, or responsibility
                                       for, any of the events that caused Enron’s collapse.
                                          I remember a case when I was a young lawyer in the Detroit
                                       River area. Three ships had collided in a fog in the middle of the
                                       Detroit River, and in the case the judge observed that this event
                                       could not have occurred because of the testimony of all the wit-
                                       nesses indicated that none of the vessels was within three-quarters
                                       of a mile of the point of impact.
                                          The most notable of those proclaiming lack of knowledge and re-
                                       sponsibility are Messrs. Skilling, the former president and chief ex-
                                       ecutive officer, and Lay, the chairman of the board. Now, although
                                       Mr. Skilling is widely understood to have been the architect of
                                       Enron as an asset-lite energy trading company with an increasing
                                       off-balance-sheet debt load, he presents himself as the unfortunate,
                                       unknowing ‘‘victim’’ of some as-yet-undefined forces of the market-
                                       place.
                                          Mr. Lay, who was CEO during all of Enron’s history except the
                                       last 6 months when Mr. Skilling held the job, claims that he knew
                                       even less. Yet most of these top officers ran a company which nu-
                                       merous former and current employees have described as ‘‘crooked,’’
                                       a ‘‘pyramid scheme,’’ the home of ‘‘house of cards accounting,’’ a
                                       place where you ‘‘drank the Kool-aid’’ instead of questioning what
                                       was going on, and fed the earnings ‘‘monster’’ with more and more
                                       questionable deals.
                                          Moreover, the Board of Directors, from one end to the other, was
                                       asleep. For example, they never even bothered to find out how
                                       much Andrew Fastow, the company’s chief financial officer, was
                                       making on his side deals with the company. To this day, neither




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00012   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 13 ===
                                                                                           9

                                       the Board nor anyone at the top levels of Enron knows exactly how
                                       much Mr. Fastow made on those deals. Nor did the Board bother
                                       to check if the controls it had ordered to keep these deals above-
                                       board were actually being carried out.
                                          Today we are going to hear more disclaimers of responsibility.
                                       Today we are going to hear from lawyers who will disclaim with
                                       great diligence. Some asked questions, but never followed up, and
                                       we will hear from other lawyers who knew of problems but never
                                       asked questions. For example, both the in-house and outside law-
                                       yers who represented Enron in the related-party transactions in-
                                       volving Mr. Fastow and Mr. Michael Kopper, who worked with Mr.
                                       Fastow, will tell us that.
                                          It wasn’t their responsibility to make sure that Enron or its ac-
                                       countants knew about the side guarantee with Barclay’s Bank that
                                       brought down the Jedi-Chewco deal.
                                          It wasn’t their responsibility to make sure that Mr. Kopper’s in-
                                       terest in Chewco was approved by the Office of the Chairman and
                                       known by the Board of Directors, even though these lawyers knew
                                       it was a conflict of interest violation.
                                          It wasn’t their responsibility to make sure the many deals made
                                       between Mr. Fastow’s LJM entities and Enron were actually at
                                       arm’s length and represented a fair deal for Enron in both the
                                       short and the long term.
                                          We will hear that most of these lawyers didn’t even know what
                                       controls were required by the Board of Directors to try and keep
                                       related-party deals above-board. They were told that the Board had
                                       approved the relationship with Mr. Fastow, and that was enough.
                                       Sometimes they even relied on Mr. Fastow himself as justification.
                                          We will hear from lawyers who tried to find out how much Mr.
                                       Fastow made so it could be included in Enron’s proxy, but when
                                       Mr. Fastow refused to tell them, their response was, ‘‘Next year we
                                       will do it.’’ We will hear that lawyers were not responsible for ask-
                                       ing about accounting decisions. We will hear from lawyers who ig-
                                       nored, rationalized, or even discounted problems brought to the
                                       company’s attention by Sherron Watkins and others.
                                          Maybe the lawyers involved in the Enron mess were simply
                                       doing their job. I find this a most troublesome prospect. And I
                                       would note that it appears that the legal profession may have
                                       changed in the 50 years since I was sworn in to the bar. At that
                                       time, we thought that it was the responsibility of the lawyer to
                                       serve with the highest integrity and responsibility, to protect the
                                       interests of the clients, and to see to it that justice is done.
                                          Until this fiasco, then, I had always thought of lawyers as more
                                       than highly paid technicians. In this case, I was apparently wrong.
                                       It is very sad, Mr. Chairman.
                                          Thank you.
                                          [The prepared statement of Hon. John D. Dingell follows:]
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN D. DINGELL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
                                                                 FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                         Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One of the things that has struck me as we get deeper
                                       and deeper into the Enron investigation is the ability of almost all of the people in-
                                       volved to disclaim knowledge of, or responsibility for, any of the events that caused
                                       Enron’s collapse. The most notable of these are, of course, Jeffrey Skilling, the




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002    Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00013   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 14 ===
                                                                                          10
                                       former president and chief executive officer, and Kenneth Lay, the chairman of the
                                       board.
                                          Although Mr. Skilling is widely understood to have been the architect of Enron
                                       as an asset-light, energy trading company with an increasing off-balance-sheet debt
                                       load, he presents himself as a unknowing ‘‘victim’’ of some as-yet-undefined forces
                                       of the marketplace. Mr. Lay, who was CEO for all of Enron’s history except the six
                                       months when Mr. Skilling held the job, claims to know even less. Yet both of these
                                       top officers ran a company which numerous former and current employees have de-
                                       scribed as ‘‘crooked,’’ a ‘‘pyramid scheme,’’ the home of ‘‘house of cards accounting,’’
                                       a place where you ‘‘drank the Kool-aid’’ instead of questioning what was going on,
                                       and fed the earnings ‘‘monster’’ with more and more questionable deals. Moreover,
                                       the Board of Directors was asleep. For example, it never even bothered to find out
                                       how much Andrew Fastow, the company’s chief financial officer, was making on his
                                       side deals with the company. To this day, neither
                                          the board nor anyone at the top levels of Enron knows exactly how much Mr.
                                       Fastow made on those deals. Nor did the board bother to check if the controls it
                                       had ordered to keep these deals above-board were actually being carried out.
                                          Today, we will hear more disclaimers of responsibility. We will hear from lawyers
                                       who asked questions, but never followed up. And we will hear from lawyers who
                                       knew of problems, but never asked questions. For example, both the in-house and
                                       the outside lawyers who represented Enron in the related-party transactions involv-
                                       ing Mr. Fastow and Michael Kopper, who worked for Mr. Fastow, will tell us that:
                                       —It wasn’t their responsibility to make sure that Enron or its accountants knew
                                            about the side guarantee with Barclay’s bank that brought down the JEDI-
                                            Chewco deal.
                                       —It wasn’t their responsibility to make sure that Mr. Kopper’s interest in Chewco
                                            was approved by the Office of the Chairman and known by the Board of Direc-
                                            tors, even though these lawyers knew it was a conflict of interest violation.
                                       —It wasn’t their responsibility to make sure the many deals made between Mr.
                                            Fastow’s LJM entities and Enron were actually at arm’s length and represented
                                            a fair deal for Enron in both the short and the long term.
                                          We will hear that most of these lawyers didn’t even know what controls were re-
                                       quired by the Board of Directors to try to keep the related-party deals above-board.
                                       They were told that the board had approved the relationship with Mr. Fastow, and
                                       that was enough. Sometimes they relied on Mr. Fastow himself as justification.
                                          We will hear from lawyers who tried to find out how much Mr. Fastow made so
                                       it could be included in Enron’s proxy, but when Mr. Fastow refused to tell them,
                                       their response was—‘‘next year we’ll do it.’’ We will hear that lawyers were not re-
                                       sponsible for asking about accounting decisions. And we will hear from lawyers who
                                       ignored, rationalized, or discounted problems brought to the company’s attention by
                                       Sherron Watkins and others.
                                          Maybe all the lawyers involved in the Enron mess were simply doing their job—
                                       a most troublesome prospect. Until this fiasco, I had always thought of lawyers as
                                       more than just highly paid technicians. In this case, I apparently was wrong.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman from Michi-
                                       gan and recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Stearns, for 3
                                       minutes.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Good morning, and thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
                                       holding this hearing. And let me again commend the staff for the
                                       very significant and competent job they are doing in preparing us
                                       and getting the witnesses here.
                                         Mr. Chairman, over the course of the hearings we have had on
                                       this, we have learned of Enron’s collapse, that it was basically a
                                       complete failure and a meltdown of fundamental responsibilities
                                       and oversight. We have heard from a number of Enron and Ander-
                                       sen officials and have developed what we think is a very good
                                       record of all of these transactions.
                                         LJM, the Raptor, the Chewco, were developed and managed and
                                       hidden from scrutiny—this despite the numerous officials pleading
                                       the Fifth Amendment here in front of our committee in response
                                       to the subcommittee’s questioning. So this hearing is very perti-
                                       nent.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00014   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 15 ===
                                                                                          11

                                          Mr. Chairman, I went on the internet to look up the American
                                       Bar Association’s website to get and understand its model rules for
                                       professional conduct. And it is interesting, the first rule for lawyers
                                       under the rules for professional conduct is competence. And, my
                                       colleagues, let me just read what it says. ‘‘A lawyer shall provide
                                       competent representation to a client. Competent representation re-
                                       quires the legal knowledge, skill, thoroughness, and preparation
                                       reasonably necessary for preparation.’’
                                          So, Mr. Chairman, let us look at our hearing in perspective. In
                                       fact, let us get to the nitty-gritty. Our witnesses before us today are
                                       all attorneys. Their job was to be the legal watchdog for Enron’s
                                       transaction. From the information we have discovered we are faced
                                       with this question: was the failure of oversight and responsibility
                                       due to a lack of competence or to a measure of culpability?
                                          Mr. Chairman, Jan Avery was a woman who was an accountant
                                       at Enron in 1993. She put herself through college going at night.
                                       She didn’t have polo shirts on and khakis when she came to work.
                                       She came in a suit. In 1993, she was given a thin manilla folder
                                       containing three sheets of paper. On one there was a number, $142
                                       million.
                                          This was the routine loss. It was a staggering amount for this
                                       company and for this young accountant to understand. So she said,
                                       ‘‘Where are the books for Enron Oil? How am I supposed to justify
                                       $142 million loss for State tax purposes?’’
                                          Mr. Chairman, no one could answer her in Enron Company. So
                                       I go back. We have lawyers here whose responsibility was to be the
                                       watchdog and protect Enron. If this woman accountant at Enron
                                       knew in 1993 that there was a problem, surely the people at this
                                       front desk should have provided advice that was more competent
                                       than this young woman who put herself through night school as an
                                       accountant.
                                          So we are here today to find out what happened. And so, Mr.
                                       Chairman, I commend you and your staff.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                       nizes for 3 minutes for the purpose of an opening statement the
                                       gentlelady from Colorado, Ms. DeGette.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, this in-
                                       vestigation has really seemed to me like piecing together a big jig-
                                       saw puzzle. And we have looked at a number of the pieces of the
                                       puzzle so far. We have heard from senior management from Enron
                                       of all different flavors. We have heard from the Board of Directors.
                                       We have heard from the auditors. We have heard from outside ex-
                                       perts. And until today there has been a big piece of that puzzle
                                       right in the middle missing, and that is the attorneys who were ad-
                                       vising Enron throughout the events that we all know so well at
                                       this point.
                                          I am looking forward to hearing what the attorneys have to say
                                       today. And, in particular, I am interested in Vinson & Elkins’ rep-
                                       resentation of their client, and, in particular there, I am interested
                                       in this preliminary investigation of allegations that Vinson & Elk-
                                       ins did from Sherron Watkins’ memo. The reason I am interested
                                       in this is I think it is almost a parable for what happened through-
                                       out Enron and for what happened from all of the experts that were
                                       advising Enron, because Ms. Watkins said in her memo to Mr. Lay,




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00015   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 16 ===
                                                                                          12

                                       ‘‘I am incredibly nervous that we will implode in a wave of account-
                                       ing scandals. My 8 years of Enron work history will be worth noth-
                                       ing on my resume. The business world will consider the past suc-
                                       cesses as nothing but an elaborate accounting hoax.’’
                                           So what does Vinson & Elkins do when Enron asked them to do
                                       a so-called independent investigation of these allegations? Vinson
                                       & Elkins says, ‘‘It was decided that our initial approach would not
                                       involve the second-guessing of the accounting advice and treatment
                                       provided by Arthur Andersen. There would be no detailed analysis
                                       of each and every transaction, and there would be no full-scale dis-
                                       covery-style inquiry.’’
                                           If the allegation is that there are accounting problems, how on
                                       earth can you have any kind of analysis when you don’t look at the
                                       accounting in coming up with your assessment?
                                           These and many other questions I am sure will be made clear
                                       today, Mr. Chairman, and I am looking forward to hearing the tes-
                                       timony.
                                           Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
                                           Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and recog-
                                       nizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Burr, for 3 minutes
                                       for an opening statement.
                                           Mr. BURR. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me take this oppor-
                                       tunity to thank our witnesses today for their willingness to come
                                       in as we continue to peel the layers of the onion back and try to
                                       figure out exactly what happened.
                                           Mr. Chairman, let me commend you. The way that you have
                                       structured these hearings, the patience that you have shown, rath-
                                       er than to run out and grab headlines, we have tried to put people
                                       together that could provide facts. And I want to just turn to some
                                       testimony that we are going to hear today from one of the partners
                                       at Vinson & Elkins.
                                           And that testimony says the Enron bankruptcy filings—Enron
                                       listed more than 400 law firms as having represented them. Clear-
                                       ly, this was not a situation where Enron fell in trouble because
                                       they didn’t seek or have provided for them enough legal help.
                                       Enron’s legal affairs were directed by a highly sophisticated in-
                                       house legal department consisting of approximately 250 in-house
                                       lawyers. Clearly, they had at their fingertips expertise that most
                                       companies don’t have.
                                           Enron recruited and employed experienced, highly capable and
                                       well qualified attorneys, many of whom had previously practiced in
                                       large law firms. There is experience within this company that cer-
                                       tainly dispels any belief that maybe they were ill advised.
                                           And it goes on in the testimony to say about the report, specifi-
                                       cally, the report that Vinson & Elkins was asked to prepare and
                                       to hand over to the company, it says, ‘‘The report did conclude that
                                       no further investigation was necessary because the appropriate
                                       senior-level officers of Enron were fully aware of the primary con-
                                       cerns of Ms. Watkins, that Ms. Watkins wanted Mr. Lay to ad-
                                       dress, and had, in fact, already addressed them.’’
                                           Ladies and gentlemen that are here today, let me assure you
                                       that we have had some Enron officials who have sat before us and
                                       said they didn’t know, they can’t remember. Today I hope you will




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00016   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 17 ===
                                                                                          13

                                       help us fill in those blanks of who knew, who should remember,
                                       and who was told.
                                          I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                       nizes the gentleman, Mr. Stupak, for 3 minutes for an opening
                                       statement.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Over the brief Presi-
                                       dent’s Day district work period, I held three town hall meetings in
                                       my northern Michigan district, just as I am sure many of my col-
                                       leagues did. The No. 1 issue I heard about from my constituents
                                       was not the current budget proposals, not a desire for tax cuts, not
                                       even the war against terrorism, although they are very concerned
                                       about it.
                                          The No. 1 issue raised by people in my town hall meetings was
                                       the Enron collapse and their passionate desire to see that justice
                                       is served.
                                          My district is about as far away as you can get from Houston,
                                       Texas, without leaving the continental United States. But constitu-
                                       ents seem to feel a bond with the Enron employees and their share-
                                       holders.
                                          Mr. Chairman, my constituents, like many of us, are saddened.
                                       They are angry, and they are frustrated. They are saddened to see
                                       the lives of so many Enron employees shattered. They are angry
                                       about the shredding of public trust by all the parties involved in
                                       the Enron debacle, and they are frustrated with the fact that many
                                       of those who have come before our committee, with maybe the ex-
                                       ception of Ms. Watkins, have played dumb and had a memory that
                                       has faded away faster than Enron stock has dropped.
                                          Now, I hope that today’s panelists will be different. I hope they
                                       will answer our questions completely and honestly. I hope they will
                                       not have selective memory, and I hope they will provide us with
                                       answers.
                                          Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                       nizes the gentleman from New Hampshire, Mr. Bass, for 3 minutes
                                       for his opening statement.
                                          Mr. BASS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really do appreciate your
                                       holding this hearing. I believe this is either the fourth or fifth hear-
                                       ing we have had on this. My friend from North Carolina said, ‘‘I
                                       believe it has been thoughtful and pragmatic and informational,
                                       helpful for us in understanding what is clearly one of the most
                                       complex financial catastrophes in recent U.S. history.’’
                                          And I also appreciate the opportunity to hear from counsel of
                                       various capacities willingly, which is somewhat of a change, and I
                                       look forward to your testimony. And of particular interest to me,
                                       quite obviously, to other members of the subcommittee, as you have
                                       heard, are the views on the expectations of how you define fidu-
                                       ciary duty and conflict of interest.
                                          And I am certain at the end of the day we will have a greater
                                       understanding of Enron’s related party transactions and other
                                       agreements with those who were supposed to be protecting the
                                       company’s shareholders’ interests. But I hope we also have some
                                       sense of what these various counselors had in mind when they
                                       made decisions to engage in certain behavior and otherwise ignore




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00017   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 18 ===
                                                                                           14

                                       what may appear to be rather clear rules of ethics and accepted be-
                                       havior.
                                         Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time, so that we may proceed
                                       with the testimony and inquiry.
                                         [Additional statement submitted for the record follows:]
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL E. GILLMOR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
                                                                   FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

                                         Thank you Mr. Chairman for your continued efforts in sorting outEnron’s finan-
                                       cial breakdown. In particular, I welcome this opportunity to seek the viewpoints of
                                       the company’s in-house and outside counsel. I am hopeful the witnesses today will
                                       shed even more light on how an irresponsible corporation misrepresented its finan-
                                       cial condition and manipulated all who had an interest in them.
                                         I should also point out that in an effort to further increase corporate account-
                                       ability and protect shareholders’ rights, I recently introduced H.R. 3745, the Cor-
                                       porate Charitable Disclosure Act of 2002. This legislation would require companies
                                       to make publicly available each year the total value of contributions made to non-
                                       profit organizations during the previous fiscal year.
                                         Once again I thank the Chairman for my time and look forward to the witnesses’
                                       testimony.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman for that, and
                                       welcomes our witnesses today.
                                          Let me introduce them. They are Scott M. Sefton, Esquire,
                                       former General Counsel with Enron Global Finance. Good morning,
                                       sir.
                                          Rex Rogers, Esquire, Vice President and Associate General Coun-
                                       sel from Enron Corporation. Good morning, Mr. Rogers.
                                          James V. Derrick, Jr., Esquire, former General Counsel, Enron
                                       Corporation. Good morning, Mr. Derrick.
                                          Joseph C. Dilg, Esquire, Managing Partner, Vinson & Elkins.
                                       Good morning, sir.
                                          Ronald T. Astin, Esquire, Partner of Vinson & Elkins. Good
                                       morning to you.
                                          And Carol L. St. Clair, Esquire, former Assistant General Coun-
                                       sel, ECT Resources Group of Enron Corporation. Good morning,
                                       Ms. St. Clair.
                                          You are aware, all of you, that the committee is holding an inves-
                                       tigative hearing. And in doing so, we have the practice of taking
                                       testimony under oath. Do any of you have objections to giving your
                                       testimony under oath? Seeing no such objection, I would also ad-
                                       vise you that under the rules of the House and the rules of this
                                       committee, you are entitled to be advised by counsel.
                                          Do any of you—during your testimony, do any of you seek to be
                                       advised by counsel during your testimony? Seeing that none of you
                                       do, in that case, if you would please rise and raise your right
                                       hands, I will swear you in.
                                          [Witnesses sworn.]
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. You may please be seated. You are now
                                       under oath.
                                          And let me begin with Mr. Sefton, and ask you, sir, do you have
                                       an opening statement?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002    Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00018   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 19 ===
                                                                                          15
                                       TESTIMONY OF SCOTT M. SEFTON, FORMER GENERAL COUN-
                                        SEL, ENRON GLOBAL FINANCE, ENRON CORPORATION; REX
                                        R. ROGERS, VICE PRESIDENT AND ASSOCIATE GENERAL
                                        COUNSEL, ENRON CORPORATION; JAMES V. DERRICK, JR.,
                                        FORMER GENERAL COUNSEL, ENRON CORPORATION; JO-
                                        SEPH C. DILG, MANAGING PARTNER, VINSON & ELKINS,
                                        L.L.P.; RONALD T. ASTIN, PARTNER, VINSON & ELKINS, L.L.P.;
                                        AND CAROL L. ST. CLAIR, FORMER ASSISTANT GENERAL
                                        COUNSEL, ECT RESOURCES GROUP, ENRON CORPORATION
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Yes, I do. Chairman Greenwood——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Would you pull the microphone over to you? It
                                       is rather directional. It is the silver one that amplifies your voice,
                                       and the closer the better.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Chairman Greenwood——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. You have 5 minutes to give your opening state-
                                       ment.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. [continuing] and members of the subcommittee,
                                       good morning. I joined Enron Global Finance in the fall of 1999.
                                       I left Enron Global Finance about a year later in early October
                                       2000.
                                          I understand that this subcommittee——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. I am sorry to interrupt you, Mr. Sefton. You
                                       probably want to pull that microphone—raise it up a little bit.
                                       There you go. And get that as close to you as possible. Thank you,
                                       sir.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I understand that this subcommittee would like to
                                       discuss with me today certain matters relating to my time in Enron
                                       Global Finance. Please note that it has been over a year since I
                                       worked at Enron. That as a former employee I do not have access
                                       to my own Enron documents, and have not had access since I left
                                       the company, and that I have had a limited amount of time to pre-
                                       pare for this hearing.
                                          That said, I look forward to answering your questions today to
                                       the best of my ability.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you, Mr. Sefton. We will be mindful of
                                       those concerns.
                                          Mr. Rogers, do you have an opening statement, sir?
                                                                   TESTIMONY OF REX R. ROGERS
                                         Mr. ROGERS. I just have a short comment. Good morning, Mr.
                                       Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Good morning, sir.
                                         Mr. ROGERS. I do not have a long prepared statement but want
                                       to thank the committee for inviting me here today. For the past
                                       161⁄2 years, I have been employed as an attorney for Enron Corp,
                                       currently managing several corporate attorneys in the fields of em-
                                       ployment law, environmental law, information and technology, in-
                                       tellectual property, securities, mergers and acquisitions, and gen-
                                       eral corporate matters. I have neither a background nor expertise
                                       in accounting matters.
                                         Over the past several months I have cooperated fully with the
                                       Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering attorneys in preparation of the Powers
                                       Report, with the FBI who interviewed me on several issues, and
                                       with your staff members only a week ago. Now I hope to be able




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00019   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 20 ===
                                                                                          16

                                       to assist the members in your inquiry of Enron Corp and am pre-
                                       pared to answer any and all of your questions.
                                         Thank you.
                                         [The prepared statement of Rex R. Rogers follows:]
                                       PREPARED STATEMENT OF REX R. ROGERS, VICE PRESIDENT AND ASSOCIATE GENERAL
                                                             COUNSEL, ENRON CORPORATION
                                         Mr. Chairman: I do not have a prepared statement, but want to thank the Com-
                                       mittee for inviting me here today.
                                         For the past sixteen and one-half years I have been employed as an attorney for
                                       Enron, now managing several corporate attorneys in the fields of employment law,
                                       environmental law, information and technology, intellectual property, securities,
                                       mergers and acquisitions, and general corporate matters. I neither have a back-
                                       ground nor expertise in accounting matters.
                                         Over the past several months I have cooperated fully with the Wilmer, Cutler &
                                       Pickering attorneys in preparation of the Powers Report; with the FBI who inter-
                                       viewed me on several issues; and with your staff members only a week ago. Now
                                       I hope to be able to assist the Members in your inquiry of Enron Corp. and am pre-
                                       pared to respond to any questions.
                                         Thank you.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you, Mr. Rogers. We do appreciate your
                                       cooperation.
                                         Mr. Derrick, do you have an opening statement, sir?
                                                           TESTIMONY OF JAMES V. DERRICK, JR.
                                         Mr. DERRICK. Yes, I do, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. We can hear you, and, please, you have 5 min-
                                       utes to make your opening statement, if you choose to.
                                         Mr. DERRICK. Good morning to each of you. I am Jim Derrick,
                                       and I, too, am pleased to be here with you today to answer any
                                       questions you may have for me.
                                         From the summer of 1991 until March 1 of this year, I had the
                                       great privilege of serving as the General Counsel for Enron Corp,
                                       and as a member of a legal team of more than 200 women and men
                                       for whom I had, and still have, the utmost respect and admiration.
                                       I graduated from the University of Texas School of Law in 1970,
                                       had the honor of serving as judicial clerk to the Honorable Homer
                                       Thornberry of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Ju-
                                       dicial Circuit, and then I practiced law at Vinson & Elkins for 20
                                       years until I was requested by Enron Corp, more than a decade
                                       ago, to become its General Counsel.
                                         First, I commend you in your efforts to examine the tragedy that
                                       has befallen Enron, so that the lessons learned here may help oth-
                                       ers avoid similar misfortune.
                                         Second, I wish to express my sincerest heartfelt sympathy to
                                       those members of the Enron family who have lost their jobs and
                                       suffered financially and otherwise, and to their loved ones who
                                       have also been affected. I also want to acknowledge with great
                                       gratitude the ongoing efforts of the more than 20,000 women and
                                       men who are still working at Enron and its affiliated companies.
                                         Finally, while, of course, I can’t anticipate all of the questions
                                       that you will want to ask me today, I do want to address very brief-
                                       ly the question that some of you have alluded to in previous hear-
                                       ings as to why we did not immediately institute a complete forensic
                                       investigation, as contrasted with a preliminary investigation, into
                                       the concerns expressed in the letter received by Mr. Kenneth L.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00020   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 21 ===
                                                                                          17

                                       Lay last August, utilizing firms that had no involvement in the
                                       transactions in question.
                                          When Mr. Lay received the August letter, we took the concerns
                                       expressed in it very seriously. We wanted to ascertain, as promptly
                                       as practical, whether the facts contained in the letter warranted a
                                       full-scale, forensic-type investigation. Because of the seriousness of
                                       the allegations, we believed it best to engage an outside firm to
                                       make this determination, rather than to rely on an internal in-
                                       quiry.
                                          To have turned to firms with no knowledge of these complex
                                       transactions would necessarily have required them, we believed, to
                                       expend a very significant amount of time getting up to speed before
                                       they could provide us with recommendations. We turned, therefore,
                                       to Vinson & Elkins, a firm that possessed the institutional knowl-
                                       edge to commence the preliminary investigation quickly, and a firm
                                       that is widely regarded as one of the world’s very best legal institu-
                                       tions.
                                          Andersen, Enron’s independent accounting firm at that time, was
                                       widely regarded as one of the world’s foremost accounting institu-
                                       tions. That firm, we believed, had knowledge of the transactions
                                       and of the company, had repeatedly certified Enron’s financial
                                       statements, and had represented to the company’s Audit and Com-
                                       pliance Committee that it was comfortable with, and had signed off
                                       on, the company’s financial disclosures.
                                          To have immediately engaged another accounting firm to exam-
                                       ine the allegations contained in the August letter, without first
                                       doing a preliminary investigation of the substance of the allega-
                                       tions, including Andersen’s position on them, would have been
                                       seen, we believed, in the context of the matters as they existed
                                       back in August, as an extraordinary act.
                                          As we have seen from our experience, when we did turn in Octo-
                                       ber to an accounting firm and a law firm that had had no involve-
                                       ment in the transactions, it required them, despite their good faith
                                       Herculean efforts, several months to produce a report, and even
                                       now there seem to be a number of issues in respect of which the
                                       correct accounting and legal answers to these extraordinarily com-
                                       plex issues remain a matter of judgment.
                                          Of course, had I been blessed with the gift of clairvoyance, had
                                       I been permitted to gaze into the future and foresee the events that
                                       would unfold in respect of Andersen, I would have advocated the
                                       choosing of another path back in August. But that was a gift that
                                       I was not given.
                                          The decisions in which I participated had to be, and were, made
                                       in the context of the matters as they then existed. They were made
                                       in absolute good faith, with the sincere intent of ascertaining by
                                       means of a prompt preliminary investigation conducted by a truly
                                       world-class law firm, whether a broader investigation, including
                                       the engagement of another accounting firm, was warranted.
                                          Members of the committee, I very much appreciate your accord-
                                       ing me the time to make these remarks, and I look forward to an-
                                       swering the questions you have for me today to the best of my abil-
                                       ity and recollection.
                                          Thank you very much.
                                          [The prepared statement of James V. Derrick, Jr. follows:]




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00021   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 22 ===
                                                                                          18
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF JAMES V. DERRICK, JR., FORMER GENERAL COUNSEL,
                                                                   ENRON CORPORATION
                                          Good morning, Congressmen. I’m Jim Derrick, and I’m pleased to be here to an-
                                       swer the questions you may have for me.
                                          From the summer of 1991 until March 1 of this year, I had the great privilege
                                       of serving as the General Counsel of Enron Corp. and as a member of a legal team
                                       of more than 200 women and men for whom I had, and still have, the utmost re-
                                       spect and admiration. I graduated from the University of Texas School of Law in
                                       1970, served as judicial clerk to the Honorable Homer Thornberry of the United
                                       States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Judicial Circuit, and then practiced law at Vin-
                                       son & Elkins for 20 years until I was asked by Enron Corp., more than a decade
                                       ago, to become its General Counsel.
                                          First, I commend you in your efforts to examine the tragedy that has befallen
                                       Enron so that the lessons learned here may help others avoid similar misfortune.
                                          Second, I wish to express my sincerest heartfelt sympathy to those members of
                                       the Enron family who have lost their jobs and suffered financially and otherwise,
                                       and to their loved ones who have also been affected. I also want to acknowledge
                                       with gratitude the ongoing efforts of the more than 20,000 women and men who are
                                       still working at Enron and its affiliated companies.
                                          Finally, while I can’t anticipate all the questions you will ask today, I do want
                                       to address briefly the question that some of you have alluded to in previous hearings
                                       as to why we did not immediately institute a complete forensic investigation—as
                                       contrasted with a preliminary investigation—into the concerns expressed in the let-
                                       ter received by Mr. Kenneth L. Lay last August, utilizing firms that had no involve-
                                       ment in the transactions in question.
                                          When Mr. Lay received the August letter, we took the concerns expressed in it
                                       very seriously. We wanted to ascertain, as promptly as practical, whether the facts
                                       contained in the letter warranted a full-scale, forensic-type investigation. Because
                                       of the seriousness of the allegations, we believed it best to engage an outside firm
                                       to make this determination, rather than to rely on an internal inquiry. To have
                                       turned to outside firms with no knowledge of these complex transactions would nec-
                                       essarily have required them, we believed, to expend a very significant amount of
                                       time getting up to speed before they could provide us with recommendations. There-
                                       fore, we turned to Vinson & Elkins, a firm that possessed the institutional knowl-
                                       edge to commence the preliminary investigation quickly and that is widely regarded
                                       as one of the world’s very best legal institutions.
                                          Andersen, Enron’s independent accounting firm at the time, was widely regarded
                                       as one of the world’s foremost accounting institutions. The firm, we believed, had
                                       knowledge of the transactions and of the company, had repeatedly certified Enron’s
                                       financial statements, and had represented to the Company’s Audit and Compliance
                                       Committee that it was comfortable with the Company’s financial disclosures. To
                                       have immediately engaged another accounting firm to examine the allegations con-
                                       tained in the August letter without first doing a preliminary investigation of the
                                       substance of the allegations, including ascertaining Andersen’s position on them, I
                                       believe would have been seen, in the context of matters as they existed back in Au-
                                       gust, as an extraordinary act.
                                          As we have seen from our experience, when we did turn in October to an account-
                                       ing firm and a law firm that had had no involvement in the transactions in ques-
                                       tion, it required them, despite their good faith Herculean efforts, several months to
                                       produce a report, and even now there seem to be a number of issues in respect of
                                       which the correct accounting and legal answers to these extraordinarily complex
                                       issues remain a matter of judgment.
                                          Of course, had I been blessed with the gift of clairvoyance, had I been permitted
                                       to gaze into the future and foresee the events that would unfold in respect of Ander-
                                       sen, I would have advocated the choosing of another path last August. But that was
                                       a gift I was not given. The decisions in which I participated had to be, and were,
                                       made in the context as matters then existed. They were made in absolute good faith,
                                       with the sincere intent of ascertaining by means of a prompt preliminary investiga-
                                       tion conducted by a world class law firm whether a broader investigation, including
                                       the engagement of another accounting firm, was warranted.
                                          I very much appreciate your according me the time to make these remarks, Con-
                                       gressmen. I am ready to answer your questions to the best of my ability and recol-
                                       lection. Thank you.
                                           Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you.
                                           Mr. Dilg, do you have an opening statement?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00022   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 23 ===
                                                                                          19
                                                                   TESTIMONY OF JOSEPH C. DILG
                                         Mr. DILG. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
                                         Mr. DILG. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
                                       committee. My name is Joe Dilg. I am the Managing Partner of
                                       Vinson & Elkins. My partner, Ron Astin, is here to assist me—to
                                       assist the committee in responding to its questions. We decided, to
                                       economize on time, that I would give the opening statement on be-
                                       half of both of us.
                                         Vinson & Elkins, which was founded in 1917, is now an inter-
                                       national law firm. We have offices worldwide with approximately
                                       850 attorneys. Although Mr. Astin and I have each personally
                                       worked on many Enron matters, we were directly involved in only
                                       part of the firm’s work for Enron. We are testifying today only to
                                       our own personal knowledge.
                                         Since Enron’s bankruptcy, there have been reports and state-
                                       ments that have inaccurately described the role Vinson & Elkins
                                       played in the advice we gave to Enron. We look forward to respond-
                                       ing to your questions, because we are confident a full exploration
                                       of the facts will show that our firm has met all of its professional
                                       responsibilities.
                                         First, let me say that the lawyers of Vinson & Elkins are greatly
                                       saddened by the financial collapse of Enron. Many outstanding and
                                       decent people who worked at Enron and their families have been
                                       greatly harmed. Likewise, many Enron investors have unfortu-
                                       nately lost a great deal of money. Many cities like Houston will be
                                       harmed by the loss of the very significant business and civic
                                       achievements of Enron.
                                         Our work for Enron consisted of a large number of specific
                                       projects for which we were selected by the Enron legal department.
                                       Enron listed in its bankruptcy filing hundreds of law firms as hav-
                                       ing represented Enron. Enron was a significant client for many
                                       major law firms.
                                         Enron’s legal affairs were directed by a highly sophisticated in-
                                       house legal department of approximately 250 lawyers. Enron re-
                                       cruited and employed experienced, highly capable, well qualified at-
                                       torneys, many of whom had previously practiced in large law firms.
                                       Pursuant to Enron corporate policy, Vinson & Elkins, as well as all
                                       other outside counsel employed by Enron, were employed by and
                                       directed to interface with Enron’s legal department, not Enron’s ex-
                                       ecutives.
                                         Despite our sadness over the collapse of Enron, we remain proud
                                       to have served as Enron’s counsel in many matters. Our represen-
                                       tation of Enron provided interesting and challenging legal work on
                                       highly visible transactions and other matters. It is a pleasure to
                                       work with their highly qualified in-house counsel.
                                         In representing Enron, our lawyers worked closely with the
                                       world’s leading investment banking firms, commercial banks, and
                                       other major law firms. We provided Enron with quality legal serv-
                                       ices, and we did so professionally and ethically.
                                         Much of the committee’s attention and the media’s coverage of
                                       the relationship between Enron and Vinson & Elkins has focused
                                       on the preliminary review conducted by Vinson & Elkins into alle-




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00023   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 24 ===
                                                                                          20

                                       gations made by an Enron Vice President, Ms. Sherron Watkins.
                                       We are pleased to have the opportunity to discuss that matter.
                                          Ms. Watkins indeed raised serious issues. Contrary to some pub-
                                       lic reports and the implication of previous statements made in
                                       hearings conducted by this committee, Vinson & Elkins did not ad-
                                       vise Enron that there were no problems. Our written and oral re-
                                       ports pointed out significant issues, including the credit problem in
                                       the Raptor vehicles, the aggressiveness of the accounting, conflicts
                                       of interest, litigation risks, and the risk of credibility-harming
                                       media attention.
                                          The report did conclude that no further investigation was nec-
                                       essary because the appropriate senior-level officers of Enron were,
                                       at that time, fully aware of the primary concerns expressed by Ms.
                                       Watkins, and, in fact, were taking actions to address them.
                                          Mr. Fastow had already resigned from his position with the LJM
                                       partnerships, eliminating the conflict of interest issues raised by
                                       Ms. Watkins in her letter, and earlier by Mr. McMahon to Mr.
                                       Skilling. Prior to the delivery of our final written report, the com-
                                       pany had terminated the Raptor entities, which were the primary
                                       focus of Ms. Watkins’ concerns. The company reported in its earn-
                                       ings release for the third quarter of 2001 a loss of more than $500
                                       million associated with such termination.
                                          The bankruptcy of Enron in December of 2001, approximately 6
                                       weeks after we delivered our written report, appears to have been
                                       due to the convergence in the fall of 2001 of a number of factors,
                                       many of which related to investment decisions made years before
                                       in current events outside of Enron’s control.
                                          No one can deny that the adverse publicity associated with the
                                       related party transactions and the accounting errors related to the
                                       November restatement announcements contributed to the loss of
                                       confidence Enron experienced in the energy trading and financial
                                       markets. This confidence was critical to the continued success of
                                       Enron’s trading operations which accounted for a significant por-
                                       tion of their business.
                                          With regard to the related party transactions, it is important to
                                       consider the role of legal counsel. If a transaction is not illegal and
                                       has been approved by the appropriate levels of corporation’s man-
                                       agement, lawyers, whether inside corporate counsel or with an out-
                                       side firm, may appropriately provide the requisite legal advice and
                                       opinions about legal issues relating to the transactions.
                                          In doing so, the lawyers are not approving of the business deci-
                                       sions that were made by their clients. Likewise, lawyers are not
                                       passing on the accounting treatment of the transactions.
                                          In conclusion, I want to make it very clear that we are confident
                                       that Vinson & Elkins fully met its ethical and professional respon-
                                       sibilities in connection with our representation of Enron. We are
                                       pleased to assist in the committee’s deliberations and are happy to
                                       answer your questions within the constraints of our professional re-
                                       sponsibility to our clients.
                                          Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
                                          [The prepared statement of Joseph C. Dilg follows:]




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00024   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 25 ===
                                                                                          21
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF JOSEPH C. DILG, MANAGING PARTNER, VINSON & ELKINS
                                          Good morning Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. My name is Joe
                                       Dilg. I am the Managing Partner of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. Vinson & Elkins, found-
                                       ed in 1917, is now an international law firm of approximately 850 lawyers. My part-
                                       ner Ron Astin is with me to assist in answering the Committee’s questions.
                                          From 1991 until December 2001, I served as the Vinson & Elkins partner pri-
                                       marily responsible for coordinating the firm’s relationship with Enron. In this role,
                                       I coordinated much of the legal work performed by Vinson & Elkins for Enron
                                       through all of our offices. Although Mr. Astin and I each personally worked on many
                                       Enron matters, we were directly involved in only part of Vinson & Elkins’ work for
                                       Enron.
                                          This statement, as well as the testimony that Mr. Astin and I will provide, is
                                       based solely upon our individual personal knowledge and best recollection of the
                                       events. We cannot purport to know and thus be able to speak to all of the knowledge
                                       and information possessed by all lawyers at our firm.
                                          Since Enron’s bankruptcy, there have been reports and statements that inac-
                                       curately describe the role Vinson & Elkins played and the advice we gave. We look
                                       forward to responding to questions as fully as possible because we are confident a
                                       full exploration of the facts will show that our firm fully met its professional obliga-
                                       tions.
                                          First, let me say that the lawyers of Vinson & Elkins are greatly saddened by
                                       the financial collapse of Enron. Many outstanding and decent people who worked
                                       at Enron and their families have been greatly harmed. Likewise, many Enron inves-
                                       tors have unfortunately lost a great deal of money. Many cities like Houston will
                                       be harmed by the loss of the very significant business and civic contributions of
                                       Enron and its employees.
                                          Our work for Enron consisted of a large number of specific projects for which we
                                       were selected by Enron’s legal department. In the Enron bankruptcy filings, Enron
                                       listed more than 400 law firms as having represented Enron. Enron was a signifi-
                                       cant client for a number of major law firms.
                                          Enron’s legal affairs were directed by a highly sophisticated in-house legal depart-
                                       ment consisting of approximately 250 attorneys. Enron recruited and employed ex-
                                       perienced, highly capable, and well qualified attorneys, many of whom had pre-
                                       viously practiced in large law firms.
                                          Pursuant to Enron corporate policy, Vinson & Elkins and other outside attorneys
                                       were employed by and directed to interface with Enron’s legal department, not
                                       Enron’s executives.
                                          Despite our sadness over the collapse of Enron, we remain proud to have served
                                       as Enron’s counsel in many matters. Our representation of Enron provided inter-
                                       esting and challenging legal work on highly visible matters, and it was a pleasure
                                       to work with their very able in-house counsel. In representing Enron, our lawyers
                                       worked closely with many of the world’s leading investment banking firms, commer-
                                       cial banks, and law firms. We provided Enron with quality legal services, and we
                                       fully met our professional and ethical obligations in rendering those services.
                                          Much of the Committee’s attention and the media’s coverage of the relationship
                                       between Enron and Vinson & Elkins has focused on a preliminary review conducted
                                       by Vinson & Elkins into allegations made by an Enron Vice President, Ms. Sherron
                                       Watkins, in a letter and supplemental materials delivered to Mr. Kenneth Lay in
                                       August of 2001. We are pleased to have an opportunity to discuss that matter.
                                          Ms. Watkins raised serious issues. Contrary to some public reports and the impli-
                                       cation of some previous statements made in hearings conducted by this Committee,
                                       Vinson & Elkins did not advise Enron that there were no problems. Our written
                                       report pointed out significant issues, including the credit problem in the Raptor ve-
                                       hicles, the aggressiveness of the accounting, conflicts of interest, litigation risks, and
                                       the risk of credibility-harming media attention.
                                          The report did conclude that no further investigation was necessary because the
                                       appropriate senior level officers of Enron were fully aware of the primary concerns
                                       Ms. Watkins wanted Mr. Lay to address—and had in fact already addressed them.
                                       Mr. Fastow had resigned from his position with the LJM partnerships, eliminating
                                       the conflict of interest problems raised by Ms. Watkins and earlier by Mr.
                                       McMahon. Prior to the delivery of our final written report, the Company terminated
                                       the Raptor entities which were the primary focus of Ms. Watkins’ concerns. The
                                       Company reported in its earnings release for the third quarter of 2001 a loss of
                                       more than $500 million attributable to the termination.
                                          The bankruptcy of Enron in December of 2001, approximately six weeks after we
                                       delivered our written report, has been the subject of numerous published analyses
                                       which have made clear that Enron faced very significant business challenges. Enron




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00025   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 26 ===
                                                                                          22
                                       had made major and highly publicized investments in the broadband, water, inter-
                                       national infrastructure, and retail electric businesses, all of which had resulted in
                                       significant illiquid capital investments and large losses for the company. The price
                                       of Enron’s common stock had already declined approximately 60 percent from Au-
                                       gust 2000 to August 2001, when Mr. Skilling’s resignation created even more uncer-
                                       tainty about the company. At the same time, Enron’s online trading through Enron
                                       Online and the related dependency on trade credit from its counter-parties was ex-
                                       periencing explosive growth.
                                          In hindsight, there appears to be a consensus that these events, coupled with im-
                                       pending maturities of a significant amount of debt and the turmoil in the financial
                                       markets created by the tragic events of September 11, 2001, placed Enron in an ex-
                                       tremely vulnerable position in the fall of 2001. No one can deny, however, that the
                                       adverse publicity associated with the related party transactions and the accounting
                                       errors related to the November restatement announcements contributed to the loss
                                       of confidence Enron experienced in energy trading and financial markets. This con-
                                       fidence was critical to the continued success of Enron’s trading operations, which
                                       accounted for a significant portion of Enron’s business.
                                          With regard to the related party transactions, it is important to consider the role
                                       of legal counsel. If a transaction is not illegal and it has been approved by the ap-
                                       propriate levels of a corporation’s management, lawyers, whether corporate counsel
                                       or with an outside firm, may appropriately provide the requisite legal advice and
                                       opinions about legal issues relevant to the transactions. In doing so, lawyers are not
                                       approving the business judgment of their clients. Likewise, lawyers are not respon-
                                       sible for the accounting treatment of the transactions.
                                          In conclusion, I want to make it very clear that we are confident that Vinson &
                                       Elkins fully met its professional responsibilities in connection with our representa-
                                       tion of Enron. We are pleased to assist in the Committee’s deliberations and are
                                       happy to answer your questions, within the constraints of our professional respon-
                                       sibilities to our clients.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you, Mr. Dilg.
                                         Mr. Astin, I understand that Mr. Dilg’s opening statement spoke
                                       for you as well?
                                         Mr. ASTIN. That is correct, Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Very well.
                                         Ms. St. Clair, do you have an opening statement?

                                                             TESTIMONY OF CAROL L. ST. CLAIR
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. Yes, I do.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. Good morning. Mr. Chairman, and members of
                                       the subcommittee, my name is Carol St. Clair. I start——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. I am going to ask you to move that white note-
                                       book and then pull the microphone front and center there and get
                                       it nice and close. Thanks.
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. I started at Enron in 1994 working for the Liq-
                                       uids Group in the Legal Department of Enron North America Cor-
                                       poration. In 1995, after the Liquids Group was sold, I transferred
                                       to Enron North America’s Finance Group. I worked in Enron North
                                       America’s Finance Group until March 1999, when I transferred to
                                       the Financial Trading Group of Enron North America, where I re-
                                       mained until June of 2000.
                                          In January 2001, after a 6-month maternity leave, I joined Enron
                                       North America’s Power Trading Group, which along with the Gas
                                       Trading Group was sold in February in Enron’s bankruptcy pro-
                                       ceeding.
                                          As you know, Mr. Chairman, I am appearing this morning volun-
                                       tarily. To date, I have fully and freely cooperated with the sub-
                                       committee’s investigation, and intend to continue to do so. Mr.
                                       Chairman, I will, to the best of my ability, be glad to answer ques-




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00026   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 27 ===
                                                                                           23

                                       tions you or any of the members of the subcommittee may have
                                       this morning. Thank you.
                                          [The prepared statement of Carol St. Clair follows:]
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF CAROL ST. CLAIR, FORMER ASSISTANT GENERAL COUNSEL,
                                                          ETC RESOURCES GROUP, ENRON CORPORATION
                                          Good morning. Mr. Chairman and Members of the subcommittee, my name is
                                       Carol St. Clair. Last month, I accepted a new position as a trading attorney in the
                                       Legal Department of UBS Warburg Energy, LLC after working at Enron Corpora-
                                       tion for more than seven years. I started at Enron in 1994, working for the Liquids
                                       Group in the legal department of Enron North America Corporation. In 1995, after
                                       the Liquids Group was sold, I transferred to Enron North America’s Finance Group.
                                       I worked in the Finance Group until March 1999 when I transferred to Enron North
                                       America’s Financial Trading Group where I served until June 2000. In January
                                       2001, after a six month maternity leave, I joined Enron North America’s Power
                                       Trading Group.
                                          As you know, Mr. Chairman, I am appearing this morning voluntarily. To date,
                                       I have fully and freely cooperated with the subcommittee’s investigation and intend
                                       to continue to do so. Mr. Chairman, I will, to the best of my ability, be glad to an-
                                       swer questions you or any other members of the subcommittee may have.
                                          Thank you.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. We thank you, Ms. St. Clair, and appreciate
                                       your cooperation.
                                         The Chair recognizes himself for 10 minutes for purposes of in-
                                       quiry. And let me address my first question to Mr. Dilg. Mr. Dilg,
                                       you are the Vinson & Elkins engagement partner for the Enron ac-
                                       count, and you have worked on the account since 1990, when Jim
                                       Derrick handed over the account to you when he left V&E to be-
                                       come Enron’s General Counsel.
                                         Reportedly, Enron is V&E’s single largest client. V&E billed
                                       Enron over $36 million in 2001 and over $150 million during the
                                       past 5 years. By comparison, Arthur Andersen billed $54 million to
                                       Enron in 2001. V&E’s partners earned a reported average annual
                                       income of $655,000. Your first year associates, straight out of law
                                       school, salary starts at $122,000 per year.
                                         In August of 2001, Jim Derrick called and asked you to look into
                                       allegations regarding accounting improprieties and conflicts of in-
                                       terest at Enron. Sherron Watkins asked that Enron investigate her
                                       concerns and specifically recommended that V&E not be used, be-
                                       cause V&E had done much of the legal work on the problematic
                                       transactions.
                                         Nevertheless, you and Mr. Derrick concluded that V&E could
                                       conduct a review of Ms. Watkins’ allegations. In brief, V&E took on
                                       the task of investigating its own work. The question is: was there
                                       not an inherent and obvious conflict of interest for V&E in taking
                                       on the investigation?
                                         Mr. DILG. No, sir, there was not a conflict of interest in Vinson
                                       & Elkins undertaking the investigation. Ms. Watkins raised a num-
                                       ber of issues in her letter. Her primary concern was Mr. Lay being
                                       aware of the business issue that faced Enron that there were large
                                       losses in the Raptor partnerships that are large obligations under
                                       the derivatives written with the Raptor partnerships that would be
                                       backed up by Enron stock, and the issue of how to deal with that
                                       with the Enron shareholders going forward as far as the dilution
                                       that would occur.
                                         She raised issues of the conflict of interest created by Mr.
                                       Fastow’s participation in LJM and a number of other issues. She




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002    Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00027   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 28 ===
                                                                                          24

                                       mentioned in her letter that Vinson & Elkins had written true sale
                                       opinions on some of the transactions, and, therefore, would have a
                                       conflict, but her allegations did not address the legal work provided
                                       by Vinson & Elkins. We were not being asked to review our own
                                       work.
                                          Mr. Derrick was aware that we had previously represented
                                       Enron on some of the transactions that she was talking about, but
                                       the appropriate standard, I believe, is whether or not our own in-
                                       terest would materially interfere with our work. We did not feel
                                       that we had a conflict of interest based on what we were being
                                       asked to do.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Well, yes, but you certainly had an interest in
                                       keeping the client. And wouldn’t it seem to be the case that had
                                       V&E reviewed its own work and/or had V&E sought outside coun-
                                       sel to review its own work, that outside counsel recommended to
                                       V&E that—or advised Enron, I should say, that V&E had given it
                                       less than adequate counsel, that it certainly might have threatened
                                       your interest in keeping your largest client, would it not?
                                          Mr. DILG. Again, we were not being asked to review our own
                                       work. We were being asked to conduct a preliminary review to see
                                       whether a further, more extensive forensic review was necessary.
                                       Ms. Watkins was raising matters that were well known to a num-
                                       ber of executives in the company and transactions that had been
                                       approved by the Board of Directors of the company.
                                          We were not being asked to review the quality of the legal work
                                       on any of the transactions, and I am not sure that there has been
                                       any—in any of the materials that I have seen any allegations that
                                       the legal work in putting the transactions together had any infir-
                                       mities.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Well, here is what the Powers Report notes.
                                       ‘‘The result of the V&E review was largely predetermined by the
                                       scope and the nature of the investigation and the process employed.
                                       The Powers Committee identified the most serious problems in the
                                       Raptor transactions only after a detailed examination of the rel-
                                       evant transaction, and, most importantly, discussions with our ac-
                                       counting advisors, both steps that Enron determined and V&E ac-
                                       cepted would not be part of V&E’s investigation.’’
                                          ‘‘With the exception of Watkins, V&E spoke only with very senior
                                       people at Enron and Andersen. Those people, with few exceptions,
                                       have substantial professionalism and personal stakes in the mat-
                                       ters under review. The scope and process of the investigation ap-
                                       pear to have been structured with less skepticism than was needed
                                       to see through these particularly complex transactions.’’
                                          That is what Powers said, which is quite different from what you
                                       have just said. How would you respond to the Powers Report’s as-
                                       sertions?
                                          Mr. DILG. I think it is important to understand the difference in
                                       the scope and purpose of the special committee formed by the
                                       Board of Directors shortly after our report was delivered. It was in
                                       response to an SEC inquiry as well as derivative suits being filed
                                       against the company and had a much broader scope as far as look-
                                       ing at overall related party transactions.
                                          We were making a preliminary review of the matters raised by
                                       Ms. Watkins, which both in her letter and when we subsequently




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00028   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 29 ===
                                                                                          25

                                       interviewed her, primarily related to the Raptor transactions. I
                                       think that is consistent with what the Powers Report says that she
                                       told Mr. Lay. And to make sure that Mr. Lay, in coming back in
                                       as CEO, understood the serious business issues they had with the
                                       Raptor transactions.
                                          She raised questions as to the accounting. The company’s Audit
                                       Committee had chosen Arthur Andersen as their accountants. We
                                       wanted to make sure in our review that Arthur Andersen had the
                                       proper facts, that they had all of the facts that they needed to
                                       make the review, and that they were comfortable with their ac-
                                       counting decisions. But we were not in a position to second-guess
                                       Arthur Andersen’s ultimate professional judgment on the account-
                                       ing issues involved.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Well, you may not have been in a position to
                                       second-guess the details of the accounting firm, but you certainly
                                       had a responsibility to protect the company from liability, did you
                                       not? The company has faced 77 lawsuits as a result of these part-
                                       nerships and the demise of the company, and I can’t quite under-
                                       stand why it is that V&E would take the position that it didn’t
                                       have some responsibility to its client to examine the potential risk
                                       that these transactions imposed in terms of civil liability.
                                          Mr. DILG. I think we, both in our oral conversations with Mr.
                                       Derrick and Mr. Lay, and in our written report, pointed out the
                                       risk that these transactions posed in connection with shareholder
                                       litigation, as far as the ability of a potential plaintiff’s lawyer,
                                       etcetera, to paint these transactions in a very bad light. I think we
                                       picked up references that we had had in some of our interviews to
                                       bad cosmetics, if you will.
                                          Again, the focus of the review was to determine whether there
                                       were additional facts that were not known at that time that war-
                                       ranted further investigation. We did not find that any of the indi-
                                       viduals that Ms. Watkins said to check with to see if she was all
                                       wet had any additional facts, or felt that there were any additional
                                       facts that weren’t known at that time to make sure Mr. Lay knew
                                       how to address the transactions.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Well, let us talk about bad cosmetics. During
                                       the course of your inquiry, you interviewed Jeffrey McMahon. In
                                       the summary of Mr. McMahon’s first interview on August 30, 2001,
                                       with you, you note that he indicated that some bankers thought
                                       there might be linkage between investing in LJM and future busi-
                                       ness with Enron.
                                          In his second interview with you conducted on October 18, 2001,
                                       a few days after you submitted your report, Mr. McMahon told you
                                       of specific instances where investment bankers complained to him
                                       of being pressured to invest in LJM transactions, or were promised
                                       Enron business if they invested in LJM.
                                          Mr. McMahon identified specific institutions—First Union, Mer-
                                       rill Lynch, Deutsche Bank, Chase Bank—and specific bankers, in-
                                       cluding Paul Riddle, and provided the names of Enron employees
                                       who could provide additional information on this subject—Ben
                                       Glisan, Tim Despain, Ray Bowen, and Kelly Booth. This sub-
                                       committee has learned of other individual bankers who have com-
                                       plained.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00029   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 30 ===
                                                                                          26

                                          In your October 15, 2001, letter to Mr. Derrick, you wrote, ‘‘The
                                       second potential conflict of interest identified by several individuals
                                       was that investors in LJM may have perceived that their invest-
                                       ment was required to establish or maintain other business rela-
                                       tions with Enron. Although no investors in LJM were interviewed,
                                       both Mr. Fastow and Mr. McMahon stated unequivocally that they
                                       had told potential investors that there was no tie-in between LJM
                                       investment and Enron business.’’
                                          Your description of what you had learned appears to be highly
                                       misleading. Mr. McMahon clearly indicated in his first report that
                                       some banks—that there was a linkage, and that someone at Enron
                                       had made these promises. Presumably, given his position, it was
                                       Mr. Fastow. But you make it appear as if they are both shooting
                                       down this allegation when, in fact, it was Mr. McMahon who raised
                                       the allegation. And he clearly had names of individuals and banks
                                       as set forth in the summary of the second interview.
                                          Based on the facts you knew at the time you submitted the re-
                                       port, why isn’t your description misleading?
                                          Mr. DILG. I don’t believe our description is misleading, Mr.
                                       Greenwood. We did want to alert the company to the concerns
                                       raised, I think both by Ms. Watkins and Mr. McMahon, that they
                                       had heard that there was linkage. Mr. McMahon told us that he
                                       had told any banker that asked him that there was no linkage. Mr.
                                       Fastow also adamantly denied any linkage.
                                          The concerns we heard raised were some people within invest-
                                       ment banking and commercial banking institutions grumbling be-
                                       cause they didn’t get deals that they thought they were supposed
                                       to get because they invested in LJM, which indicated——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Did you ask those bankers if, in fact, they had
                                       been made promises or had threats made against them?
                                          Mr. DILG. We did not.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Why is that?
                                          Mr. DILG. We did not interview anyone outside the company at
                                       this point in time.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. They just took the words of the—Sherron Wat-
                                       kins has these allegations about Fastow and other people wearing
                                       two hats, conflicts of interest. You go to them and basically say,
                                       ‘‘Do you have conflicts of interest? There are allegations that bank-
                                       ers felt that you were squeezing them on these deals. Did you do
                                       that?’’ They say no. You go to the bankers and say, ‘‘We heard you
                                       had complaints. What was your experience with Fastow that
                                       caused you to complain?’’ You didn’t do that?
                                          Mr. DILG. We didn’t interview anyone outside of the company in
                                       connection with our preliminary review. Mr. McMahon had indi-
                                       cated to us in the initial interview that he was not aware of any
                                       situation where a banking arrangement looked unusual. Again,
                                       both Mr. McMahon and Mr. Fastow denied there was any linkage,
                                       or at least Mr. Fastow denied there was any linkage. Mr. McMahon
                                       said he told the banks there was no linkage.
                                          His information that he gave to us after we had submitted our
                                       report was more detailed. Within I think a week—I am not positive
                                       on the date—but within a very short period of time after that inter-
                                       view, Mr. McMahon was the chief financial officer of the company
                                       in charge of all of the banking relationships.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00030   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 31 ===
                                                                                          27

                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. My time has expired. But did you ask Mr.
                                       McMahon for the names of these individuals that he complained
                                       about to begin with, in the first interview?
                                          Mr. DILG. I can’t recall that we did.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Didn’t that raise any red flags with you that
                                       would cause you—I mean, I am trying to understand why the first
                                       thing you wouldn’t have done, the next thing you would have done
                                       was say, ‘‘Oh, my God,’’ pick up the phone, call these bankers, and
                                       say, ‘‘I am supposed to protect this company from liability, and
                                       there is a lot of liability that could result from these allegations if
                                       these allegations are true.’’
                                          I don’t understand why you didn’t feel a responsibility to Enron
                                       and stockholders to make those calls right away and find out what
                                       was really happening, not just taking Andy Fastow’s word for it.
                                          Mr. DILG. You have to understand, Mr. Chairman, that in the
                                       context that the preliminary review was conducted, Mr. Skilling
                                       had just resigned from the company. There was a great deal of
                                       speculation in the market and with Enron’s counter parties as to
                                       the reasons for Mr. Skilling’s resignation. We were trying to de-
                                       velop the facts that we could by talking with people inside the com-
                                       pany so as not to create lots of speculation and rumors until we
                                       knew what we could report to Mr. Derrick.
                                          Again, the people that we interviewed indicated that they had
                                       seen no business arrangements that were contrary to Enron’s best
                                       interest coming out of this, or any indication that banks were get-
                                       ting more favorable deals than they should have gotten due to a
                                       linkage with LJM. And the person in charge of the banking rela-
                                       tionships at that point in time denied there was any linkage.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Well, it sounds like what you are saying is that
                                       the preliminary review also had, as part of its purpose, not just a
                                       preliminary review but you didn’t—this was to be a hushed review
                                       because of the concern that Skilling’s departure created a lack of
                                       confidence in the company. And if you took the review outside the
                                       walls of Enron, that to really get to the bottom of it, that it would
                                       have some negative short-term consequences for Enron when, in
                                       fact, what you might have done is prevented some very, very seri-
                                       ous long-term consequences.
                                          My time has expired. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
                                       Florida, Mr. Deutsch, for 10 minutes.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to read just
                                       a couple of sentences from Ms. Watkins’ letter. ‘‘Looking at the
                                       stock we swapped, I also don’t believe any other company would
                                       have entered into the equity derivative transaction with us at the
                                       same prices without substantial premiums from Enron. In other
                                       words, the $500 million in revenue in 2000 would have been much
                                       lower.’’
                                          Which is really the contention that I have said in terms of the
                                       fact that these transactions did not serve a business purpose. And
                                       if we accept her premise, that is the issue.
                                          And, you know, as I mentioned in the introduction, Mr. Derrick,
                                       if you can comment, you know, on the Rhythms transaction, just
                                       the structure of it, as a general partnership set up to sell back to
                                       Enron the stock—I mean, the outside—if they had done that with
                                       an investment bank there would be no question that they can do




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00031   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 32 ===
                                                                                          28

                                       it. But setting this up as an off balance sheet, were you personally
                                       involved with approving this or involved with understanding it?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. No, Congressman. I had no personal involvement
                                       in the structure. That would have been—in terms of the legal work
                                       with respect to that, that would have been done by the lawyers
                                       who I think at that time were in Enron North America. And, of
                                       course, the business aspects of that would have been handled by
                                       the business individuals who were part of structuring the trans-
                                       action, but I had no personal involvement in that.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. So you—again, we are trying—today’s hearing
                                       was—the purpose of sort of trying to, you know, have the top dogs,
                                       you know, in front of us. So it would not have come to your atten-
                                       tion. I mean, specifically, is there anyone here—you know, again,
                                       Mr. Astin, would you be aware of who would have approved this?
                                          And, Mr. Derrick, I mean, who specifically—so our staff at least
                                       can follow up. I mean, who specifically would have approved the
                                       structure of this transaction?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, from the Enron side, Congressman, I can’t
                                       say with certainty. I would think that it would have been Ms.
                                       Mordaunt or someone in the legal group in which she was involved
                                       who was working with Ms. Mordaunt.
                                          And let me make it clear that I was at the Executive Com-
                                       mittee—well, I am sorry. I was at the—I would have been at a
                                       Board meeting in which that was presented, so I don’t mean to say
                                       that I have not heard of this matter. But in terms of having any
                                       detailed knowledge about it, or having been personally involved in
                                       the structure of it, I was not.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Mr. Sefton, as a former General Counsel as well,
                                       I mean, are you aware of the—who approved this transaction, or
                                       any—or the structure of it?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. This transaction was completed before I started my
                                       position in Global Finance.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. And Mr. Astin?
                                          Mr. ASTIN. Congressman, I had a very limited role in providing
                                       some initial securities disclosure-related advice to Ms. Kristina
                                       Mordaunt, with regard to this transaction. I did not work on the
                                       structuring of it. I did review the first draft or so of a partnership
                                       agreement, just to——
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. So who at Vinson & Elkins would have approved
                                       this transaction?
                                          Mr. ASTIN. No one. We didn’t work on the transaction except as
                                       I have described.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. And would that be typical, that in-house counsel
                                       would have basically—so now we are looking for Mrs. Mordaunt,
                                       and our staff at least can question her. I mean, is she, on her own,
                                       the person who basically said—you know, gave it the, you know,
                                       legal Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval that it is okay. Mr. Der-
                                       rick?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, again, I don’t—specifically, with respect to
                                       this transaction, I don’t know, Congressman. Let me say under our
                                       corporate governance rules, every transaction that would have con-
                                       stituted a binding obligation on the part of Enron would have re-
                                       quired the signoff, and should have the initials of, the attorney who
                                       approved that transaction.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00032   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 33 ===
                                                                                          29

                                          Now, in many of our transactions, not literally every one, but in
                                       many of our transactions there would have been an outside firm
                                       also working with the in-house group. As Mr. Dilg just pointed out,
                                       Enron used a great many law firms. I don’t know whether another
                                       law firm was specifically involved in this transaction or not.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. All right. And, again, this is one of 4,000 partner-
                                       ships. It is one of the largest. It is not the largest. As you well
                                       know, you booked—or Enron booked a $390 million gain on the
                                       Rhythms stock. So it is not a small, you know, transaction. I mean,
                                       it—so I guess I—if you are not aware, you are not aware. You are
                                       not aware of any specific outside counsel that would have been in-
                                       volved in this transaction.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. No, I am not. But that is not to say that that infor-
                                       mation is not available. It certainly should be.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Do you understand this transaction and how it
                                       was set up?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. No, Congressman, I can’t explain the transaction,
                                       because, again, I had no personal involvement in it.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. I don’t know if I want to ask you to give a legal
                                       opinion, because maybe I can, you know, explain it a little bit. Let
                                       me go more specifically as part of this—Mr. Fastow, who obviously
                                       remained as the chief financial officer, was also the general part-
                                       ner. My understanding is that at the Board meeting it was the un-
                                       derstanding of the Board that he was not to receive any compensa-
                                       tion for his work as the general partner. Is that your under-
                                       standing as well?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, I would have to look at the minutes of that
                                       Board meeting specifically to truthfully answer that question.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Was there any objection to him receiving com-
                                       pensation as general partner to these types of transactions?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. The only Board meeting at which I was in attend-
                                       ance related to the LJM1 transaction, which I believe was the
                                       hedge of the Rhythms transaction. And I do believe that there was
                                       a discussion by Mr. Fastow of the proposed compensation structure
                                       and that attached to the minutes of that meeting would be a slide
                                       which does explain whatever was explained at the meeting with re-
                                       spect to his proposed compensation.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Were you aware of the conflict of interest role that
                                       Mr. Fastow had regarding his role in LJM partnerships?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Yes. And the very purpose of presenting that—
                                       well, let me say, as you undoubtedly know by now, under the
                                       Enron code of conduct, our code of ethics, conflicts of interest are
                                       not prohibited. It is provided—there is a procedure provided in the
                                       code of conduct that requires that a conflict of interest be presented
                                       to the chairman and chief executive officer. It actually is not re-
                                       quired to be presented to the Board, although in this case it was.
                                          And the very purpose of having that discussion, as I recall——
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. All right. So, really, you were trying to put in a
                                       meaningful system to put in place to guard against potential con-
                                       flicts of interest with Mr. Fastow.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Exactly. That is right.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. And it was a serious conflict that you expected
                                       and a suitable system was supposed to be in place?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00033   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 34 ===
                                                                                          30

                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, with respect to LJM1, I was not present at
                                       the Board meetings where the LJM2 structures were discussed. As
                                       I recall, LJM1, Congressman, was actually looked at as a—at the
                                       time as basically one transaction to put in place a hedge to protect
                                       the value of the company.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. How was the conflict system supposed to operate?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Under our code, any employee who has a conflict
                                       of interest is required to present that to the chairman and chief ex-
                                       ecutive officer. It is then up to that individual to make whatever
                                       decision he or she believes is appropriate. There is no formal re-
                                       quirement for it to be sent through——
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. I am asking questions because—again, I have 10
                                       minutes, so I really do need——
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I am sorry.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. [continuing] to go relatively quickly. Let me just
                                       ask you, in the LJM deals, there was a structure where there is
                                       a multi-name signature block. Why was that set into place? And,
                                       again, the specific information we have now is that it was not fol-
                                       lowed through on a continuous basis. That Mr. Skilling specifically
                                       did not sign, you know, continuously those approval sheets, and yet
                                       the transactions were approved.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I will have to defer, in large part, I think to the
                                       lawyers in the Enron Global Finance Group who were charged with
                                       that. I don’t recall having any specific involvement in setting up
                                       those approval sheets. And I don’t recall at the time that the
                                       Rhythms transaction was being discussed, Congressman, that there
                                       was such an approval sheet.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Did you understand the system that it was sup-
                                       posed to include these approval sheets?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. At the time of the Rhythms transaction, there was
                                       no approval sheet.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. What about LJM2?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. As LJM2 was developed, my understanding is that
                                       the Enron Global Finance Group, in conjunction with——
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. The bottom line is, did you know that these ap-
                                       proval sheets were part of the system that you had supposedly im-
                                       plemented to avoid conflict?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Yes, at some point.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Okay. And did you know that Mr. Skilling did not
                                       sign them on a continuous basis?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. My first awareness of that came in my conversa-
                                       tions with Mr. Mintz, who raised the issue that there was not con-
                                       temporaneous——
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. So who was guarding the store? Who was the cop
                                       watching what was going on? I mean, not internally, not exter-
                                       nally. I mean, you set up a system which apparently no one fol-
                                       lowed.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, I think that—I am not sure that that is cor-
                                       rect, Congressman. There was a system that was set up, I think,
                                       designed in good faith to deal with these issues. The question that
                                       everyone was looking at is: was the system appropriately adhered
                                       to? But that responsibility was allocated by the Board to Enron
                                       Global Finance Legal, as well as to our chief accounting officer and
                                       our chief risk officer.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00034   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 35 ===
                                                                                          31

                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Let me go back to the—do you have the chart
                                       again? Let me just go back to it. Just because, again, we are not—
                                       sometimes I just have found it easy to focus on the specific trans-
                                       action. I am going to do my best to try to explain this, that on the
                                       Rhythms transaction, as I said, the stock value went up about $390
                                       million is my understanding. Enron made a corporate decision to
                                       basically lock in the price, they wanted to buy it put to do that.
                                          Mr. Fastow set up the partnership to sell that put back to Enron.
                                       It was capitalized by Enron stock right here. As soon as he set up
                                       the general partnership, he took out a several million dollar gen-
                                       eral partnership fee. That was actually the first thing that he did.
                                          He then sold the put back—actually, the general partnership set
                                       up a swap as a subsidiary, which was actually done improperly, be-
                                       cause by taking out the general partnership fee it had less equity
                                       than was needed for a 3-percent set-aside. But they sold it back.
                                          The problem with the transaction is two things. One is the gen-
                                       eral partnership never could have made good on the put. I mean,
                                       basically, Enron bought a put from itself in this transaction. And,
                                       effectively, that is what occurred. And that is the point of what I
                                       am saying that we—that at least in my opinion this transaction is
                                       illegal. It is illegal because a business purpose is not there.
                                          The business purpose—the purpose, as far as I can see, is, No.
                                       1, to enrich Mr. Fastow as the general partner to take the fee, No.
                                       1. No. 2, to basically manipulate the stock price, because what you
                                       have done is you have booked the gain, the $390 million gain. The
                                       liability that that stock might go down is not listed as a liability
                                       anywhere.
                                          So this is the point, you know, of why it is legal and where the
                                       problem comes in—is that an outside auditor, or someone—the
                                       public, an analyst—looking at the books, unless they can get inside
                                       of this transaction, does not understand what occurred. And I can’t,
                                       you know, for the life of me—and no one—and I have used this
                                       chart with other people to try to come up with, why is this a legiti-
                                       mate transaction?
                                          What is legitimate about this, except maybe, you know, if this
                                       was, you know, Goldman Sachs, then it would be legitimate, be-
                                       cause they would be selling a put. But Mr. Fastow didn’t go to
                                       Goldman Sachs to buy the put. He bought the put from himself.
                                       And, in fact, what continues in this transaction is that it was cap-
                                       italized, as I said, by Enron stock, literally given by Enron stock,
                                       when both the Rhythms net and Enron stock went down without
                                       consideration.
                                          Enron then gave, at Mr. Fastow’s request, an additional—I be-
                                       lieve it is $150 million of additional stock to this general partner-
                                       ship without consideration. Without consideration. Without show-
                                       ing that as a liability on the balance sheets. And, again, what is
                                       significant about this, as we have delved into these partnerships,
                                       is basically this is one of many. I mean, this is one of the largest.
                                       It is not the largest. And this is the structure.
                                          Again, we talked about how Enron did all of these complicated
                                       things. This is not so complicated. It really isn’t that complicated.
                                       And this is the structure, apparently, that was continuously used
                                       by Mr. Fastow in the LJM partnerships. Very similar. There were




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00035   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 36 ===
                                                                                          32

                                       different products. You know, it could have been a pipeline that
                                       had a value, and they locked in the pipeline.
                                          But essentially, I mean, our understanding is this was a game.
                                       And, I mean, from your perspective as general counsel, I don’t see
                                       how you weren’t aware that this was the game. And if it was the
                                       game, then try to explain to me why it was a legal game and why
                                       this whole thing was not a scam from day one, why it wasn’t, you
                                       know, basically thieves in blue suits and red ties. And, really, that
                                       is what this whole thing is about.
                                          And I think that is the question which is going on, because the
                                       issue that I think we go back to is Enron’s demise is not business
                                       as usual in America. There have been several companies since
                                       Enron’s bankruptcy in America that have gone bankrupt. K-Mart
                                       has gone bankrupt. Other companies have gone bankrupt. Big com-
                                       panies. Not as big as Enron, but the reality is that the public mar-
                                       kets knew that there were problems with those companies.
                                          The reality is in the case of Enron, until Enron vaporized, the
                                       public markets did not really know of the level problem. So, Mr.
                                       Derrick, I really want to at least give you the opportunity, because
                                       if you can—if you can respond.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, Congressman, I will attempt to respond to
                                       the best of my ability. As I mentioned earlier, I was not involved
                                       in the structure of that transaction, and I can’t speak to the details
                                       of it. I will say, to the best of my recollection, that it was certainly
                                       considered at the time that the Board approved that there was a
                                       legitimate business purpose, and that was to help ensure that the
                                       shareholders of Enron would be able to retain as much value as
                                       possible with respect to the investment that had been made in
                                       Rhythms.
                                          As to what later transpired, I can’t speak to that. I have not cer-
                                       tainly been told, and was not aware, that these structures had been
                                       considered to be illegal. I know that there are great concerns with
                                       respect to the appropriate accounting treatment, but I was not
                                       aware that anyone had challenged the actual legality of the——
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Is that within Enron or within your outside coun-
                                       sel, or am I the first person to suggest to you that they are illegal?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, I don’t claim to have read everything that
                                       may be out there, Congressman. But my understanding is that the
                                       concern here has been primarily related to whether the appropriate
                                       accounting treatment was followed——
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Is it an SEC violation to have a non-business pur-
                                       pose in terms of that? That that is a violation? That is a criminal
                                       violation?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, again, my——
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. I mean, if it is a non-business purpose, it is a
                                       criminal violation. People will go to jail.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. My understanding at the time that the Board ap-
                                       proved this was that it was certainly considered to have a legiti-
                                       mate business purpose—that is, to protect the value of the Enron
                                       shareholders and their investment in Rhythms.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Okay.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired.
                                          The Chair recognizes the Chairman of the full committee, Mr.
                                       Tauzin.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00036   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 37 ===
                                                                                          33

                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. Dilg, on October 30 when Sherron Watkins met with Ken
                                       Lay and provided him with the memo that we have as a part of
                                       our record, she listed two mistakes, apparently. One was that Lay
                                       should have appropriately taken the matter seriously in the begin-
                                       ning of the investigation. However, mistake No. 2 she lists, ‘‘is that
                                       he relied upon V & E and Arthur Anderson to opine on their own
                                       work.’’ And she quotes your statement on October 16 to her when
                                       supposedly Sherron Watkins said to Lay that he should probably
                                       come clean and admit the problems and restate the 2000 Raptor in
                                       order to preserve his legacy and possibly the company. And your
                                       statement was, are you suggesting that Ken Lay should ignore the
                                       advice of his counsel and the auditors concerning this matter? She
                                       was apparently complaining when she went to Mr. Lay, he made
                                       the mistake and relied upon the very same law firm that had done
                                       the work on these transactions, to comment on their work and to
                                       comment on the criticisms of that work instead of hiring outside
                                       counsel and outside auditors and that you indicated to her that
                                       Ken Lay should simply continue to take the advice of his counsel
                                       and his auditors concerning this matter.
                                         Was that an accurate statement to Mr. Lay on October 30?
                                         Mr. DILG. I don’t have a copy, I don’t believe, of that memo-
                                       randum Chairman Tauzin.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I’ll put it in front of you right now.
                                         Mr. DILG. Thank you very much.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I have the cite, but here’s an actual copy and
                                       you can see where I’ve underlined it. She’s basically saying it was
                                       a great mistake for him to end up relying upon your firm, to com-
                                       ment on your firm’s work. And that you said, are you telling me
                                       that Ken Lay shouldn’t rely upon his counsel and his auditors? Is
                                       that accurate?
                                         Mr. DILG. I don’t remember making that specific statement.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. You do remember, however, filling a report
                                       out on October 15 that you and I believe Mr. Mark Hendricks, III,
                                       prepared for Mr. Derrick. Is that correct?
                                         Mr. DILG. Yes sir.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. And in that report your conclusions are that
                                       your ‘‘preliminary investigation do not, in our judgment, warrant a
                                       further widespread investigation by independent counsel and audi-
                                       tors.’’ Is that correct?
                                         Mr. DILG. That’s correct.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Do you stand by that decision?
                                         Mr. DILG. Yes sir.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. You also say that while there’s some bad cos-
                                       metics involved that your response to the response of Mr. Derrick
                                       should be to Ms. Watkins that ‘‘we should assure her that her con-
                                       cerns were thoroughly reviewed, analyzed and were found not to
                                       raise new or undisclosed information given serious consideration.’’
                                       Is that correct?
                                         Mr. DILG. Yes sir.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. But if we look at the beginning of your report
                                       and this is where I want you to comment, Mr. Derrick, because this
                                       is a letter to you, and obviously the ‘‘you’’ in this sentence refers
                                       to you, Mr. Derrick.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00037   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 38 ===
                                                                                          34

                                          In preliminary discussions, the second page of the report, in pre-
                                       liminary discussions with you, it was decided that our initial ap-
                                       proach would not involve the second guessing of accounting advice
                                       and treatment provided by Arthur Anderson, that there would be
                                       no detailed analysis of each and every transaction and there would
                                       be no full-scale discovery style inquiry. Instead, inquiries should
                                       continue to determine whether the anonymous letter and supple-
                                       mental materials raise new factual information that would warrant
                                       a broader investigation.’’
                                          Isn’t it true, Mr. Derrick, that while Mr. Dilg is writing a report
                                       advising you to tell Ms. Sherron Watkins that you’ve given her
                                       complaints thorough—I want to quote you accurately, ‘‘thoroughly
                                       reviewed, analyzed’’ although you were being told by Mr. Dilg to
                                       tell Ms. Watkins that her complaints were thoroughly reviewed and
                                       analyzed. But nevertheless, you gave instructions to Mr. Dilg and
                                       Vinson & Elkins not to do that. You told them, according to his,
                                       letter, don’t look at the accounting treatment, don’t look at these
                                       transactions in detail and for heavens sake, don’t do a full style
                                       discovery. Isn’t that correct?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Chairman Tauzin, if I understand your question
                                       correctly, this goes to the point that I was speaking to in my open-
                                       ing remarks which is in the context of last August, recall that as
                                       the Powers Report indicated, despite the fact that there were lit-
                                       erally hundreds of people who were involved in these transactions
                                       and despite the fact that under the Enron Code of Conduct, there
                                       are three different ways of reporting anonymously any concerns
                                       that one may have to the company which does trigger an investiga-
                                       tion.
                                          To the best of my knowledge, the only report that had been pre-
                                       sented on this issue was that at the time it was an anonymous re-
                                       port. We took this extremely seriously. The question was at the
                                       time do we launch into—and this was not something I instructed
                                       Vinson & Elkins. This was part of our initial discussions.
                                          The question was how do we, as promptly, as practical——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Derrick, Sherron Watkins met with Mr.
                                       Derrick and Mr. Rogers, 3 days before the 15th. You can’t possibly
                                       sit here and tell me that you thought this was still an anonymous
                                       complaint.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I’m saying at the time that we received the initial
                                       report, it was an anonymous letter. Obviously, at some point and
                                       I can’t recall exactly which day that would have been, but yes, at
                                       some point we certainly understood it was Ms. Watkins, but I don’t
                                       know her.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. I want you to explain to us, because I’m to-
                                       tally—I can’t understand for the life of me why the general counsel
                                       of this corporation, when he’s approached by Ken Lay, when
                                       Sherron Watkins meets with you, Mr. Rogers, to go over all this
                                       stuff, not anonymous any more, why you when asked to considered
                                       her request that outside counsel, she says this is our recommenda-
                                       tion in an initial letter. Involve Jim Derrick and Rex Rogers to hire
                                       a law firm to investigate the Condor and Raptor transactions to
                                       give Enron attorney-client privilege on this work product, can’t use
                                       V & E due to conflict. They provided some true sale opinions on
                                       these deals. Why, when Mr. Lay comes to you and says I need to




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00038   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 39 ===
                                                                                          35

                                       know whether all this is true, why you turn right around and get
                                       Vinson & Elkins to do this extraordinarily limited investigation
                                       and instruct them don’t look at the accounting treatment and don’t
                                       do a full-scale discovery style inquiry and by the way, I should look
                                       at the next paragraph where Mr. Dilg, you point out that you only
                                       looked at selected documents, provided you by Enron.
                                          It appears to me, Mr. Dilg, Mr. Derrick was severely limiting
                                       your ability to examine whether or not, No. 1, Sherron Watkins’ al-
                                       legations were correct, because you were told not to look at them.
                                       And two, whether anybody else really ought to look over your
                                       shoulder and see whether or not Vinson & Elkins had done a good
                                       job in recommending these deals when you issued approval letters
                                       on them.
                                          Is that correct?
                                          Mr. DILG. I don’t believe that we were instructed to be limited,
                                       Chairman Tauzin.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. I’m reading your statement, Mr. Dilg. Listen,
                                       let me read it again. ‘‘In preliminary discussions with you, Mr. Der-
                                       rick, it was decided’’—sounds like both of you talked about it and
                                       decided together that our initial approach would not involve the
                                       second guessing of the accounting advice and treatment provided
                                       by AA. And there would be no detailed analysis of every trans-
                                       action. And there would be no full-scale discovery style inquiry.
                                       And second, that you would only review selected documents. You’re
                                       trying to tell me that wasn’t an extraordinarily limited review of
                                       Sherron Watkins’ complaints?
                                          Mr. DILG. I think the sentence you read did talk about our initial
                                       approach and again the scope of our review was to determine
                                       whether a further, more detailed——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. How could you know whether a further review
                                       would be required if you wouldn’t even look at her allegation? How
                                       could you, the attorneys who advised the corporation on these
                                       deals, how could you possibly give the company objective informa-
                                       tion as to whether or not an outside counsel or an outside auditor
                                       ought to look at them if he never even looked at the deals again?
                                          Mr. DILG. Ms. Watkins was raising some very serious business
                                       concerns that she wanted Mr. Lay to review and be aware of. We
                                       didn’t feel that that involved and there is nothing in her letter——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Did you even bother to interview Skilling?
                                          Mr. DILG. Mr. Skilling was no longer with the company.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. But you never tried to interview him?
                                          Mr. DILG. No sir.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. You never asked him about the so-called
                                       handshake deal where he promised that the partnership would be
                                       protected with Enron stock, they would never lose money?
                                          Mr. DILG. No sir.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. You just asked Fastow about it, he denied it
                                       and that was enough?
                                          Mr. DILG. He denied it. If there was a concern from the com-
                                       pany’s standpoint, Mr. Causey said that he was not aware, I be-
                                       lieve Mr. Causey said he was not aware of any such transaction
                                       and——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Ms. Watkins says that employees were asking
                                       this all the time, that people were saying that, that many similar




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00039   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 40 ===
                                                                                          36

                                       comments are made when you ask about these deals. Employees
                                       quote our CFO as saying these are handshake deals. But Skilling
                                       and LJM will never lose money. Did you ever try to find out who
                                       these employees were who said that Fastow actually told them that
                                       he had such a handshake deal?
                                          Mr. DILG. We did interview Ms. Watkins and she said a lot of
                                       it was rumors that she had heard. She did give us some names of
                                       other people that we should talk to on this specific aspect.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Did you talk to them?
                                          Mr. DILG. We did not.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. You didn’t bother chasing down that allega-
                                       tion. You didn’t talk to Mr. Skilling. You lived by Mr. Derrick’s and
                                       your agreement not to look at the deals, not to do any discovery-
                                       style inquiry and you reported quite conveniently to Mr. Lay and
                                       Mr. Derrick that everything is okay, just cosmetic and tell Ms.
                                       Watkins that we looked at everything and she should go away. In
                                       fact, you did more than go away. This is a remarkable piece. This
                                       is a memo—Mr. Derrick, I want to ask you about this one. This is
                                       from someone who works in your office. This is from Ms. Sharon
                                       Butcher. It’s to Sharon Butcher from Vinson & Elkins from Carl
                                       Jordan, but the letter is per your request. Some way or another,
                                       someone who worked for you, Sharon Butcher, made a request to
                                       Vinson & Elkins and she made two requests apparently. ‘‘Per your
                                       request, the following’’——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. It’s Tab 4 in your books in case you need to——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Tab 4 in your books. From Carl Jordan, Au-
                                       gust 24, 2 days after—I mean this is right about the time all this
                                       is coming about, to Sharon Butcher in your office, Mr. Derrick.
                                       Which says, ‘‘per your request, Sharon’’, so Sharon must have
                                       asked for this information. ‘‘Here are some thoughts on how to
                                       manage the situation with the employee who made the sensitive re-
                                       port’’ and there are all kind of thoughts about how thank God she’s
                                       asking for reassignment herself. You can see she wanted a new job.
                                       And then the second one, you also ask that I include in this com-
                                       munication a summary of the possible risks associated with dis-
                                       charging or constructively discharging employees who report alle-
                                       gations of improper accounting practices. Did you, Mr. Derrick, in-
                                       struct Sharon Butcher to make such a request on Vinson & Elkins?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Yes, I did, Congressman.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Explain to me why.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, under our Code of Conduct, any employee
                                       who makes an anonymous report is guaranteed that there will be
                                       no retribution by the company, that the company will not tolerate
                                       any form——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Why did you need the lawyers to tell you
                                       what the risk of doing something you knew you couldn’t do?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. We wanted to be absolutely correct in every
                                       way——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. That’s a fine answer. You want to be abso-
                                       lutely correct. But let me ask you again what I asked you. If you
                                       already knew that your code of ethics prohibited you from dis-
                                       charging her, why on earth would you instruct one of your employ-
                                       ees to ask Vinson & Elkins about what would happen if you did
                                       that, what the risks were to the company, including, for example




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00040   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 41 ===
                                                                                          37

                                       the SEC might have some questions about that and that you might
                                       have problems with other oversight agencies of the government if
                                       you did that. Why would you even want to ask Vinson & Elkins
                                       to give you a list of all the horrible things that would occur if you
                                       knew you had no right under your own code of ethics to discharge
                                       this employee?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. That gives us any information that we would need,
                                       Congressman, as a legal department, in order to be in the best po-
                                       sition to protect any potential harassment or intimidation of Ms.
                                       Watkins. We had absolutely nothing other than her interest and
                                       the company’s interest in acting properly in this regard. Not only
                                       was that the right thing——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Derrick, you came from Vinson & Elkins,
                                       didn’t you?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I certainly did.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. So you’re the lead counsel for Enron. The guy
                                       Mr. Lay turns to to get help with these allegations.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Correct.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Formerly with Vinson & Elkins. You turn
                                       back to Vinson & Elkins to investigate it, but you tell them don’t
                                       look too hard. That’s the common sense review of what I’ve just
                                       read to you.
                                          How do you explain that?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I would respectfully disagree with that construc-
                                       tion, Congressman. As I mentioned, Mr. Lay and I both proceeded
                                       in absolute good faith to take Ms. Watkins’ allegations extremely
                                       seriously. What you were pointing to as the downside of Vinson &
                                       Elkins was also the great strength of Vinson & Elkins——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Why did you tell them not to look at the
                                       deals—why did you tell them not to do a thorough discovery-style
                                       inquiry? Why did you tell them not to do that?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Let me say again I did not instruct them to do
                                       that. That was part of our initial discussion in how best to proceed
                                       with a preliminary investigation. It was always the purpose of this
                                       investigation that the recommendation to engage an additional ac-
                                       counting firm could well have been made.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. My time is up, but I want to make it clear.
                                       You call this a preliminary investigation, but it’s the only one you
                                       did, right? It’s the only one Vinson & Elkins did, the only one you
                                       did, right?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. We followed the recommendation that we received
                                       from the outside firm——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. From Vinson & Elkins saying we don’t think
                                       anybody ought to overlook our work and check it. Did that surprise
                                       you that Vinson & Elkins would tell you we don’t think anybody
                                       has to look at what we did to see if it’s legally correct?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I have the utmost faith in Vinson & Elkins and in
                                       their integrity. I believe that they had truly believed that we
                                       should have proceeded——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. You knew that Vinson & Elkins were the at-
                                       torneys on the Raptor deal.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. As I said, Congressman, I don’t know that I was
                                       aware that they were attorneys on all the deals, but we were cer-




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00041   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 42 ===
                                                                                          38

                                       tainly aware that they had been involved in the transactions which
                                       gave them the great ability to quickly start on the investigation.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
                                       chair is about to recognize the gentlelady from Colorado, but before
                                       I do just one question, Mr. Dilg. Your preliminary investigation
                                       was not a cover up, was it?
                                         Mr. DILG. It was definitely not a cover up.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. In what ways would a cover up look different
                                       than your preliminary investigation?
                                         Mr. DILG. I’m not sure. I’ve never participated in a cover up,
                                       Chairman. Again, you need to take our preliminary report in the
                                       context of what Enron was doing at the time in terminating the
                                       Raptor transactions and having already removed Mr. Fastow from
                                       the conflict of interest position.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The chair recognizes the gentlelady from Colo-
                                       rado for 10 minutes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Derrick,
                                       I’m sure you didn’t mean to imply to the chairman that you gave
                                       any less shrift to the allegations being made by Ms. Watkins be-
                                       cause they were initially made anonymously, did you?
                                         Mr. DERRICK. To the contrary, Congresswoman——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. I’m serious, didn’t you.
                                         Mr. DERRICK. We absolutely did.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you. Now also, I’m sure that when you
                                       asked Vinson & Elkins to do an investigation, you yourself didn’t
                                       intend to have them do a cover up, did you?
                                         Mr. DERRICK. My integrity is not for sale, Congresswoman. I
                                       would not participate in a cover up.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you. So you thought that they would do an
                                       independent investigation.
                                         Mr. DERRICK. Yes, I did.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Is that your testimony?
                                         Mr. DERRICK. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you. Now Mr. Dilg, in your written testi-
                                       mony, you point out to us very helpfully that Enron’s legal affairs
                                       were directed by a highly sophisticated in-house legal department
                                       consisting of approximately 250 attorneys, some of which by the
                                       way, came from your organization, correct?
                                         Mr. DILG. That’s correct.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. And so for most of the financial transactions, your
                                       lawyers would interface with the in-house attorneys and also, by
                                       the way, with Arthur Anderson who provided the auditing and ac-
                                       counting advice for Enron, correct?
                                         Mr. DILG. We would usually interface with the legal department.
                                       I’m not sure that we would interface with Arthur Anderson.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. You assumed that the in-house lawyers were
                                       interfacing with Arthur Anderson for routine transactions, right?
                                         Mr. DILG. I’m not sure it would be the in-house counsel as much
                                       as it would be the in-house financial department or accounting de-
                                       partment.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. So you don’t even know if the in-house lawyers
                                       were working with Arthur Anderson on these issues?
                                         Mr. DILG. That’s correct. I do not know.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00042   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 43 ===
                                                                                          39

                                          Ms. DEGETTE. As far as you know, there may have been no law-
                                       yers working with Arthur Anderson?
                                          Mr. DILG. That could be.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Mr. Derrick, do you know if your lawyers worked
                                       with Arthur Anderson?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I can only say that I personally did not work with
                                       Arthur Anderson. It wouldn’t surprise me——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. You were the head of the legal department. Do
                                       you know whether any of your lawyers worked with them?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. As I was going to say, Congresswoman, it wouldn’t
                                       surprise me that on some matters there was interface between
                                       some in-house lawyers and Anderson. I personally was not.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. If you wouldn’t mind supplementing your answer,
                                       find out if anybody did, that would be helpful in this investigation.
                                          Now Mr. Derrick, the investigation of Sherron Watkins’ claims,
                                       that was kind of a different assignment than the normal assign-
                                       ments that you got, wasn’t it?
                                          Mr. DILG. Is that question addressed to me, Congresswoman?
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. I’m sorry. Yes, it is, Mr. Dilg.
                                          Mr. DILG. Yes, that was not a normal assignment as far as—I’m
                                       a transactional lawyer.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Did you understand that that was to be an inde-
                                       pendent investigation of these claims?
                                          Mr. DILG. I understood we were to make a preliminary review.
                                       We discussed——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Did you think it would be an independent prelimi-
                                       nary review?
                                          Mr. DILG. It depends on—it’s not an independent review such
                                       that you would have to respond to a derivative suit or if you were
                                       going to have an independent committee of the board directing
                                       their own counsel.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. So you didn’t think it was particularly inde-
                                       pendent. The reason I’m asking this question is because and we’ve
                                       talked about this at length with the chairman and others, you lim-
                                       ited the scope of the investigation right from the get go. You said
                                       that you’re not going to second guess Arthur Anderson’s account-
                                       ing, right?
                                          Mr. DILG. We——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Wasn’t that one of your premises in the investiga-
                                       tion?
                                          Mr. DILG. In our preliminary review, we were not to review the
                                       accounting.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. And in fact you never did review Arthur Ander-
                                       son’s accounting, did you?
                                          Mr. DILG. No, we did not.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay, the investigation team was you and Mr.
                                       Hendricks only, right?
                                          Mr. DILG. That’s correct.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. You didn’t use any associates, right?
                                          Mr. DILG. That’s correct.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. You didn’t have any accountant helping you with
                                       the investigation, did you?
                                          Mr. DILG. That’s correct.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00043   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 44 ===
                                                                                          40

                                          Ms. DEGETTE. So you would really have no way—I mean do you
                                       have an accounting background?
                                          Mr. DILG. I do not.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. I don’t know how you are, the way I am, before
                                       I went to law school I had one accounting course in college. I as-
                                       sume it’s probably pretty much the same with you, is that right?
                                          Mr. DILG. I believe I had two semesters of accounting in under-
                                       graduate school.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. So you don’t really understand complicated
                                       accounting transactions or standards, do you?
                                          Mr. DILG. No ma’am.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Do you know whether Mr. Hendrick does?
                                          Mr. DILG. I do not believe he does.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. So the two of you, you interviewed witnesses, just
                                       the two of you. You never reviewed these transactions, did you?
                                          Mr. DILG. No, we did not get into the details of the transaction.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Now you did know, didn’t you, that Sherron Wat-
                                       kins’ allegations were that the accounting scandals were the prob-
                                       lem. Isn’t that correct?
                                          Mr. DILG. She raised a number of different things in her cor-
                                       respondence with Mr. Lay.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Right, but I mean basically she said we will im-
                                       plode in a way the accounting scandals and there’s an elaborate ac-
                                       counting hoax and then her supplemental information indicated
                                       she thought there were accounting problems with a number of the
                                       transactions, most particularly Raptor, correct?
                                          Mr. DILG. She was concerned about the Raptor transaction, pri-
                                       marily.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Right.
                                          Mr. DILG. Her main concern was that Mr. Lay, in coming back
                                       in as CEO, thoroughly understand the issues he had with the busi-
                                       ness issues of the vehicles unwinding 2 years hence and the prob-
                                       lems that might cause.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. If you’ll excuse me, I’ve looked at—I assume you
                                       reviewed all of her—both her letter of concern and also the at-
                                       tached specific concern she raised, didn’t you?
                                          Mr. DILG. Yes, we did.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Well, because she says here about Raptor, the ac-
                                       counting treatment looks questionable, and talks about equity de-
                                       rivatives. ‘‘The equity derivative transactions do not appear to be
                                       at arm’s length. There’s a veil of secrecy. Employees are ques-
                                       tioning our accounting propriety’’ etcetera. Aren’t those all issues
                                       around accounting?
                                          Mr. DILG. Yes. All those statements relate to accounting.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Did you understand what those allegations were?
                                          Mr. DILG. We understood her base allegation to be concern about
                                       the fact that the Raptor vehicles were supported by Enron stock
                                       and that Enron had hedged investments made against those.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Right, and she had specific concerns about specific
                                       transactions. Did you ever have any independent accountant look
                                       at those transactions?
                                          Mr. DILG. We did not.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Now, why not?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00044   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 45 ===
                                                                                          41

                                          Mr. DILG. Our charge for the initial review was to determine
                                       whether there were facts sufficient for a further review. We were
                                       not to review the accounting advice given by the accounts that
                                       Enron’s audit committee had decided to use for accounting advice.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. If the allegation is that the accounting is funny,
                                       and you rely on the accounting to come to your conclusion, how can
                                       you conclude that there’s not a problem with the accounting with-
                                       out any kind of outside analysis?
                                          Mr. DILG. We were concerned with making sure that Arthur An-
                                       derson had at their disposal all the material facts relating to the
                                       transactions and we did try to verify that.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. And did you find that out? Did they?
                                          Mr. DILG. Yes.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. How did you find that out?
                                          Mr. DILG. We gave them Ms. Watkins’ letter and walked through
                                       with their engagement partners point by point under Ms. Watkins’
                                       letter and——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Did they have the information, so, from that you
                                       concluded yes?
                                          Mr. DILG. They were very well aware of the issues that she was
                                       raising and that they felt very comfortable with the accounting de-
                                       cisions they had made in connection with the transaction.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Let me ask you this, did you ask Anderson to pro-
                                       vide you a detailed analysis of the allegations that Ms. Watkins
                                       made in her memo, most specifically, the Raptor deals and the
                                       other deals? Did you ask them for a detailed analysis or did you
                                       just say, does this look okay to you and they said yes, and that was
                                       it?
                                          Mr. DILG. We gave them the letter, I believe, a day or so before
                                       a meeting that we had with Mr. Duncan and Ms. Cash. We did not
                                       ask for a detailed, written analysis.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. So you don’t know to this day what Arthur Ander-
                                       son’s analysis would have been of the transactions that formed the
                                       basis of Ms. Watkins’ concerns?
                                          Mr. DILG. Arthur Anderson had included those transactions in
                                       the scope of their overall audit of the company and they confirmed
                                       to us verbally that they were still comfortable——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. This seems like an incredible circle to me. She
                                       says well, there’s problems with the audit, so you go ask the people
                                       that did the audit. They say the audit was okay, so it just comes
                                       back to point one.
                                          How could you decide independently if it was true or not?
                                          Mr. DILG. We could not decide on whether the accounting was
                                       correct. We’re not in position to do that. We could decide whether
                                       the Big Five accounting firm that the company’s audit committee
                                       had decided to rely on for accounting advice were aware of the con-
                                       cerns and that they were still satisfied with their accounting ad-
                                       vice.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. But if the accounting—if the concern of the whis-
                                       tle blower is that the accounting is wrong, then how can you deter-
                                       mine there’s not a problem if you’re relying on the people doing the
                                       accounting to give you the analysis?
                                          Mr. DILG. I think Ms. Watkins’ concerns, and I don’t want to
                                       speak for Ms. Watkins, but based on her letter and our interviews




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00045   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 46 ===
                                                                                          42

                                       were not with the technical accounting side. She disagreed with the
                                       concept that you could support a transaction with your own stock.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay, let me ask you one more question. Now you
                                       said here there’s some problems with cosmetics. You thought it
                                       might look bad, right, in your report?
                                          Mr. DILG. We laid out——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. You used that word, you said that there’s some
                                       problems with cosmetics.
                                          Mr. DILG. We did use the word cosmetics.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. But then you said you had some concerns that
                                       there might be litigation as a result of this, correct?
                                          Mr. DILG. We had concerns that we expressed both in the letter
                                       and in oral conversations that in the event of the litigation, these
                                       transactions could be portrayed very badly.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Well, actually, you said that you were concerned
                                       that there might be litigation. Right? You said, ‘‘there is a serious
                                       risk of adverse publicity and litigation.’’ That’s the last page, page
                                       9 of the October 15 letter.
                                          Mr. DILG. Yes.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. She’s handing it to you right now.
                                          Mr. DILG. Thank you.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Did you undertake any other, any further risk
                                       analysis on behalf of your client, Enron, to let them know what
                                       those litigation risks were so that they could rely on your advice
                                       and conduct a narrow internal affairs?
                                          Mr. DILG. We did advise the company of the litigation risk.
                                       Again, these were transactions that had been entered into by the
                                       company some 18 months to 2 years before. There had been serious
                                       declines in the market value of the investments that had been
                                       hedged against them. The company terminated these vehicles
                                       shortly after our initial meeting with Mr. Lay and Mr. Derrick.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Can I just stop you? We don’t have any document
                                       that would indicate the advice you gave to Enron relating to the
                                       litigation risk. Does such a document exist or did you give that ad-
                                       vice verbally?
                                          Mr. DILG. It’s here in the October 15 letter.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. So there’s no additional documentation other than
                                       this?
                                          Mr. DILG. There was an outline, I believe that the committee has
                                       of our discussion of Mr. Lay and Mr. Derrick.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. But there’s no additional memo about litigation
                                       risk?
                                          Mr. DILG. That’s correct.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The chair thanks the gentlelady from Colorado
                                       and recognizes the gentleman from Florida for 10 minutes for pur-
                                       poses of inquiry.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Dilg, I saw in your
                                       opening statement, I just re-read it, you talked about that you felt
                                       the lawyers that you dealt with with Enron were highly capable,
                                       well qualified attorneys. Then you talked about your relationship
                                       with Enron and you were proud of it. I think that’s what you said
                                       in your opening statement?
                                          Mr. DILG. Yes sir.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00046   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 47 ===
                                                                                          43

                                          Mr. STEARNS. In hindsight, do you think there’s anything you
                                       would have done differently dealing with Enron?
                                          Mr. DILG. I do not think so.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. So you would not have changed an iota of anything
                                       that you did with Enron in your advising, in your consulting, in
                                       your procedures with them?
                                          Mr. DILG. We performed a great deal of work on very many
                                       projects for Enron over a long period of time. To my knowledge,
                                       there’s nothing that I’m aware of that we would change.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Okay, so we’ve established the record that every-
                                       thing you did during that time with Enron, you would do it again,
                                       the same thing. Is that correct?
                                          Mr. DILG. From my personal standpoint, yes.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. This, to me is a little bit far fetched. If I were you,
                                       I would say look, we made some mistakes. We’re sorry, we could
                                       have improved. There are some areas we could have changed. But
                                       to come up here and say there’s absolutely nothing you would
                                       change, did you ever think about not continuing Enron as a client?
                                          Mr. DILG. No sir, not until after the bankruptcy.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. So it took you to the absolute meltdown of this cor-
                                       poration before you said we’ll just not have Enron as a client. Is
                                       that true?
                                          Mr. DILG. That’s correct.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. And all during that time, there were no indications
                                       to you that Enron was performing functions that were illegal in
                                       your opinion?
                                          Mr. DILG. Never had any information that would indicate to me
                                       that Enron was performing an illegal act.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. How much did you charge V & E for its investiga-
                                       tion of the Watkins letter?
                                          Mr. DILG. How much did we charge Enron?
                                          Mr. STEARNS. How much did V & E charge Enron for the inves-
                                       tigation of the Sherron Watkins letter?
                                          Mr. DILG. I don’t have the precise figures. I believe it’s around
                                       $60,000. We conducted that very quickly.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. In your testimony, you define the role of legal
                                       counsel. Let me just read from this. ‘‘If a transaction’’, you say, ‘‘is
                                       not illegal and has been approved by the appropriate levels of a
                                       corporate management, lawyers, whether corporate counsel or with
                                       an outside firm, may appropriately provide the requisite legal ad-
                                       vice.’’
                                          So if a transaction is not illegal, not illegal and it’s been ap-
                                       proved by the corporate management, who determines whether a
                                       transaction is legal or not? Isn’t that your job?
                                          Mr. DILG. Based on the information we would have at the time
                                       we were rendering the legal services, that’s certain advice that we
                                       would give.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. That kind of answer gets me concerned. If I under-
                                       stand, the whole purpose of V & E is to take the facts that are
                                       given to you, figure out if there is a legally appropriate way to do
                                       it, isn’t that what your law firm does? Anderson comes to you, we
                                       want to do this, you show them how to do it legally. Isn’t that the
                                       whole purpose of your law firm?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00047   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 48 ===
                                                                                          44

                                          Mr. DILG. That is the type of advice we render on certain mat-
                                       ters, when we’re asked. We do litigation matters. We do lots of dif-
                                       ferent things.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. I think every law firm in America is trying to ad-
                                       vise their clients what’s legal to do. And you’re saying that you, as
                                       the counsel for Enron, never saw anything egregious about any-
                                       thing they did during the entire relationship you had with Enron.
                                       That’s what you’re telling us today?
                                          Mr. DILG. Yes sir.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Now when Mr. Skilling came here, he gave pretty
                                       much the same tact you have done, you know. I used the term with
                                       him ‘‘plausible deniability.’’
                                          I don’t know if that term fits you, but the approach you’re taking
                                       here is total unrepentence, a feeling that you did nothing wrong
                                       and that you and your entire legal firm with all these high powered
                                       lawyers, never saw a red flag during the whole process and you
                                       never thought about separating your relationship with Enron until
                                       the meltdown and until the bankruptcy. That’s what you’re telling
                                       us today.
                                          Mr. DILG. I believe the earlier question was whether we ever saw
                                       anything illegal. That’s what we’re qualified to determine. Red flag
                                       is a term that I’m not sure that I feel comfortable with. But then
                                       again, it’s to my knowledge we never saw anything at Enron that
                                       we considered illegal. Our ethical obligations would require us to
                                       withdraw if we did and if they did not follow our advice in pur-
                                       suing an illegal action.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Sefton, prior to your coming here, I had the
                                       opportunity to question Mr. Mintz, your successor. He testified that
                                       when he saw virtually identical language that was in the LJM2,
                                       identical language in the PPM for LJM3 in late 2000, he became
                                       very concerned. He was alarmed, because it suggested that Fastow
                                       was promoting his access to inside information as a way to promote
                                       investment in his partnership.
                                          He raised his concern with Enron’s legal team and V & E. Mr.
                                       Dilg, did you know that he raised that? Mr. Mintz raised that with
                                       you folks about his concern about Fastow’s inside—promoting his
                                       access to inside information? Did you ever know about that? Just
                                       yes or no?
                                          Mr. DILG. I don’t believe I recall any specific conversations with
                                       Mr. Mintz.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Sefton, did you know about Fastow and what
                                       he was doing? Because you prepared the LJM2 papers, didn’t you?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No, I did not prepare those papers.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Didn’t you review them?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I saw some of the documents relating to LJM2.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. How can you see some and not the entire docu-
                                       ment? Do they come one page at a time?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. LJM2 was represented by Kirkland & Ellis which
                                       was their outside counsel. They did essentially all the work on put-
                                       ting that deal together.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Well, did you review the private placement memo-
                                       randum?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Yes, I did.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00048   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 49 ===
                                                                                          45

                                          Mr. STEARNS. And there was no concern by you on this, even
                                       though your successor, Mr. Mintz, testified that he had great con-
                                       cern about the PPM for LJM3 and yet you had no concern, is that
                                       correct?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I have never discussed with Mr. Mintz the reasons
                                       for his concerns.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Skilling did not sign any of these documents.
                                       Should Mr. Skilling have signed some of these documents?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. His signature was called for on the form, yes.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. When I go to a closing on my home, if I don’t sign
                                       the document, my lawyers says, ‘‘Mr. Stearns, you better sign this
                                       document or the deal is not going to be credible.’’
                                          Now your job was to review these partnerships, is that correct?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No, that’s not correct.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Okay. Did you see these partnership agreements?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No, I did not.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. But you just told me earlier that you saw a part
                                       of LJM2?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I saw the private placement memorandum.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Okay, would you have discerned whether Skilling
                                       signed or not that? Could you recognize in that he did not sign it?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I don’t believe his signature was called for in con-
                                       nection with the private placement memorandum.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. If you don’t mind, pull the mike a little closer.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Sorry.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Did you sign the approval sheets for the LJM2?
                                       Did you sign them?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Yes, I did.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Now if you signed them that meant that you were
                                       approving the LJM2 partnership, is that correct?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. That is not my understanding.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. So when you sign a document that’s the approval
                                       sheet, it’s your understanding that that does not mean it’s an ap-
                                       proval sheet?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. The approval sheet requires approval by Mr. Buy
                                       and Mr. Causey. Those were the two senior executive officers of the
                                       company who were required to approve the transactions by the
                                       board of directors.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Derrick, what was your role in helping the
                                       board of directors understand the LJM transactions? As general
                                       counsel, did you advise them on the controls they implemented to
                                       avoid conflicts in doing business with LJM and did you recommend
                                       that they implement any additional controls?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Congressman, the only—best of my recollection,
                                       the only board meeting that I was at with respect to the LJM was
                                       the LJM1 transaction in which was viewed as simply a on-off
                                       transaction. There were no controls, as I recall the discussion at
                                       that point, because it was already a deal that they were looking at
                                       specifically with a fairness opinion.
                                          With respect to the other LJM matters, I did not personally par-
                                       ticipate in the controls and I was not at the meetings at which
                                       LJM2 was——
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Derrick, I just have a little time left. All of us
                                       on this committee are just having a difficult understanding why




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00049   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 50 ===
                                                                                          46

                                       Mr. Skilling didn’t sign these documents and why you, as a former
                                       general counsel of Enron didn’t get a concern when Skilling didn’t
                                       sign these documents because I would think part of your job as the
                                       former general counsel of Enron is to make sure all the documents
                                       are properly signed.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, Congressman, as we have said, we had al-
                                       most 250 lawyers in a decentralized department——
                                          Mr. STEARNS. You had too many people to enforce the signing of
                                       the document?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. No, but the responsibility for that was allocated by
                                       the board to Enron Global Finance and their attorneys. Those were
                                       not documents that were toward me.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Sefton, what’s your comment?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. With respect to what?
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Documents that Mr. Skilling should have signed,
                                       were not signed. Shouldn’t that raise some flags?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Yes, and it did.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. I mean because Mr. Derrick is saying you’re sup-
                                       posed to have done it, so he’s bouncing—aren’t you, Mr. Derrick,
                                       bouncing the ball back to Mr. Sefton and saying Mr. Sefton was
                                       supposed to do that? Isn’t that what you just said?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I don’t mean to be bouncing balls, Congressman.
                                       I’m just saying the board had allocated that responsibility to a par-
                                       ticular group, a legal group in our organization.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. I would think the general counsel of Enron might
                                       be that particular group you’re talking about. So Mr. Sefton, at this
                                       point I’m finding it hard to believe that you wouldn’t be involved
                                       in making sure all these documents were properly signed.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I’d like to just say that it was never my under-
                                       standing that the board delegated this job to Enron Global Finance
                                       legal. That was never my understanding.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Whose responsibility was it? If it wasn’t yours,
                                       whose responsibility? You ere the top poobah here, the former—you
                                       were the counsel for Enron. I mean if you’re not responsible, the
                                       Global Finance, who else could there be?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I believe the approval process called for the busi-
                                       ness unit that was doing the transaction to complete the signatures
                                       and get the signatures on the form.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Well, Mr.——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Will the gentleman yield real quick——
                                          Mr. STEARNS. I want to finish. The general counsel, Mr. Mintz,
                                       I mean he tried. He said I sent him a memo in May 2001. I gave
                                       him about a week to respond. This is Mr. Mintz saying. I didn’t
                                       hear from him. I asked my secretary to call his secretary to see if
                                       I could get him on the schedule. He tried and tried and tried. And
                                       Mr. Mintz was unable to get the signature on the approval sheets.
                                       I mean who should he have gone to? I mean aren’t you the respon-
                                       sible one to help out here?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No, Mr. Mintz is my successor.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Yeah. I mean you weren’t aware of this problem
                                       at all with Mr. Skilling? Are you saying today you had no knowl-
                                       edge about Skilling not signing these documents, is that your state-
                                       ment today?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No, I’m not.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00050   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 51 ===
                                                                                          47

                                          Mr. STEARNS. You knew he didn’t sign the documents?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I know that his signature wasn’t on all the forms.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Okay, so if they weren’t on all the forms, should
                                       they have been on all the forms? Just yes or no?
                                          As a general counsel, should his name have been on the forms,
                                       yes or no?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I understand that the——
                                          Mr. STEARNS. No, just yes or no. Should they be on the forms?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Well, I’d like to answer by saying that the approvals
                                       required by the board of directors required approval by Mr. Buy
                                       and Mr. Causey and that’s what the board said had to be done in
                                       order to approve these transactions because of the conflict of inter-
                                       est.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. No. I’m just asking your general, your legal opinion
                                       here as a general counsel. Should Skilling’s name have been on
                                       those forms?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. The board did not call for that.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. So they don’t have to be on the forms, is that what
                                       you’re saying?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. The board did not recall Jeff Skilling to sign those
                                       forms.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. But you just told me earlier that his name should
                                       have been on the forms. You just told me a moment ago.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. His signature was called for by the form itself, but
                                       it wasn’t required by the board procedures.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Didn’t you create the form? Who created the form?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I did assist in preparing the form.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Assist, now wait a second. You created the form,
                                       Mr. Sefton. You asked that his name be on that form. You told me
                                       his name should have been on that form and it wasn’t on the form.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No, I——
                                          Mr. STEARNS. That’s the facts we’ve just established.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No, I did not ask that his name be on the form.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Who did, because you said his name should have
                                       been. And you prepared the form, so who else could there be?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Mr. Fastow suggested that Mr. Skilling’s name be
                                       added.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. And did you make sure that that name was added
                                       in the nomenclature underneath saying blank line, Mr. Skilling?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Yes, I did.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. So you had on the form that Mr. Skilling’s name
                                       should have been there. You prepared the forms. You said he
                                       should have been on there. Now tell me why didn’t you make sure
                                       it was not on the form?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Well, what I haven’t mentioned to you is that when
                                       I became aware of the fact that some of the forms had not been
                                       signed by Mr. Skilling, I raised this issue with Mr. Fastow and told
                                       him that there was an issue here that we needed to deal with.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Needed to deal with is probably a good way to
                                       summarize this.
                                          Mr. Chairman——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Mr. Chairman, can I ask unanimous consent for
                                       15 seconds?
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Without objection.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00051   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 52 ===
                                                                                          48

                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Mr. Rogers, in your position, did you think that
                                       Mr. Skilling was supposed to sign those forms?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Madame Chairman, let me reach over here. This is
                                       pretty uncomfortable. Congresswoman, excuse me. I’m getting off
                                       to a bad start. I think these processes for policies and procedures
                                       for ensuring that these transactions with LJM were not adverse to
                                       the best interest of Enron and that they were arm’s length——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. I asked a kind of a simple question. Can I get
                                       kind of a simple answer? Did you think Mr. Skilling was supposed
                                       to sign the forms?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. In the beginning, that was not my understanding.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. That was an important factor for the Board. When
                                       I said earlier, as these processes evolved and the in-house counsel
                                       reviewed the policies and procedure to see how they could be re-
                                       fined and improved, it was clear to me through reading minutes of
                                       the board that the board considered Mr. Skilling’s approval to be
                                       important.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you. And so you thought he was supposed
                                       to sign the forms as it went on?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I did think he was supposed to sign the forms as
                                       it went on.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentlelady has expired. The
                                       chair would inform the witnesses and the members of the com-
                                       mittee that we have what appears to be a relatively brief series of
                                       votes that we must address on the floor, so we will recess now for
                                       at least 20 minutes and I can’t give you a precise time because of
                                       the uncertainty of the votes, but it will be about 20 minutes.
                                          [Off the record.]
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The hearing will come to order. The chair rec-
                                       ognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Stupak for 10 minutes
                                       for inquiry.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Dilg, just to ask you
                                       some questions and you had indicated in your response that there
                                       was this litigation risk and then you went on and said that because
                                       of serious decline in the market that there would be a litigation
                                       risk. Is that some quick summary of what you said to Ms. DeGette,
                                       that there would a litigation risk because of serious decline in the
                                       market?
                                          Mr. DILG. Right, Enron shares dropped possibly 60 percent or so
                                       in the last year, at a point in time in August and in September
                                       when we were writing this report.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. So as long as the market stayed up, Enron would
                                       never be in trouble, is that correct?
                                          Mr. DILG. No sir, I don’t believe that was the rationale.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. There wouldn’t be any problem unless there was
                                       lawsuits. The only lawsuits are going to come when people start
                                       losing money. So all these transactions, partnerships, these SPEs,
                                       that’s okay, as long as the market stays up and Enron can cover
                                       the cost? Is that sort of the conclusion of the logarithm?
                                          Mr. DILG. No sir. The Raptor vehicles had had some very severe
                                       losses hedged against them. I think it was Mr. Causey that told us




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00052   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 53 ===
                                                                                          49

                                       in our interviews that they were designed to deal with volatility,
                                       not a complete collapse of market.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Sure, they’re supposed to hedge in case there’s a
                                       fall, and they’re supposed to hedge, right, or put says Mr. Deutsche
                                       likes to put it, right?
                                          Mr. DILG. That’s as I understood the purpose of the transactions.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. But puts and hedges are not legal, if you’re putting
                                       up your own company’s stock as Enron did, correct?
                                          Mr. DILG. I don’t believe that’s correct.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. What do you believe is correct, if my statement was
                                       incorrect?
                                          Mr. DILG. I believe there was a business purpose. The fact that
                                       the vehicles were supported by Enron stock, we saw in our review
                                       nothing that made them illegal because of that.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. So there was no business purpose to these SPEs, is
                                       that what you’re saying? That’s what made them improper?
                                          Mr. DILG. No, I didn’t say they were improper. The business pur-
                                       pose, as I understood from Mr. Causey during our review was that
                                       they were to hedge against volatility in some of the stock, some of
                                       the investments that Enron had made.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. You know everyone up here at the table at least all
                                       say I don’t have an accounting background. I’m not an accountant,
                                       you know. I only know the legal/technical merits. But none of us
                                       on this committee has accounting backgrounds. We’re not account-
                                       ants. We can figure out a few things and it doesn’t take a lot for
                                       us to figure out. We’ve only had 4 or 5 hearings. You guys have
                                       spent more time, in fact, with Enron for many, many years. It
                                       seems to me, it seems to me that when you get the memo from Ms.
                                       Watkins, and if you just took a look at the letter, not even all the
                                       details. If you just read the letter. It said Skilling’s abrupt depar-
                                       ture will raise suspicions of accounting improprieties. I’m on 14 if
                                       you care to follow along, second paragraph. ‘‘Will raise suspicions
                                       of accounting improprieties and valuation issues. Enron has been
                                       very aggressive in accounting, most notably in the Raptor trans-
                                       actions and the Condor vehicle. We do have valuation issues with
                                       our international assets and possibly some of our EES MTM posi-
                                       tions.’’
                                          So her letter is more than just Raptor and Condor. If you go
                                       down to the fourth paragraph, excuse me, fifth paragraph, second
                                       line it says ‘‘the value in the swaps won’t be there for Raptor. So
                                       once again, Enron will issue stock to offset these losses. Raptor is
                                       an LJM entity. It sure looks to laymen on the street that we’re hid-
                                       ing losses in a related company and will compensate that company
                                       with Enron stock in the future.’’
                                          So she’s really just laying it out there. You don’t need to be an
                                       accountant. You don’t need to be a Member of Congress. She said
                                       a lay person on the street can understand this. The problem I’m
                                       having and some of my colleagues are as we’re talking at the votes,
                                       all these smart attorneys up here, they can’t figure it out, but the
                                       lay person on the street can figure it out. Our concern is what’s the
                                       relationship here? If you take a look at, if we just take a look at
                                       the table here, I believe what, Mr. Derrick worked for many years
                                       for Vinson & Elkins on the Enron account and you were at Enron,
                                       right?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00053   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 54 ===
                                                                                          50

                                          Mr. DERRICK. Right.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. So you have 25 years there at least.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. It was 20 years, Congressman.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. But Mr. Dilg, you replaced Mr. Derrick and Vinson
                                       & Elkins. It just seems like such a cozy relationship that even
                                       when you get a memo that says even the common lay person on
                                       the street can figure it out, none of you guys can figure it out.
                                          Mr. DILG. I’m not positive how to respond, Congressman. We did
                                       understand that the Raptor partnerships were supported largely by
                                       Enron stock. That was in Enron’s disclosures in the 10(k) and
                                       10(q)s, etcetera.
                                          What I don’t understand from your question is the assumed ille-
                                       gality of that.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Well, okay, I’m not asking for a legal conclusion.
                                       You said you charged $60,000 to review the Watkins memo. Now
                                       with that $60,000, I’m sure it’s not just for your technical, legal
                                       merit. I’m sure whatever rate you charge is based upon reputation
                                       of the firm, common sense, knowledge. In fact, you didn’t go outside
                                       Enron because you guys had all the knowledge and therefore it
                                       would be easier to do a good review.
                                          I guess my concern is you bring all this experience and expertise,
                                       but when we get to a real question, it’s either I don’t have account-
                                       ing experience or we didn’t see the technical/legal merit. You come
                                       and you’re hired and you bring other attributes with you as indi-
                                       viduals, as attorneys and as professional people. It seems like to
                                       some of us up here that those other attributes were just a blind eye
                                       was cast when you looked at this memo because it’s all within the
                                       house. I would think when you look at this memo words like ‘‘ag-
                                       gressive accounting, creative accounting’’ would sort of send a sig-
                                       nal to someone with all this experience not only within Enron and
                                       Vinson & Elkins, but even the lay person on the street, those are
                                       red flags and we should take a more serious in-depth look at it
                                       which you don’t even hire an accountant, where admittedly you say
                                       you’re not an accountant. I would then think, as Ms. DeGette was
                                       trying to say, you’d at least hire an account when you have these
                                       red flags out here and you’re charging this company. There seems
                                       to be a circle that you don’t want to connect here.
                                          Mr. DILG. I do think our October 11 and our earlier conversa-
                                       tions with Mr. Lay and Mr. Derrick pointed out that the account-
                                       ing, even though Arthur Anderson said they stood by it and still
                                       felt that it was proper, was aggressive and creative. We did see
                                       that as a red flag and we did put that in our letter to make sure
                                       that people understood that.
                                          I think Mr. Lay and I’m not sure all the reasons that went into
                                       it, but that may well have been one of the reasons they terminated
                                       the Raptor transactions in the third quarter of 2001.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Well, okay. Let me ask Mr. Rogers. You were cer-
                                       tainly throughout this year the vice president, associate general
                                       counsel. Have you ever heard the words aggressive or creative ap-
                                       plied to any Enron accounting before?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. By anyone? I certainly heard of it——
                                          Mr. STUPAK. No, no. I mean before this whole mess started. Is
                                       creative and aggressive accounting, is that proper terminology you
                                       use?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00054   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 55 ===
                                                                                          51

                                          Mr. ROGERS. That’s not terminology that I would use. I hadn’t
                                       heard that referred to with Enron’s accounting practices.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. What does aggressive and creating accounting
                                       mean?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I don’t know what it means.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. How about Mr. Derrick, Mr. Dilg? Mr. Rogers
                                       doesn’t know what it means, but yet you guys used it in your re-
                                       port. So what does it mean, aggressive and creative? Mr. Derrick?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, it actually was not my report, Congressman,
                                       but no, I can’t——
                                          Mr. STUPAK. It was a report to you from Vinson & Elkins.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Right, I can’t explain what aggressive and creative
                                       accounting——
                                          Mr. STUPAK. What did you think of it then when they sent you
                                       this report. You paid $60,000. They send you a report and it says
                                       ‘‘aggressive and creative.’’
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I think the comfort that we took from the report
                                       was that they had discussed these very things with Anderson that
                                       we paid millions of dollars——
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Let’s back to the words though. What did it mean
                                       to you? What did it mean to you when you saw on page 7, you got
                                       this report and you’re anxious because there’s some allegations
                                       being made. You read it. You get to page 7, there’s ‘‘aggressive and
                                       creative accounting.’’ Did you take great comfort in that?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. It was, I believe, the following sentence where it
                                       was no one had any reason to believe that the accounting was not
                                       technically correct and they had discussed these very issues with
                                       the firm that our audit committee had determined was the appro-
                                       priate accounting firm for the company.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. So even though you saw the words aggressive and
                                       creative, you thought, oh, it’s no big deal because Anderson said it
                                       was okay?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. If the next sentence it says ‘‘and by the way, An-
                                       derson does not believe it’s okay’’ that would have been obviously
                                       a great cause of concern.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Mr. Dilg, you wrote the memo then. What did ag-
                                       gressive and creative mean in accounting? What does that mean?
                                          Mr. DILG. I’m not sure that we put a terminology on it, Rep-
                                       resentative. We were reporting what we’d been told during our
                                       interviews. I think Mr. Buy used the word aggressive.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Mr. Buy did?
                                          Mr. DILG. I’m not sure. I need to look back through the interview
                                       memos to see exactly where, but those words, obviously, were
                                       things that we felt like we needed to convey, even though Arthur
                                       Anderson said they were still satisfied with the accounting and had
                                       reviewed Ms. Watkins’ letter and the allegation she made.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. But you’d agree that those aren’t generally accepted
                                       terminology we used in accounting, right?
                                          Mr. DILG. Uh——
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Again, you don’t have to be an accountant to answer
                                       this one.
                                          Mr. DILG. I don’t believe they’re part of generally accepted ac-
                                       counting practices, but I understand that Arthur Anderson was




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00055   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 56 ===
                                                                                          52

                                       very convinced that these met generally accepted accounting prin-
                                       ciples.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. All right. If you take a look at the report there. Let
                                       me get the exact report here, the Powers Report. And if you take
                                       a look on page 176, again, The Rogers Commission, Report or what-
                                       ever you want to call it, sees this very different. If you look on page
                                       176, it talks about the shared Watkins letter. I’m quoting now,
                                       ‘‘provided a road map to a number of the troubling issues presented
                                       by Raptors.’’ It goes on next paragraph, ‘‘We identified the most se-
                                       rious problems in the Raptor transactions only after detailed exam-
                                       ination of the relevant transaction and most importantly discus-
                                       sions with our accounting advisors. Both steps at Enron and V &
                                       E excepted, would not be part of B & E’s investigation. With the
                                       exception of Watkins, B & E spoke only with the very senior people
                                       at Enron and Anderson. Those people, with few exceptions, had
                                       substantial professional and personal stakes in the matter under
                                       review.’’ That’s the part that’s probably troubling most of us. This
                                       circle, as I spoke of, will you take a look at these transactions,
                                       who’s the approving legal counsel but Vinson and Elkins? And you
                                       were asked to look at these transactions that you had previously
                                       approved and yet you never even had an accountant when you all
                                       say you’re not accountants even look at it. The closeness, the cozi-
                                       ness of the relationship is the part that’s bothering a lot of us on
                                       this committee.
                                          Do you care to add anything to that?
                                          Mr. DILG. Only that we were asked to do a preliminary review
                                       and we did talk to the people that Ms. Watkins laid out in her let-
                                       ter to check with. I think she said to see if I’m all wet.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. But preliminary review, I mean you did nothing fur-
                                       ther after this.
                                          Mr. DILG. I’m sorry?
                                          Mr. STUPAK. You used the word ‘‘preliminary review’’ as been es-
                                       tablished early. You really did nothing after this.
                                          Mr. DILG. Our preliminary review was to determine whether a
                                       further review was necessary.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. And you determined there was no further review.
                                          Mr. DILG. And we believed at the time we gave the report, no
                                       further review was necessary.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Not even by accountants?
                                          Mr. DILG. I’m sorry?
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Not even by an accounting firm outside of Arthur
                                       Anderson?
                                          Mr. DILG. Arthur Anderson, again, was one of the Big Five ac-
                                       counting firms that had been chosen by the Audit Committee at
                                       Enron.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Right. All in-house, right? All in-house. Arthur An-
                                       derson, in-house. They had attorneys in-house. They had account-
                                       ants in-house, right? And you never talked to any of those people.
                                          Mr. DILG. We talked to the leading engagement partner for Ar-
                                       thur Anderson.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. Head guy at Anderson. Those people had substan-
                                       tial professional and personal stakes in the matter under review as
                                       it says in the Powers Report, right? Those were the people that
                                       were talked to.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00056   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 57 ===
                                                                                          53

                                          Mr. DILG. I don’t know how they characterized the personal
                                       stakes they had in it. They had the credibility of their veracity on
                                       the line.
                                          Mr. STUPAK. They had a dog in the fight, let’s put it like that.
                                          Mr. DILG. We had no reason to believe that we couldn’t believe
                                       them.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
                                       chair recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Burr for
                                       10 minutes to inquire.
                                          Mr. BURR. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Sefton, let me ask you,
                                       I would take for granted everybody at the table has kept up with
                                       the hearings that have happened in the house and with the pub-
                                       licity that exists around Mr. Skilling’s testimony, I think most of
                                       you probably know that he lacked the ability to remember a lot of
                                       things and in some cases suggested that he had no relation to the
                                       involvement of the partnership.
                                          Let me ask you, Mr. Sefton, do you believe that Mr. Skilling was
                                       accurate in his testimony in front of Congress?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. During my time in Enron Global Finance, I don’t
                                       believe I had any conversations with Mr. Skilling at all. So I have
                                       no basis on which to judge.
                                          Mr. BURR. But you did leave some handwritten notes about your
                                       understanding of the makeup of the partnerships and the need for
                                       Mr. Skilling’s signature to accompany the approval, didn’t you?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I’m not sure that my notes talk about his——
                                          Mr. BURR. Who replaced you?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Jordan Mintz.
                                          Mr. BURR. And didn’t Mr. Mintz testify to us that it was, in fact,
                                       the notes that you left when you served in his role that sort of
                                       guided him as to what everybody’s involvement was and who had
                                       to sign off?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I didn’t hear Mr. Mintz testify to that.
                                          Mr. BURR. Was that the intention of any of the notes that you
                                       wrote, if they referred to the need for Mr. Skilling’s signature, is
                                       that something that you understood was needed?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. As I explained earlier, I did not understand that it
                                       was required by the Board when they waived the conflict of inter-
                                       est.
                                          Mr. BURR. Mr. Derrick, do you believe that from what you know,
                                       Mr. Skilling was completely candid with his testimony in front of
                                       Congress?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, Congressman, as you can appreciate, I have
                                       no way of knowing, in fact, what Mr. Skilling did or did not know.
                                       If your question relates to whether it was my view that his signa-
                                       ture was required on the documents, certainly based on my con-
                                       versations with Mr. Mintz, that would have been my under-
                                       standing.
                                          Mr. BURR. Did Mr. Mintz dream this up? Was it printed some-
                                       where or did he get it from the notes that Mr. Sefton left?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I don’t know where Mr. Mintz received his infor-
                                       mation. I do recall though that at one of the Audit Committee
                                       meetings that it was presented as a control mechanism by Mr.
                                       Causey, as I recall, and Mr. Mintz was there. But as to the basis
                                       for where that came from, I don’t have personal knowledge of that.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00057   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 58 ===
                                                                                          54

                                          Mr. BURR. There was one thing that I know was printed at
                                       Enron and that was the Code of Conduct, correct?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Correct, yes sir.
                                          Mr. BURR. The Code of Conduct was waived by the board in at
                                       least two instances for Andy Fastow, am I correct?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. You are correct.
                                          Mr. BURR. Were you ever consulted as counsel on whether that
                                       was a smart thing for Enron to do?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Congressman, I don’t ever recall being consulted.
                                          Mr. BURR. Did you ever supply a recommendation on whether as
                                       counsel the board should waive the Code of Conduct?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I don’t recall being consulted on that.
                                          Mr. BURR. Mr. Dilg, was your law firm consulted on the board’s
                                       decision whether they should waive the Code of Conduct?
                                          Mr. DILG. We did not advise the board.
                                          Mr. BURR. It’s a very reputable law firm nationally. Is it common
                                       for companies to have a Code of Conduct that is waived the way
                                       that Enron has waived this Code of Conduct or waive a Code of
                                       Conduct at all?
                                          Mr. DILG. I could speak to what’s common, Representative, by
                                       companies that have Codes of Conduct have them there for a pur-
                                       pose which is to make sure they know where there is a conflict of
                                       interest and they feel that they’ve dealt with it appropriately.
                                          Mr. BURR. That’s my understanding from CO’s as well and they
                                       have also expressed to me in my conversations that they can’t
                                       imagine that it would take an unbelievable circumstance within
                                       their company for a Code of Conduct to be waived.
                                          Let me go back to you, Mr. Sefton. I think the LJM2 approval
                                       sheet was your creation and I just want to ask you because as I
                                       go down the sheet from that sheet it says the persons negotiating
                                       for Enron, Ben Glisson. Excuse me, this is for Raptor. Persons ne-
                                       gotiating for LJM, Michael Kopper. Both who work for Fastow, cor-
                                       rect?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Yes.
                                          Mr. BURR. In the 2000 Proxy, as it relates to it, it says these
                                       transactions occurred in the ordinary course of Enron’s business
                                       and were negotiated on an arm’s length basis with senior officers
                                       of Enron other than Mr. Fastow.
                                          Is the term ‘‘at arm’s length’’ in this proxy statement an accurate
                                       depiction of the negotiations that took place between Mr. Glisson
                                       and Mr. Kopper, in your opinion?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I believe the reference to senior officer is to Mr.
                                       Causey and Mr. Buy.
                                          Mr. BURR. I’m reading off the sheet. Listen, persons negotiating
                                       for LJM, Michael Kopper. As counsel, how did you monitor the ne-
                                       gotiations or did you?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I don’t believe I monitored the negotiations.
                                          Mr. BURR. Mr. Sefton, on June 28, 2000 you signed this approval
                                       sheet. So I would take for granted it was your understanding that
                                       at that time what was on this sheet was accurate, that the negotia-
                                       tions took place between Glisan. He also signed the sheet. In addi-
                                       tion, Mr. Rogers, is your name Rex?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Yes sir.
                                          Mr. BURR. You signed this sheet too.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00058   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 59 ===
                                                                                          55

                                          Mr. ROGERS. Yes sir, my signing those deal approval sheets were
                                       for the limited purpose of Section 4(a) which was——
                                          Mr. BURR. Just share with us, if you will, since there’s some con-
                                       fusion. Who negotiated for Enron and who negotiated for the part-
                                       nership?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. On this particular transaction or any transaction?
                                          Mr. BURR. This one.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I don’t know the answer to that.
                                          Mr. BURR. Mr. Derrick, on October 17, Enron was informed by
                                       the SEC of an inquiry, correct?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. That is correct.
                                          Mr. BURR. And what date was the first memo that went com-
                                       pany-wide to Enron relative to a change in the document protection
                                       of rules at Enron?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. If memory serves me correctly, Congressman, I be-
                                       lieve it was on October 25 with respect to the litigation that had
                                       been filed.
                                          Mr. BURR. Share with me with all the concerns that didn’t start
                                       with October 17, what transpired in an 8-day period at Enron and
                                       specifically in the legal counsel’s office that would delay for 8 days
                                       a memorandum to protect all documents given that you knew that
                                       there was an SEC inquiry?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. As you know, Congressman, we sent out a number
                                       of e-mails with respect to document presentation, preservation. I
                                       think with respect to the limited time that you’re referring to, fol-
                                       lowing the communication from the Securities and Exchange Com-
                                       mission, Mr. Rogers became involved in that as our representative,
                                       having been a former member of the SEC’s organization.
                                          If your point is were we concerned about any document destruc-
                                       tion at that time——
                                          Mr. BURR. Was this the first SEC inquiry that had been pre-
                                       sented to Enron?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I’ll have to refer to Mr. Rogers. I don’t personally
                                       recall another SEC inquiry.
                                          Mr. BURR. Mr. Rogers, is an SEC inquiry, given that you’ve got
                                       some SEC experience, is that a serious thing?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Very serious.
                                          Mr. BURR. Would you as with your knowledge of SEC and law
                                       background, is that something that would immediately send off a
                                       signal we need to protect everything that’s here?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Yes sir.
                                          Mr. BURR. And what would take 8 days in your opinion to deter-
                                       mine it’s time to send out a company-wide memo to say don’t throw
                                       anything away, this is serious.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I don’t know the answer to that. I think in those
                                       first several days after the notice or the inquiry from the SEC,
                                       there was a lot of activity at Enron through responses to media re-
                                       quests.
                                          Mr. BURR. But you served in a legal capacity, correct?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. That’s correct.
                                          Mr. BURR. And in a legal capacity with an SEC background, you
                                       couldn’t have been distracted by media requests, given the serious-
                                       ness that you knew this inquiry weighted?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00059   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 60 ===
                                                                                          56

                                          Mr. ROGERS. No sir, our immediate reaction was to respond to
                                       the SEC request for documentation, for information. That was the
                                       immediate response.
                                          Mr. BURR. Is part of an SEC inquiry and the request that goes
                                       along with it the protection of documents?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I don’t recall that being part of the request, but cer-
                                       tainly anyone at the company, certainly anyone in the legal staff
                                       is going to——
                                          Mr. BURR. Knows that document destruction after that inquiry
                                       is noticed to be a serious, serious thing, right?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Yes sir.
                                          Mr. BURR. And let me ask you, were you aware of any document
                                       destruction that took place at Enron?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I am not aware of any document destruction at
                                       Enron Corp.
                                          Mr. BURR. Mr. Derrick, are you aware of any document destruc-
                                       tion that took place at Enron?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I’m not aware of any relevant document—if you
                                       mean literally any document destruction, there are various things,
                                       trade secret issues that, of course, would legitimately be being dis-
                                       posed of, but in terms of any relevant document destruction, Con-
                                       gressman, I am not, and as you recall, later when there was a re-
                                       port which was widely publicized with respect to potential concerns
                                       about that, the response of Enron was to request the FBI to come
                                       in. We opened our doors and cooperated fully with them.
                                          Mr. BURR. Clearly, you did, and I think there was a lag and I’m
                                       truly concerned on the 8 days. And my time has run out, but I
                                       would like to ask Mr. Dilg, short answer if you will, for the chair-
                                       man’s indulgence.
                                          Were there legal opinions and/or work provided by Vinson & Elk-
                                       ins that were ignored by Enron?
                                          Mr. DILG. Again, as I stated earlier——
                                          Mr. BURR. You have advised them on numerous legal opinions.
                                       You’ve stated that.
                                          Mr. DILG. We’ve advised on numerous legal matters. As I men-
                                       tioned earlier, there’s never a situation that I’m aware of where we
                                       advised the company that something would be illegal that they ig-
                                       nored that advice. We give advice on a daily basis to our clients as
                                       far as things that we think may be a better way to do something
                                       or often offer even business advice that companies may decide not
                                       to follow. That is sort of a normal occurrence, but when it comes
                                       to whether something is illegal, I’m not aware of Enron ever not
                                       following our advice in that connection.
                                          Mr. BURR. I once again would like to thank all of you for your
                                       testimony today. I hope in the end, we’re able to go back and read
                                       the transcripts and understand a little bit better what happened,
                                       but I’ve got to share with you that is frustrating from this end to
                                       actually hold documents that were at Enron that named partners,
                                       that named negotiators, that named participants. Nobody can re-
                                       member whether they were involved or not, that from the top of
                                       Enron to the legal counsel at Enron that it seems like the only per-
                                       son that knew what was going on was Sherron Watkins. And I
                                       question whether she was taken seriously by anybody, including
                                       the review. It’s quite honest that Enron probably got what they




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00060   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 61 ===
                                                                                          57

                                       paid for, $60,000 you said, was—I thought that was a drop in the
                                       bucket for the degree of the accusations that were made. But I
                                       think that gives me some idea of exactly the extent of what you
                                       were asked to review. I thank you.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The gentleman’s time has expired. The com-
                                       mittee is joined by two members who are members of the full com-
                                       mittee, but not the Subcommittee and I’m going to recognize them
                                       in one moment for inquiry. Before I do, I’m going to exercise the
                                       prerogative of the chair to follow up on something here.
                                          I’m looking at an LJM2 approval sheet. It’s Tab 20 in your note-
                                       books. You may all want to refer to this. And it’s about halfway
                                       through the set of documents in your notebooks in Tab 20. And this
                                       describes a deal between Talon, which is a Special Purpose Entity
                                       organized for the purpose of entering into certain derivative trans-
                                       actions. LJM2 says—it says that LJM2 through its 100 percent vot-
                                       ing control, Talon has unilateral ability to make investment deci-
                                       sions for Talon. Now—it’s the Raptor deal.
                                          It indicates in the person negotiating for Enron in this case is
                                       Ben Glisan. The person negotiating for LJM is Michael Kopper. Ob-
                                       viously, both of these gentleman work for Mr. Fastow and each
                                       working for him under one of his different hats that he wore.
                                          A number of you folks signed the approval deal. These trans-
                                       actions were negotiated by Enron employees who were working for
                                       both Enron and LJM2 at the same time. Enron’s Year 2000 proxy
                                       statement reads, ‘‘These transactions occurred in the ordinary
                                       course of Enron’s business and were negotiated on an arm’s length
                                       basis, that senior officers of Enron other than Mr. Fastow’’ and
                                       that was signed by, among others, Mr. Rogers and Mr. Sefton.
                                          My question is Mr. Sefton and Mr. Rogers, beginning with you,
                                       how did you ascertain that, in fact, these were arm’s length—these
                                       negotiations were at an arm’s length basis?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I’ll respond first. Again, my signing off on all of
                                       these deal approval sheets was for the limited purpose of Section
                                       4(a). Will this transaction require disclosure as a certain trans-
                                       action in Enron’s proxy statement? And the answer is yes. If any
                                       of the transactions has a value of $60,000 or more it will be dis-
                                       closed in the proxy statement.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Were you aware that these two gentlemen were
                                       negotiating against one another?
                                          You signed a document that said that you knew that they were,
                                       but that you knew that it was arm’s length.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Again, I was signing for the limited purpose of Sec-
                                       tion 4(a).
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Did you know that they were negotiating
                                       against one another? That’s—let’s take it one question at a time.
                                       Did you know that these two gentlemen were negotiating against
                                       one another?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I don’t recall.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. But you signed a form that said that you did
                                       and that, in fact, not only did you know that they did, but you
                                       knew that it was arm’s length.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Well, signed for the purposes of Section 4(a).
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Sefton, how about you? Did you know that
                                       these individuals were negotiating against one another?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00061   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 62 ===
                                                                                          58

                                          Mr. SEFTON. Yes.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. And did you sign a form saying that you knew
                                       that they were negotiating at this negotiation was at arm’s length?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I signed the form.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Did you in signing that form, in fact, certify
                                       that they were negotiating at arm’s length?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No, I did not.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. What is the significance of your signature on
                                       the form? What were you certifying? What were you proving?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I think the important thing to remember is that this
                                       transaction is being approved by Mr. Buy and Mr. Causey, and
                                       that is the procedure that the board had put in place to ensure that
                                       the transactions were being done at an arm’s length basis.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. And how did you know that it was approved by
                                       Causey?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Because they are signing the form as well.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. So in other words, your role when you get this
                                       form is to look on it and see if Mr. Causey’s signature is on it and
                                       then certify that his signature is on it and put your signature on
                                       it to certify that his signature is on it. Is that right?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. What? The board required——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Is that—just answer that question. When you
                                       signed these approval forms, what you were doing was saying, yup,
                                       I see Causey’s signature on here. It’s right above mine. I’ll sign
                                       mine name to certify that I see Mr. Causey’s signature. Is that
                                       what you did?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. What did you do?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I would also review the form and make sure it had
                                       been completed, all the blanks filled in. That it was properly filled
                                       out. Since I had been involved in creating the form, I was——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Whose job was it to—who certifies that, in fact,
                                       these transactions occurred in the ordinary course of Enron’s busi-
                                       ness and were negotiated on an arm’s length basis with senior offi-
                                       cers of Enron’s, other than Mr. Fastow? Whose job was that?
                                          Mr. Derrick, can you tell us whose job it was to certify this was
                                       arm’s length? This goes right to the core of the conflict of interest?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, I believe that it was Mr. Causey and Mr. Buy
                                       who were charged with the responsibility on the business side of
                                       that, in determining that. If there had been matters that were un-
                                       lawful, I think that the lawyers would have been signing this. And
                                       let me say I did not create this form, but that would be my under-
                                       standing, Mr. Chairman, is that the lawyers were there to en-
                                       sure——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. You were aware that they were negotiating
                                       against one another?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. No, this is not a form that came to me, Mr. Chair-
                                       man.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Would you have considered it improper if you
                                       knew that they were negotiating against one another?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. At the time of this, again, I’m not sure what the
                                       date here was, but I don’t think that we became aware that Mr.
                                       Glisan had any interest that was not tantamount to Enron’s inter-
                                       est until after the investigation began.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00062   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 63 ===
                                                                                          59

                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The private placement memorandums list the
                                       principals. It says the day to day activities of the partnership will
                                       be managed by Mssrs. Fastow, Kopper and Glisan. So Mr. Sefton
                                       saw this form. Mr. Astin saw this form. Mr. Rogers saw this form.
                                       You all reviewed it and that didn’t tell you that there was some-
                                       thing less than an arm’s length negotiation going on here?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I’m sorry, what form are you referring to?
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. It’s the LJM2 co-investment LP. It’s the private
                                       placement memorandum.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. That’s not an Enron document.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. That’s 21.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Okay. It’s a private placement memorandum.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Right.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Of LJM. I reviewed a draft of it. I didn’t see the
                                       final version of it.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Do you think the draft of it indicated that the
                                       partners were—that the day to day activities of the partnership
                                       will be managed by Fastow, Kopper and Glisan?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. It was my understanding that Glisan was not in the
                                       final draft. I didn’t see the final, but it was my understanding that
                                       wasn’t going to be Glisan’s role.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. You can remember that?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I do remember that.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. You remember that—why do you think that
                                       sticks out in your mind? Why would you have recalled that?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I recall that because——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Had it been otherwise, you would have been
                                       concerned?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I recall it because we had a senior corporate securi-
                                       ties lawyer at Vinson & Elkins review the memorandum. Again, it’s
                                       not a memorandum.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Who was that?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. It was Bob Baird. It wasn’t a memorandum. It’s not
                                       an Enron Corp. memorandum. It was prepared by LJM and their
                                       counsel. And the draft that I saw had, among other things, Ben
                                       Glisan, my understanding, I didn’t see the final draft, but it wasn’t
                                       my understanding that Ben Glisan was going to be acting on behalf
                                       of LJM.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Would you have thought it proper for these
                                       guys to be negotiating against one another, one on behalf of the
                                       partnership and one on behalf of the company? Could that ever
                                       have been proper?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. My understanding at the time is that Mr. Glisan
                                       was the treasurer of Enron Corp. and that he would have been act-
                                       ing on behalf of Enron Corp.
                                          I didn’t have any information at the time that indicated other-
                                       wise.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The chair recognizes the gentleman from Mas-
                                       sachusetts, Mr. Markey for 10 minutes.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. Mr. Derrick,
                                       I want to recap where we are right now in this hearing. You’ve tes-
                                       tified that when Sherron Watkins’ allegation came to your atten-
                                       tion Enron and Vinson & Elkins designed (1) to ignore her warn-
                                       ings, that Vinson & Elkins and Arthur Anderson had conflicts and




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00063   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 64 ===
                                                                                          60

                                       shouldn’t be used to investigate the allegations; (2) you also decided
                                       to limit the nature and scope of Vinson & Elkins inquiry so that
                                       it didn’t examine the underlying accounting, didn’t employ full dis-
                                       covery and investigative techniques; (3) you also decided notwith-
                                       standing this blistering, scalding indictment of a memo which Ms.
                                       Watkins delivered to Mr. Lay and to you, subsequently, you also
                                       decided, No. 3, not to interview any former employees, like Jeff
                                       Skilling or Cliff Baxter who might have been able to shed some
                                       light on the transaction; (4) not to follow-up on leads Sherron Wat-
                                       kins provided with respect to other employees who could substan-
                                       tiate her allegations, notwithstanding the fact that she has almost
                                       been completely vindicated in retrospect; and (5) to largely limit
                                       your inquiry to interviewing individuals like Andy Fastow and
                                       Doug Duncan who were responsible for putting together these
                                       transactions or reviewing and approving them and who would
                                       therefore be likely to defend these transactions as appropriate and
                                       lawful.
                                          So Mr. Derrick, what I’d like to do is just go back to the begin-
                                       ning of the process which you put in place. According to your testi-
                                       mony to the Powers Committee, you first learned of the Sherron
                                       Watkins letter when Ken Lay gave it to you. What did Mr. Lay say
                                       to you when he gave you this letter?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I don’t recall the specific conversation, and I don’t
                                       recall whether, as I think I made it clear there, whether he walked
                                       it over, whether he sent it over, but immediately upon receiving it
                                       I distributed the copies of that memorandum to what I thought at
                                       the time were the appropriate people, which included Sharon
                                       Butcher, who keeps care of our tracking log, to Mr. Fastow,
                                       Mr.——
                                          Mr. MARKEY. So you are saying you cannot remember if Mr. Lay
                                       handed this to you personally? You cannot remember that.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Congressman, all I can testify to is what I person-
                                       ally recall.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. This is a bombshell. He handed you dynamite that
                                       could blow up the Corporation or he did not. You don’t remember
                                       if he did.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I don’t recall whether it was carried over or wheth-
                                       er he brought it over. No, I’m sorry, I just don’t.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. That is hard to believe. Now, let me ask you this:
                                       Did you and Mr. Lay discuss whether the issues raised in the letter
                                       might arise at an all-employee meeting scheduled to be held in a
                                       few days?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. There was an all-employee meeting, and the ques-
                                       tion was——
                                          Mr. MARKEY. You discussed that subject with Mr. Lay.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I think we did, yes. I can’t say that it was the time
                                       that I received the letter.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. You told the Power Committee that in fact you did
                                       discuss subject with——
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Yes, but the question, Congressman, is whether it
                                       was at the time I received the letter. I don’t recall whether it was
                                       at the time I received the letter.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. Subsequent to the receipt of the letter, within the
                                       next several days, did you discuss it with him?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00064   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 65 ===
                                                                                          61

                                          Mr. DERRICK. Yes.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. You did. Now, you and Mr. Lay discussed the need
                                       to have an investigation done into these allegations. Who proposed
                                       selection of Vinson & Elkins, you or Mr. Lay?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I believe—well, it was a mutual discussion, but I
                                       think it would have been me who proposed Vinson & Elkins.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. Okay. Did you discuss with Mr. Lay the potential
                                       conflict of interest which Vinson & Elkins had with Enron?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Yes, we did. We discussed the possible downside
                                       because they had been involved in it. On the other hand, there
                                       was, as I’ve said before, the great strength that they had the back-
                                       ground, and following up on that—but the question ultimately
                                       would be for the law firm to determine whether in fact there was
                                       a conflict of interest.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. Did Mr. Lay suggest that Vison & Elkins’ inves-
                                       tigation be limited in scope and that it not examine the accounting
                                       and that it not be a full-scale inquiry with discovery and interviews
                                       with both current and former employees? Did he ever suggest that
                                       to you?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. We discussed it. I don’t recall that Mr. Lay pro-
                                       posed that. The question was how do we, as quickly as practical,
                                       get an investigation that will enable us to have recommendations
                                       as to whether to launch a full-scale investigation.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. So did Mr. Lay say to you that it would preferable
                                       if we did not have to go outside of Vinson & Elkins or Arthur An-
                                       dersen?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. To the best of my knowledge, he never expressed
                                       that.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. He did not.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. He did not.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. Okay. Did you and Mr. Lay discuss potential ad-
                                       verse publicity that would result if Ms. Watkins’ allegations be-
                                       came public?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. To the best of my recollection, there was never a
                                       discussion with respect to that.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. Did you and Mr. Lay discuss the potential litiga-
                                       tion that could result if these allegations became public?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. To the best of my knowledge, we never had a dis-
                                       cussion. Our sole purpose was to address these as quickly as——
                                          Mr. MARKEY. You are saying absolutely not. Mr. Lay never
                                       raised the public relations aspect of this, the consequences to the
                                       corporation if this ever became public. He never said that to you
                                       during any of these meeting?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I believe that you are referring to the initial meet-
                                       ings we had.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. I am referring now to all of the meetings up to the
                                       point at which ultimately we have a release of this report by Vin-
                                       son & Elkins. Did he ever mention at any time his great concerns
                                       about—remember now, you are a former partner of Vinson & Elk-
                                       ins now dealing with the managing partner of Vinson & Elkins, so
                                       we are very concerned about this conflict that exists, at least in
                                       your mind, to preexisting loyalty to a firm that basically gave you
                                       the opportunity to work at Enron. So what about any conversa-
                                       tion—did Mr. Lay at any time ever have any conversations with




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00065   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 66 ===
                                                                                          62

                                       you about the publicity consequences if this report was dev-
                                       astating?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Congressman, the only recollection I have would be
                                       at the time that Vinson & Elkins presented their presentation to
                                       us, pointing out the possibility of adverse publicity and litigation,
                                       but I don’t recall Mr. Lay ever raising that as an issue.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. Did you ever discuss with Mr. Lay whether Ms.
                                       Watkins could or should be dismissed?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. No, I do not recall ever having a conversation with
                                       Mr. Lay. He mentioned that she had requested that she be reas-
                                       signed from Mr. Fastow, but there was never any indication in any
                                       conversation I had with Mr. Lay with respect to any firing of Ms.
                                       Watkins.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. Okay. Now, Mr. Dilg, did Mr. Derrick at any time
                                       say to you that he would prefer that you resolve this question in
                                       a way in which you did not have to recommend another firm do the
                                       investigation?
                                          Mr. DILG. No, sir.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. He never did.
                                          Mr. DILG. No, sir.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. Did you ever recommend to him that you would
                                       prefer that it stay in-house and that another firm not be called in
                                       to do an independent investigation?
                                          Mr. DILG. No, sir. Our final recommendation in the October 15
                                       letter was that there was no further investigation.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. When Mr. Lay—did you ever talk to Mr. Lay about
                                       this case, Mr. Dilg?
                                          Mr. DILG. We had one meeting with Mr. Derrick and Mr. Lay I
                                       believe—I think the date was September 21, but I am not positive.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. And at that meeting, did Mr. Lay say to you that
                                       he would prefer if you did the investigation, that is Vinson & Elk-
                                       ins, and not some outside firm?
                                          Mr. DILG. No, sir. We were reporting on the investigation we had
                                       done thus far.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. And at that point, you had not reached any conclu-
                                       sions that would indicate that the accounting practices or other
                                       practices would cause problems for the firm?
                                          Mr. DILG. We reported on what we had heard from Arthur An-
                                       dersen with respect to the accounting.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. And you were satisfied that there were no prob-
                                       lems?
                                          Mr. DILG. I am not an accountant, so we alerted him to the ref-
                                       erences to creative and aggressive, et cetera, that we had heard
                                       during our interviews, but we did tell him that Arthur Andersen
                                       was fully comfortable with their accounting treatment.
                                          Mr. MARKEY. You know, I have a real problem with all of this.
                                       Obviously, the Powers Committee conducted a real investigation.
                                       Enron and Vinson & Elkins did not in fact conduct a real investiga-
                                       tion. When the ordinary investor or employee at Enron thinks that
                                       an investigation is being done, they think that people, that is the
                                       investigators, are acting like Columbo, asking all the questions
                                       that no one else would think of in order to make sure that the
                                       truth was obtained. In fact, what you did was act more like Inspec-
                                       tor Clueso, stumbling over obvious evidence, not interviewing obvi-




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00066   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 67 ===
                                                                                          63

                                       ous suspects or witnesses, and in fact coming to conclusions that
                                       delayed the point at which a real reckoning was in fact possible.
                                         And I think if you had not conducted this phony investigation,
                                       that it might have been possible that we would not have seen the
                                       collapse of Enron, that we would have had enough time to take the
                                       types of actions, not we, but rather the corporation and others, in
                                       order to save that corporation, the employees’ jobs, the investors’
                                       savings. And so I have absolutely no question in my mind that
                                       there was a decision made here. I wish I knew definitively who
                                       made the decision that this was going to be too dangerous. We
                                       don’t know that at this point.
                                         I disagree with Ms. Watkins. She rules out Mr. Lay. I don’t think
                                       that this committee should rule him out. I don’t think yet we know
                                       what took place in those conversations initially after he received
                                       this memo from her. It is such a blistering, scalding indictment of
                                       the practices at the firm that ultimately have been almost com-
                                       pletely vindicated, that much more is going to have to be found by
                                       this committee. I thank you once again, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I thank my friend from Massachusetts, and I
                                       am pleased now to recognize a round of questions my friend from
                                       Texas, Mr. Green.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate the op-
                                       portunity to wave in on the subcommittee, and I have an opening
                                       statement that we have submitted. And I guess before I go into
                                       questions, the frustrations that someone—particularly someone
                                       from Houston for 30 years had the utmost respect for Arthur An-
                                       dersen and Vinson & Elkins and the last 16 for Enron, even if we
                                       are on a different sides of a political issues oftentimes, and to see
                                       what has happened. And that is the frustration that we see, and
                                       you see if from other members who maybe aren’t directly related
                                       to what has happened in Houston.
                                         Mr. Rogers, first, who did Mr. Glisan report to at Enron?
                                         Mr. ROGERS. He reported to Mr. Fastow.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. So he wasn’t independent of Mr. Fastow?
                                         Mr. ROGERS. I am sorry?
                                         Mr. GREEN. So he was not independent of Mr. Fastow if he re-
                                       ported to Mr. Fastow.
                                         Mr. ROGERS. When you say independent, I mean he reported to
                                       Mr. Fastow, that was his superior officer, that is correct.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. Mr. Sefton, according to your notes, and they
                                       are under Tab 18, and it is actually 24309, on September 29, 1999,
                                       shortly after you arrived in Houston to begin working for Mr.
                                       Fastow, you had a meeting with Mr. Fastow, is that correct?
                                         Mr. SEFTON. These notes would indicate that I did, yes.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. And he explained the LJM deals to you, didn’t
                                       he?
                                         Mr. SEFTON. I don’t recall that meeting. My best recollection of
                                       what happened at that meeting is in these notes.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. And your notes reflect LJM1, and without
                                       having to read all the notes from September 29, they reflect LJM
                                       just some of the highlights, without having to go into them because
                                       I only 10 minutes, but your notes reflect discussion on LJM, is that
                                       correct, these notes that we have in Tab 18?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00067   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 68 ===
                                                                                          64

                                          Mr. SEFTON. Yes. These notes were taken, I believe, during a dis-
                                       cussion. I don’t know what each individual means, whether it re-
                                       flects a statement made by Mr. Fastow or whether it is sort of an
                                       observation on my own part.
                                          Mr. GREEN. Well, assuming they were your notes and they were
                                       observations of your meeting, one of the purposes of LJM1 that
                                       your notes directly mention was to hedge Enron’s investment in
                                       RythmsNet stock, which was very volatile. Enron’s investment had
                                       gone from $10 million to $150 million in less than 6 months after
                                       RythmsNet went public; is that correct?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I don’t know that.
                                          Mr. GREEN. Okay.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I wasn’t involved in the LJM1 transaction, that took
                                       place before I arrived.
                                          Mr. GREEN. Okay. Well, but your notes that we are going from
                                       talk about your discussion with him, and maybe I need to read the
                                       notes to you, because they are there. ‘‘Two things led to LJM1: for-
                                       ward contents to purchase Enron stock, prices below market. Buy-
                                       ing shares back would have increased equity, but we would have
                                       had to borrow money which would cause problems. Had the
                                       Rhythm stock position, huge volatility. We want to hedge the
                                       Rhythm stock position but couldn’t do it in market.’’ Those are your
                                       notes.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Yes.
                                          Mr. GREEN. Okay. I would appreciate it if you would at least fa-
                                       miliarize yourself with your notes. Then when I ask you the ques-
                                       tion, instead of me having to take up my 10 minutes in reading
                                       your notes to you.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I am sorry. That wasn’t——
                                          Mr. GREEN. Enron could not sell its Rhythm stock for another 6
                                       months; is that correct?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Is that in my notes?
                                          Mr. GREEN. No, it is not, but I am asking you from other knowl-
                                       edge other than these notes. Your notes reflect the volatility of the
                                       Rhythms stock position and the huge volatility. Do you know that
                                       Enron couldn’t sell their investment in it for 6 months?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I am sorry, but I did not work on that transaction.
                                       I am not familiar with what happened there.
                                          Mr. GREEN. Okay. That is what Vince Kaminski told the Powers
                                       Committee, though, that Vince Kaminski was the head or Enron’s
                                       research group at the time, told the Power Committee that could
                                       not buy such a hedge in the market because it prohibitively expen-
                                       sive, obviously very volatile from your notes. In fact, yesterday the
                                       analyst from PricewaterhouseCoopers who valued that stock for
                                       Enron told our staff that the volatility was off the charts. So, again,
                                       reflects your notes from 1999.
                                          According to your notes, Mr. Fastow told you that Enron couldn’t
                                       hedge Rhythms in the market. Was it also your understanding that
                                       no outside third party would have taken the hedge at the price
                                       LJM did?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. All that I recall from this meeting are these notes.
                                          Mr. GREEN. Okay. Your notes, again, seem to refer to the
                                       Rhythms stock position had huge volatility, and your notes reflect,
                                       ‘‘We wanted to hedge the Rhythms stock position but couldn’t do




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00068   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 69 ===
                                                                                          65

                                       it in the market.’’ So that agrees with what Mr. Kaminski shared
                                       with      us     yesterday,    and     also    the    analyst     from
                                       PricewaterhouseCoopers.
                                          It is very interesting in the 1999 annual report, footnote 16, that
                                       states that, ‘‘Management believes that the terms of the trans-
                                       actions related with the representative terms that would be nego-
                                       tiated with an unrelated third party.’’ Did you see any evidence
                                       from your notes or from your memory other than your notes that
                                       that was an independent third party?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I am sorry, you are referring to what document?
                                          Mr. GREEN. Okay. The annual report for Enron was 1999.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. The annual report?
                                          Mr. GREEN. Footnote 16. Just trust me I am——
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Okay.
                                          Mr. GREEN. [continuing] saying that footnote 16 states that,
                                       ‘‘Management believes that the terms of the transactions with re-
                                       lated parties are representative of terms which would be negotiated
                                       with unrelated third parties.’’ That is in that report. Do you have
                                       any evidence of that from your notes or your memory that that was
                                       really unrelated third parties in LJM1?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Well, I am not sure if I am answering your ques-
                                       tion, but I wasn’t involved in the preparation of that annual report
                                       footnote. I am not familiar with——
                                          Mr. GREEN. I know, but I am asking you do you have any infor-
                                       mation that would show that that footnote was correct from your
                                       notes here and any information at all, other than your recollection
                                       from these notes?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No, I don’t think there is anything in my notes that
                                       would speak to that.
                                          Mr. GREEN. Okay. The proxy says that same thing, the proxy
                                       statement. It states that, ‘‘Management believes that the terms of
                                       the transactions were reasonable and no less favorable than the
                                       terms of similar arrangements with unrelated third parties.’’ Mr.
                                       Sefton, Mr. Derrick and Mr. Astin, tell me what basis you had on
                                       signing off on the statement, and what was the due diligence that
                                       these representations called for?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Congressman, speaking for myself, I didn’t have a
                                       personal involvement in that. We had in place what we considered
                                       to be a large team of qualified people who would have been looking
                                       at that and preparing the proxy statements. And it would have
                                       been on the basis of what they did that would have been the basis
                                       for that statement.
                                          Mr. GREEN. Who was in charge of making sure this proxy state-
                                       ment was correct then within the Enron legal team?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, internally, Mr. Rogers was leading our secu-
                                       rities effort.
                                          Mr. GREEN. Okay. Mr. Rogers, the statement that, ‘‘Management
                                       believes that the terms of the transactions were reasonable and no
                                       less favorable than the terms of similar arrangements with unre-
                                       lated third parties,’’ did you sign off on that statement to be in the
                                       proxy?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I was part of the team that was charged to gather
                                       the information. I did not do the personal due diligence on that.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00069   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 70 ===
                                                                                          66

                                          Mr. GREEN. What was the due diligence from the team, if not
                                       yourself?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. The due diligence were lawyers and accountants
                                       within Enron were assigned to gather the information. I didn’t
                                       draft the proxy disclosure.
                                          Mr. GREEN. But you signed off on it.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Well, when you say signed off on it, I reviewed it,
                                       and based on the information that was presented to us, we agreed
                                       with it.
                                          Mr. GREEN. What information was presented to you from the
                                       lawyers and accountants to show that this was no less favorable
                                       than unrelated third parties?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. The internal legal team that worked on the under-
                                       lying transactions. My team did not work—was not assigned to
                                       work on any of the LJM or any of the structured finance trans-
                                       actions. So we had no personal knowledge of them. The parties that
                                       were assigned to draft the proxy disclosure were the parties that
                                       worked on the transactions and the lawyers and accountants that
                                       worked on the transactions that would have done the due diligence.
                                          Mr. GREEN. Can you give us some names of who that would be,
                                       the lawyers that worked for your team—or that worked for that?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I don’t know the specific lawyers and accountants.
                                       It would have been lawyers in the Enron Global Finance Unit and
                                       the accounting team that reports to Rick Causey who also signs off
                                       on all of the LJM transactions, along with the chief risk officer who
                                       was reviewing these transactions in terms of fairness to Enron.
                                          Mr. GREEN. So someone told you in those teams that this state-
                                       ment was correct, and you signed off on it.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Based on that compilation of due diligence, correct.
                                          Mr. GREEN. Mr. Rogers—and Mr. Chairman, I know—let me just
                                       ask, on the statements on the LJM approval sheet where you
                                       signed—in previous questions, you answered that you only signed
                                       off relating to 4(a).
                                          Mr. ROGERS. That is correct.
                                          Mr. GREEN. Is that 4(a) on the compliance sheet of this or is that
                                       some other——
                                          Mr. ROGERS. No, it is 4(a) on this sheet. It is 4(a), does it require
                                       proxy disclosure, and the answer is yes, because Andrew Fastow,
                                       as the chief financial officer of Enron, is a related party. There is
                                       a clear conflict; it is required to be disclosed.
                                          Mr. GREEN. It was required to be disclosed. I guess just as a law-
                                       yer, whenever I always sign for something that was specific only
                                       for, for example, 4(a) or whatever, I always wanted to make sure
                                       that was under my signature, and I think most documents I used
                                       to sign with Vinson & Elkins, if there was limited responsibility,
                                       I always spelled that out.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I wish I had done that.
                                          Mr. GREEN. I understand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. The Chair thanks the gentleman; his time has
                                       expired. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
                                       Waxman, for a round of questions.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Since the
                                       very first hearing on the Enron scandal before this committee, I
                                       have sought information about Enron’s Special Purpose Entities.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00070   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 71 ===
                                                                                          67

                                       What we know about these entities is very disturbing. While Enron
                                       employees made millions with no apparent risk, Enron share-
                                       holders and employees lost their shirts. And due to Enron’s re-
                                       markable political clout, not a single regulator was in a position to
                                       prevent this debacle.
                                          We are now 3 or 4 months into this investigation, yet we appear
                                       no closer to having a complete list of the partners and investors in
                                       Enron’s many partnerships. Amazingly, in previous hearings, nei-
                                       ther Enron’s executives nor its accountants could tell us who the
                                       partners and investors were. Well, testifying before us today are
                                       the lawyers who actually worked on many of these partnerships.
                                       Surely it will help that you witnesses will be able to shed some
                                       light on these important questions.
                                          Let me start with you, Ms. St. Clair. You worked on the legal as-
                                       pects of the Jedi/Chewco transaction. How can we find out who the
                                       partners and investors were in Enron’s many partnerships? Can
                                       you tell us who has this list and what the documents the com-
                                       mittee should request to obtain this list?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. With respect to Jedi/Chewco? I mean that is the
                                       only transaction that I am familiar with.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Well, how about any of the partnerships?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. I am not familiar with, other than looking at the
                                       partnership agreement itself and who signed it and whether it has
                                       a list of partners.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Who signed it—I am sorry, I didn’t hear what you
                                       said. You looked at the partnership agreement and who signed it.
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. What partner signed it and whether or not it has
                                       a list of partners. Some partnership agreements do.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Okay. And where would we be able to get a copy
                                       of those lists that were in those agreements, of partners?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. With respect to—I can only address with respect
                                       to the Chewco partnership.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Well, let us go to Jedi/Chewco.
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. Jedi/Chewco?
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Yes. Did that have a list of partners?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. I think the Chewco partnership agreement is in
                                       the files and has been available, yes.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Okay. And do you know whether that has been re-
                                       quested by this committee?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. I don’t know.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Well, I am going to make a request to the chair-
                                       man that he—Mr. Chairman, I would request since Ms. St. Clair
                                       believes the names of the partners are on the Jedi/Chewco—are in
                                       their files, that we request that information for the committee.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. My understanding, Mr. Waxman, is that re-
                                       quest is already before Enron and its counsel, and I don’t think we
                                       have yet received all of our responses. We have not received all the
                                       records, and if there is a need yet under that inquiry, that request
                                       for documents, to satisfy that, it has not been met, either by Vinson
                                       & Elkins or by the firm, I would renew it here today, and we will
                                       renew in writing if we need to.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Point of information, Mr. Chairman.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. The gentleman is recognized for a point of in-
                                       formation.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00071   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 72 ===
                                                                                          68

                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Mr. Chairman, this won’t go against my time, will
                                       it?
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. It will not go against your time. Depends how
                                       long his information is.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. I think the gentleman’s request is a very pertinent
                                       one, not only Chewco but for the other ones. As I understand from
                                       our staff, we have requested these documents to find out who the
                                       investors were for all these partnerships. And I think the question
                                       is, Mr. Chairman, how long ago did we request this information to
                                       find out who the partners were of these Special Purpose Entities?
                                       Just how long ago has it been, just approximately?
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. My understanding it has been since Decem-
                                       ber.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Okay.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. And we are still literally receiving documents
                                       from Enron as we speak. As you know, we are still trying to under-
                                       stand whether the documents we requested are available, or were
                                       they part of any potential shredding that went on at Enron, and
                                       that is still an open question.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. And the last question I have for Mr. Chairman,
                                       would these gentlemen—was it asked of the law firm these docu-
                                       ments or Enron? And if we are having a difficult time from Enron,
                                       can we ask the gentlemen here for the same set of documents, be-
                                       cause surely they kept a copy?
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. My understanding is the inquiries were di-
                                       rected to Enron itself, and obviously if we don’t come into posses-
                                       sion of that information from Enron, we will make a request upon
                                       Vinson & Elkins for that information. In fact, as I said, I am lodg-
                                       ing that request publicly today that information be provided to us
                                       voluntarily, because we apparently are having some trouble getting
                                       it from Enron itself.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Thank the gentleman.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Again, the gentleman has 8 minutes and 17
                                       seconds to go.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Well, I appreciate my colleague’s very helpful line
                                       of inquiry, because we are trying to get this information, and we
                                       have gone all these months without getting it. And I would hope
                                       the law firms that have it would submit it to us.
                                          Mr. Sefton, you were general counsel of Enron’s Global Finance
                                       Unit. You worked on certain aspects of the LJM partnerships. Can
                                       you tell us where we can obtain a list of the partners and investors
                                       in the LJM partnerships or other partnerships? Let us say the LJM
                                       partnerships first.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. It is my understanding that the partners in LJM
                                       are not known to Enron, because LJM was an outside entity, and
                                       I don’t believe that information has been made available to the
                                       company.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Who would have that information?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I believe Mr. Fastow would or I guess maybe now
                                       Mr. Kopper.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. And, Mr. Chairman, if I might ask whether that
                                       information has been requested from Mr. Kopper?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00072   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 73 ===
                                                                                          69

                                          Mr. SEFTON. I believe that would be the correct person to ask.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. I am sorry, would the gentleman from Cali-
                                       fornia reiterate which specific material?
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Well, I have asked Mr. Sefton about the LJM part-
                                       nership, and he thinks that the investors and names of the LJM
                                       partners are with Mr. Kopper. So I don’t know if this has been re-
                                       quested, but I think we ought—since he has identified where we
                                       can get that information, I would hope—rather than take up my
                                       time now, I will ask the Chair to get that information subpoenaed.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. For the gentleman’s information, we have re-
                                       quested those documents. We have some documents, and we will
                                       work with you to make sure that you have the opportunity to re-
                                       view them.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Thank you very much. Mr. Sefton, so you think it
                                       is there. Who is Mr. Kopper?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Mr. Kopper is a gentleman who purchased Mr.
                                       Fastow’s interest in LJM2, I understand.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Do you know who else might have a copy of the—
                                       or a list of the investors in LJM?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Mr. Fastow, possibly.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Okay. How about the other partnerships, do you
                                       have any information about the names of the partners and inves-
                                       tors in any of the other partnerships?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I would think that the corporate secretary at Enron
                                       would have information about all of the entities that Enron has an
                                       ownership interest in, and I believe the records reflect who all the
                                       other owners are, if it is not entirely owned by Enron. But others
                                       here can possibly clarify that in case I am wrong.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Does anybody want to make a clarification of that?
                                       Mr. Derrick?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, I could—I think it is—it would certainly be
                                       true that the Enron corporate secretary will have a list of all the
                                       Enron entities and in terms of the Enron ownership would cer-
                                       tainly have that. Now, as to a third party, for example, LJM, which
                                       is not an Enron entity, it is unlikely, in my judgment, that that in-
                                       formation would be available within the Enron corporate sec-
                                       retary’s office.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. And where would that information be available?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, again, I assume, with respect to any of these
                                       third party entities, it would be that entity itself. In the same way
                                       that Enron would have knowledge of its side of the ownership, the
                                       third party ought to have records which will identify who their
                                       owners are.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. So would it be fair to say that Enron would have
                                       a list of all these entities, but then we have to go to the entities
                                       to get the names of the investors?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I think it would be fair to say, Congressman, that
                                       Enron would have a list of the entities in which it has an owner-
                                       ship interest and could identify the Enron side of that equation.
                                       The other side of the transaction would be, by definition, not an
                                       Enron entity, and I think it is unlikely, though I can’t say with any
                                       certainty, but unlikely that the Enron record would disclose who
                                       the owners of that other entity are. And so my thought would be




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00073   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 74 ===
                                                                                          70

                                       that a request to that other—that third party entity would produce
                                       the information that you are requesting.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. And do we have a complete list of all the third
                                       party entities?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I don’t know the answer to that.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Does Enron have a list of all the third party enti-
                                       ties?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, Enron should have a list of all of the entities
                                       in which it, Enron, has an interest, which I hope is responsive to
                                       your question, I am not sure.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. And what third party entities are there that Enron
                                       wouldn’t have an interest but are connected to the Enron issue?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, for example, there could be several tiers
                                       within the third party entity. I don’t pretend to—I wasn’t involved
                                       in these transactions in any detail, but, for example, some of the
                                       charts that have been shown disclosed that there are multi-tiers,
                                       and that is what I am referring to.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. So if we are trying to find all the information, we
                                       start with all the third parties where Enron had an interest. Then
                                       we would go to each of those separate entities and ask them about
                                       other entities that they may have dealt with.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, that would be my thought, yes.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Okay.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Would the gentleman yield just for a second?
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. I am afraid to yield to you because I have so little
                                       time, but I know you probably will get your own time in a minute.
                                          Mr. Derrick, you were Enron’s general counsel. Can you tell the
                                       committee where we would find the necessary documents to obtain
                                       the list of partners and investors?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, I don’t think I have much to add to what I
                                       just said, Congressman, on that point.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Okay. Mr. Rogers, you are the only lawyer testi-
                                       fying today who still works for Enron, and you also worked on as-
                                       pects of the LJM transactions. Can you tell us where we can obtain
                                       a list of the partners and investors in LJM?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Actually, Congressman, I did not work on the LJM
                                       transactions, but I think part of the problem here is that LJM, de-
                                       spite Mr. Fastow’s relationship to it, is not an Enron entity; it is
                                       a separate entity. And I think that is part of the problem is that
                                       Enron doesn’t have access to the records of LJM and the investors
                                       in LJM. And I think part of the problem is the people that would
                                       have that information, I don’t know if it is going to be very helpful
                                       to you, as Mr. Sefton said, would be Andy Fastow, Michael Kopper,
                                       who I understand was the individual to whom Mr. Fastow sold his
                                       interest, the law firm representing LJM, which I am sure they at-
                                       torney/client privilege issues. But a lot of the information that you
                                       want on investors into these other entities, if they are not Enron
                                       subsidiaries or subsidiaries that Enron controls or has ownership
                                       interest in, I think that is part of the delay in getting this informa-
                                       tion. I am not sure Enron has that information.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Well, let me ask this of anybody at the table, be-
                                       cause you are all Vinson & Elkins lawyers. Does anybody have
                                       anything else to tell the committee where and how we can obtain




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00074   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 75 ===
                                                                                          71

                                       a list of the partners and investors in all these Enron special enti-
                                       ties? Anything more to add? Yes?
                                          Mr. ASTIN. Congressman, the only thing I would add is that I
                                       have read news reports that indicate there is litigation I believe in
                                       the State of Delaware regarding LJM2 that might disclose the
                                       names of the partners.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Let me ask each of you, if you would, to respond.
                                       Are you personally aware of the names of any of the investors in
                                       the Special Purpose Entities or other partnerships? And why don’t
                                       we start with you, Mr. Sefton?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I am sorry, am I aware of——
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Are you personally aware of any of the names of
                                       the investors or partners in this Special Purpose Entities? Can you
                                       tell us any that you know of and some of the figures that are in
                                       those entities?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Well, I know that Enron has formed several dif-
                                       ferent—many subsidiaries that I think would be classified as Spe-
                                       cial Purpose Entities, and they may have investors ranging from
                                       institutional investors, investment banks, pension funds.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. I am really asking now what are the categories
                                       what your personal knowledge is of the participants in these spe-
                                       cial entities?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I can’t identify any, sitting here right now.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Mr. Chairman, my time is—I would like to have
                                       this as a request for the witnesses to respond in writing of their
                                       personal knowledge of the names of any of the special entities and
                                       participants or investors in those special entities. And I will be
                                       pleased to hear——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. We will make Mr. Waxman’s request an official
                                       request from the committee. Did the witnesses understand Mr.
                                       Waxman’s request? We are asking you to supply——
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Your personal information——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Reiterate your request, please.
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. Which entities are——
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. So whatever Special Purpose Entities you know
                                       about and whatever investors or partners in those entities that you
                                       know about, I would like you to submit to the committee in writing
                                       that information.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired. We will
                                       go to a second round now, and we will just take 5 minutes for ques-
                                       tions for each of us for the second round, and I will begin.
                                          Let me address some questions to you, Ms. St. Clair, and I would
                                       refer you to Tab 25. This is the mysterious document that surfaced
                                       in November of last year about the—that refers to the $6 million
                                       side agreement to the Jedi/Chewco revolving loan agreement, dated
                                       December 30, 1997. This was the reason that Chewco and Jedi had
                                       to be consolidated onto Enron’s books and prior year financial
                                       statements revised back to 1997. If you look at the document, you
                                       will see on page 2 that there are initials next to the Enron signa-
                                       ture line. Are those your initials, Ms. St. Clair?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. Yes, they are.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. Did you draft this side agreement?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. I don’t recall, but there is a footer on the second
                                       page that doesn’t look like an Enron footer.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00075   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 76 ===
                                                                                          72

                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Say that again.
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. At the bottom of the signature page to the left,
                                       it doesn’t look like an Enron footer to——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. So you don’t think you drafted this document.
                                       Do you know who drafted it if it was not you?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. I don’t recall.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Astin, have you looked at this document?
                                          Mr. ASTIN. I haven’t right now, but I have seen it before.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. Do you know who drafted the document?
                                          Mr. ASTIN. I am not certain, but our records indicate that it was
                                       likely drafted by Vinson & Elkins.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. Ms. St. Clair, do you know why this
                                       amendment was made to the Jedi/Chewco revolving loan agree-
                                       ment in a separate document, given that it was dated the same day
                                       as the principal agreement it was amending?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. I don’t know.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. What do your initials signify? Why did you put
                                       your initials on that document?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. They signify that as the lawyer that was in
                                       charge of representing Enron’s side in the Chewco transaction, that
                                       the document satisfied the legal criteria, that it was okay for the
                                       officer to sign from a legal perspective.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. But you don’t know why it was drafted
                                       in a separate document. I mean you looked at it and you decided
                                       that it was okay for the executive to sign. You had done your legal
                                       scrub of it——
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. Right.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. [continuing] but in so scrubbing, you didn’t as-
                                       certain why it was a separate document.
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. I don’t recall now why it was a separate docu-
                                       ment; no, sir.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Do you recall any discussions in the fall of
                                       1997 about this side agreement or the creation of reserve accounts
                                       to benefit Barclay’s who was lending money to Big River and Little
                                       River, which in turn was providing the 3 percent outside equity in
                                       Chewco?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. At this time, I have no independent recollection
                                       of that, but as a result of reviewing my notes during that time pe-
                                       riod, there appears to be meetings where reserve accounts were
                                       discussed.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. And your notes are those that we find in Tab
                                       17 of the binder?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. That is correct.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. As you read through these notes, they
                                       seem to reflect discussions regarding these reserve accounts and
                                       how they would be funded from distributions to Chewco to benefit
                                       the Big River/Little River lender, Barclay’s. Now, you do acknowl-
                                       edge that this subject was discussed in the meetings at the time
                                       and that this side agreement with your initials on it didn’t just
                                       come out of thin air.
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. That is correct.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. Who was at these meetings?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. I don’t have——




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00076   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 77 ===
                                                                                          73

                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Let me help you. Your notes reflect that Mr.
                                       Astin was in at least three of these meetings.
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. That is correct.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Glisan, who handled the accounting as-
                                       pects of this transaction for Enron, was in at least two.
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. Correct.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. Was it your understanding that such in-
                                       dividuals, including Mr. Astin, Mr. Glisan, Mr. Brown and other
                                       Enron employees and V&E attorneys, were aware of these reserve
                                       accounts at the time of their creation back in 1997?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. I can’t speak for Vinson & Elkins, Bill Brown and
                                       Ben Glisan, because they were—Ben was heading up the account-
                                       ing team, and Bill was on the commercial team would have had the
                                       knowledge of the reserve accounts.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Who do you know that had—to your knowl-
                                       edge, who had knowledge?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. To the best of my knowledge, Ben Glisan and Bill
                                       Brown.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. How about Kristina Mordaunt?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. At that time, I reported to her, and she was my
                                       supervisor on this deal. I don’t recall whether she was present at
                                       any of the meetings, but I did report to her on this particular deal,
                                       but I was handling the day-to-day activities as the lawyer——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. You told the committee in your interviews prior
                                       to today that you were aware that a key aspect of the Chewco deal
                                       was that there needed to be 3 percent outside equity in the deal.
                                       Weren’t you at all concerned when you reviewed this side agree-
                                       ment, which in effect transferred $6 million from Enron Jedi to the
                                       purported outside equity holders, Big River and Little River?
                                       Weren’t you concerned about that, that it would undo the 3 percent
                                       requirement?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. I don’t recall that I was concerned. I would have
                                       looked to Ben Glisan who was interfacing with Arthur Andersen to
                                       make sure that it would pass all the accounting tests. And in look-
                                       ing at the side agreement now, I am not sure that it actually says
                                       that the accounts were funded, it just allocates a different distribu-
                                       tion scheme to funds that Chewco may be receiving. As to how the
                                       reserve accounts worked themselves, we did not have access to
                                       those particular documents.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. How about you, Mr. Astin, can you shed any
                                       light on this?
                                          Mr. ASTIN. I would like very much to be helpful to you, Congress-
                                       man, but I don’t have any independent recollection of these meet-
                                       ings. I was in meetings at which the partnership allocations of the
                                       Chewco side of the transaction were discussed. I was primarily re-
                                       sponsible for another aspect of the transaction, which was Jedi II
                                       and was devoting most of my attention to that. This was the first
                                       transaction involving this accounting issue on which I had worked,
                                       and I was not familiar with its significance in 1997.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. You understood the 3 percent rule, right?
                                          Mr. ASTIN. I understood, I believe, that the intention of the par-
                                       ties was to have 3 percent equity. I did not——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Did you understand why they would pick 3 per-
                                       cent?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00077   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 78 ===
                                                                                          74

                                          Mr. ASTIN. My understanding coming into this transaction was
                                       primarily as a private equity and mergers and acquisitions lawyer.
                                       I thought that the principal purpose, and I still believe one of the
                                       principal purposes, of the leverage was to maximize the potential
                                       returns from the Jedi portfolio of assets since it was a mature port-
                                       folio of assets that was not expected to greatly increase in value so
                                       that for it to become an attractive equity investment by a third
                                       party, which was the original plan, it would require additional le-
                                       verage in order to maximize the possibility of return on the invest-
                                       ment.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Do you know why the side agreement was writ-
                                       ten to begin with, why it was a separate document, why it wasn’t
                                       incorporated in the original document?
                                          Mr. ASTIN. I have no memory of having seen it in 1997. I only—
                                       I mean we have internal files that indicate a copy was sent to me,
                                       but I was primarily working on another aspect of the transaction.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. You weren’t aware that Barclay’s had insisted
                                       on this agreement.
                                          Mr. ASTIN. No, I was not.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. And how about you, Ms. St. Clair, were you
                                       aware of that?
                                          Ms. ST. CLAIR. No, I was not.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. My time has expired. The Chair recognizes the
                                       gentleman from Florida, Mr. Deutsch.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Derrick, if you
                                       could go to page 8 of the Vinson & Elkins report addressed to you,
                                       and on that page, under the title—I will read it to you if you can’t
                                       get to it, but on the page, under the title, ‘‘Potential Bad Cos-
                                       metics,’’ the report states, ‘‘Concern was recently expressed that
                                       the transactions involving Condor and White Wing and Raptor
                                       could be portrayed very poorly as subjected to a Wall Street Jour-
                                       nal expose or class action lawsuit.’’ What were your thoughts when
                                       you read that statement?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, my thoughts were of being concerned, but
                                       there was nothing that I know of that could have been done at this
                                       stage to have addressed that issue. It was something that if it
                                       came, when it came, we would simply have to address.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. So it didn’t surprise or shock you that type of ac-
                                       tivity——
                                          Mr. DERRICK. No, as I expressed, it was a concern to me. The
                                       issue was given the concern, what at that point could the company
                                       do about it? It was something that would happen or wouldn’t hap-
                                       pen, and based on what happened we would have to address it.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Do you recall what Mr. Lay’s reaction was?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I am sorry, I don’t recall his reaction.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Mr. Dilg, these were your words, at least my un-
                                       derstanding is that you participated in the letter. Even though it
                                       wasn’t under your signature, it was under your supervision. What
                                       did those words mean to you?
                                          Mr. DILG. We were conveying—concerns had been expressed to
                                       us during our interviews, and we wanted to make sure the com-
                                       pany was aware of those concerns. Again, there wasn’t—the com-
                                       pany was taking action or had taken action at the time this letter
                                       was written to terminate the Raptor vehicles.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00078   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 79 ===
                                                                                          75

                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. I mean is there a difference between the term
                                       ‘‘bad cosmetics’’ and ‘‘unethical behavior’’ or ‘‘illegal behavior?’’
                                          Mr. DILG. I definitely think so. I think we were trying to convey
                                       that there were aspects of these transactions that in hindsight
                                       could be portrayed very badly.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. And, Mr. Derrick, would that be your opinion as
                                       well or a different take on it? You know, it is described as potential
                                       bad cosmetics.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Yes. Congressman, I did not take that to mean
                                       that there had been unethical conduct or illegal conduct but rather
                                       that it was simply what it was, that it could be portrayed in a very
                                       unflattering light, and normally litigation would follow that kind of
                                       publicity.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. And Mr. Dilg, if you could try to, in your own
                                       words, describe the difference between bad cosmetics and unethical
                                       behavior?
                                          Mr. DILG. I think unethical behavior, in my words, in going into
                                       the transaction, if people had an illegal motive or something of that
                                       nature not fully disclosed, the motives, et cetera. The bad cosmetics
                                       arose primarily because of the large losses that had been incurred
                                       on the assets that were hedged against the Raptor vehicles. That
                                       had nothing to do with the intent of the parties at the beginning
                                       of the transactions. It was a market factor that happened in the
                                       retail electric business as well as the broadband business, et cetera,
                                       that highlighted a lot of the cosmetic issues here. It was just the
                                       amount of loss that was involved.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Mr. Rogers, do you want to add anything to this?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Are you asking my opinion of the report or just
                                       the——
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Well, I mean really in terms of this specific thing,
                                       because, again, someone reading this—you know, I mean I read the
                                       words exactly, and I think what we have just heard is it portrayed
                                       in the best possible light, and was that accurate? I mean saying
                                       that—even this report is saying that exposure of what occurred
                                       could subject an expose or class action lawsuit, and is this some-
                                       thing that convinces you that there was unethical or, for that mat-
                                       ter, illegal activity occurring?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I can’t make a determination that there was uneth-
                                       ical or illegal activity from that; no, sir.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. I mean in hindsight, does anyone think that these
                                       activities or any of these partnership agreements were unethical?
                                       Do any of you? I mean in the light of hindsight, in light of what
                                       we know at this point.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, I think let me say first I am sure all of us
                                       would agree that while the investigation is still ongoing and not
                                       every side has been heard from, that everyone does deserve pre-
                                       sumption of innocence. To the extent that it is finally determined
                                       that in fact there was wrongdoing here, then certainly I think we
                                       would agree there would have been unethical conduct.
                                          Mr. DEUTSCH. Right. I mean but no one at this point, based on
                                       what we know, and particularly—again, I hate to keep focusing on
                                       Mr. Fastow, but, again, I mean in hindsight, looking at his activi-
                                       ties as a general partner, my understanding is he was telling the
                                       board or the board was looking the other way or winking that he




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00079   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 80 ===
                                                                                          76

                                       was not getting compensation. I mean it was clear he was getting
                                       compensation.
                                          I think Mr. Waxman’s line of questioning is we still don’t know
                                       who else made money. We know for a fact that he made money and
                                       that tens of millions of dollars in terms of these outside partner-
                                       ships, and yet with his fiduciary responsibility as the CFO of the
                                       organization and it appears as if misrepresenting to the board or
                                       the board looking the other way or sticking their heads in the sand
                                       at that issue.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Time of the gentleman has expired. The Chair
                                       recognizes the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Tauzin, for 5
                                       minutes.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We do know from
                                       Enron who some of those investors were. They reported to us in
                                       some cases. Ben Glisan, managing director and treasurer of Enron
                                       Corporation, was an investor in South Hampton Place. Kristina
                                       Mordaunt was an investor. She was managing director and general
                                       counsel of an Enron division. Kathy Lynn, vice president of an
                                       Enron division; Ann Yaeger, an officer employee of the company
                                       were investors.
                                          We do know now that they invested rather sums. Kristina
                                       Mordaunt, $5,800; Ben Glisan, $5,800; Ann Yaeger, $2,900; Kathy
                                       Lynn, $2,300. As a return on their investments in 6 weeks,
                                       Kristina Mordaunt made $1 million and Ben Glisan made $1 mil-
                                       lion and Ann Yaeger and Kathy Lynn each made $500,000, ap-
                                       proximately, on their investment. Any of you folks know that that
                                       was going on before you wrote your October 15 report to Mr. Der-
                                       rick and to Mr. Lay? Mr. Dilg?
                                          Mr. DILG. Chairman Tauzin, we were not aware of the investors
                                       in South Hampton at the time we wrote our report. I believe I be-
                                       came aware of that early in November.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. If you would have known that then, might
                                       you have written a different report?
                                          Mr. DILG. Yes, sir.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. I would think so. And yet I asked you a while
                                       ago if you stood by your report, and you said you did. Everything
                                       was honkey dory and that we didn’t need to have anybody outside
                                       look at this business.
                                          Mr. DILG. Based on the facts we knew at the time, I stand by
                                       that submission.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Under the facts you knew at the time, you
                                       stand by your report. Under the facts you know now, would you
                                       have advised Mr. Derrick and Mr. Lay differently?
                                          Mr. DILG. I think if we had known of the South Hampton inves-
                                       tors, that would have raised a serious concern. We were——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Would you advise them then to get an outside
                                       counsel, an outside auditor to come look at things?
                                          Mr. DILG. I am not sure on the auditor point, Chairman, but we
                                       would have definitely advised further investigation into——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Let us talk about what you did know when
                                       you wrote that report. You did know, did you not, that Michael
                                       Kopper was running Chewco?
                                          Mr. DILG. I did not. We did not look at Chewco.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00080   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 81 ===
                                                                                          77

                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Now, wait a minute, wait a minute. You say
                                       in your report, and I am going to quote from it, that, ‘‘Based on
                                       our review of the LJM deal approval sheets and accompanying
                                       checklist, it appears the approval procedures were generally ad-
                                       hered to.’’ I am looking at one of them. It says Michael Kopper ne-
                                       gotiating for LJM. It says that Ben Glisan is negotiating for Enron.
                                       You didn’t see this?
                                          Mr. DILG. Could you refer me to which one you are looking at?
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. I am looking at Raptor, Tab 20. While you are
                                       looking for that, I am going to quote Mr. Skilling to you. I was ask-
                                       ing Mr. Skilling at a previous hearing with reference to Chewco,
                                       and I asked him then if he had informed Mr. Lay that Mr. Kopper
                                       was involved with Chewco and with LJM, and he said, ‘‘I don’t re-
                                       call.’’ We got a lot of that. Then I asked him—he is not aware of
                                       what Ken knew, he said. But Mr. Kopper’s participation was well-
                                       known throughout the company.
                                          And I started to go to Mr. Jaedicke, and he interrupted me. He
                                       said, ‘‘By the way,’’ this is Mr. Skilling talking, ‘‘it was known by
                                       Vinson & Elkins who would have had responsibility,’’ and I said,
                                       ‘‘I am sorry, I didn’t hear that. Say that again.’’ And he said, ‘‘His
                                       participation in Chewco was also known to Vinson & Elkins, to my
                                       knowledge. It is my understanding that Vinson & Elkins knew that
                                       he was involved. I believe that they would have identified, to the
                                       extent there was a conflict of interest, that a waiver needed to be
                                       received.’’
                                          I asked did Vinson & Elkins report to Mr. Lay or to you after
                                       they researched the issue following Ms. Watkins’ letter that Mr.
                                       Kopper might require such a waiver. So at least Mr. Skilling be-
                                       lieved you knew. I am looking at an approval sheet you say that
                                       you reviewed in your investigations that shows Mr. Kopper is nego-
                                       tiating for LJM. Do you want to tell me now you didn’t know?
                                          Mr. DILG. We did not look—in the investigation that Mr.
                                       Henderick and I undertook, we did not look at Chewco. I don’t be-
                                       lieve this approval sheet——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. This is a Raptor sheet.
                                          Mr. DILG. Yes. I don’t believe it relates to Chewco.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Did you know that Kopper was working for
                                       Raptor and LJM?
                                          Mr. DILG. We knew Mr. Kopper, based off of the approval sheet,
                                       was negotiating on behalf of LJM.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Absolutely. In fact, when you flip the approval
                                       sheet over, there is a question, was the transaction done strictly at
                                       an arm’s length basis, yes or no? It says yes. You have got Kopper
                                       on one side negotiating for LJM, and you have got Glisan on the
                                       other side negotiating for Enron, and the documents says it is an
                                       arm’s length transaction. It goes on further to say, have all Enron
                                       employees’ involvement in the transaction, on behalf of LJM, been
                                       waived by the Enron Office of Chairman, in accordance with the
                                       Enron’s conflict of business affairs policy? It is checked off, ‘‘yes.’’
                                       Can you tell us today whether in fact Mr. Kopper got a waiver?
                                          Mr. DILG. For working on this transaction?
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. For working on any transaction on the other
                                       side of Enron. Apparently Mr. Fastow got such a waiver for the
                                       conflict of interest rule somewhere, did he not?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00081   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 82 ===
                                                                                          78

                                          Mr. DILG. Mr. Fastow got a waiver from the Office of the Chair-
                                       man. It was approved by the full board, as I understand it from
                                       the board minutes.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Right. And what is the procedure for that?
                                       The Office of the Chairman approves the waiver first, then the
                                       board approves it after, right?
                                          Mr. DILG. I believe that was the procedure followed in terms of
                                       Mr. Fastow.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Derrick, is that correct?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Yes. I wanted to clarify that. Under the Code of
                                       Conduct, actually there is no required approval for anyone by the
                                       board of directors. There is a——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. But there is by the Office of the Chairman.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. By the Office of the—well——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. So the Office of the Chairman approved Mr.
                                       Fastow. Did the Office of the Chairman approve Mr. Kopper, Mr.
                                       Derrick?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Was that directed to me, Congressman? The an-
                                       swer——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Did the Office of the Chairman ever approve
                                       a waiver for Mr. Kopper?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I am not personally aware of such an approval.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. So as counsel, you don’t know, and you are
                                       the general counsel. You don’t know whether Mr. Kopper, who is
                                       negotiating on LJM for LJM, against his own company, you don’t
                                       know whether he got a waiver?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I don’t because there is no requirement that waiv-
                                       ers come through the Legal Department, Mr. Congressman.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. You signed the form, didn’t you? Didn’t Mr.
                                       Sefton sign it? I am sorry, Mr. Sefton, could you help me here, sir.
                                       You signed this form. Were you aware Mr. Kopper had or did not
                                       have a waiver?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. My recollection is that Mr. Fastow advised me that
                                       he was taking care of the waivers for the LJM people.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. That is very nice. You can tell he took care
                                       of it. Did you personally assure yourself before you signed this doc-
                                       ument—you signed yes that the waiver was given. You signed yes
                                       it was an arm’s length transaction. Did you take care to assure Mr.
                                       Kopper had a waiver?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I had no reason to believe that Mr. Fastow was not
                                       telling me the truth on that.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. So you, as counsel, just took his word?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I relied on his assurances.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. And you, Mr. Dilg, when you investigated this
                                       on behalf of the corporation for Mr. Derrick took the word of the
                                       folks who signed this document that everything was okay, even
                                       though you knew Kopper was—at that time you had to know—was
                                       working for LJM and for Enron at the same time.
                                          Mr. DILG. We were given the board of directors’ minutes that ap-
                                       proved the participation by Mr. Fastow. They designated Mr. Buy
                                       and Mr. Causey to guard against the conflict of interest. There was
                                       a service——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. But what about Kopper? I am not asking
                                       Fastow.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00082   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 83 ===
                                                                                          79

                                          Mr. DILG. Excuse me, there was a service agreement that pro-
                                       vided for the services of certain employees of Enron that would be
                                       utilized on behalf of LJM. Mr. Kopper was listed in that service
                                       agreement. That service agreement was signed by Mr. Causey.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. But you see what is troublesome for me is
                                       that you are telling me if you would have known all these corporate
                                       executives were investing in and playing on the other side of the
                                       board, at the same time working in very responsible positions for
                                       the corporation and earning all these amazing amounts in 6 weeks,
                                       that you would have found that very troubling, you would have
                                       written a different report. Knowing what you know now, you might
                                       not stand by that report you wrote.
                                          But what I am troubled by is that you did know that Mr. Kopper
                                       was involved. You had the approval sheets, you claimed you re-
                                       viewed them. And according to you, this is a report you have given
                                       to Mr. Derrick and Mr. Lay who have just received a report saying
                                       that they are running a corporate corporation. They have just re-
                                       ceived a report—I will quote some of the things that Ms. Watkins
                                       reported again.
                                          Jeff McMahon was highly vexed over it and he heard conflicts of
                                       LJM. He complained mightily to Jeff Skilling. Cliff Baxter, who, as
                                       we know, ended up committing suicide, complained mightily to
                                       Skilling and to all who would listen about the inappropriateness of
                                       the transactions with LJM. This was a report that you had in your
                                       hands that at least you were going to look at. You weren’t going
                                       to look at the accounting, you were told not to do that, but you
                                       were going to look at the conflicts.
                                          Mr. DILG. Yes, sir.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. And you had this report from Ms. Watkins,
                                       you have got these documents that show a very important officer
                                       in the corporation negotiating for the outside partnership and docu-
                                       ments that say this is an arm’s length transaction. You didn’t look
                                       behind any of these documents in this so-called investigation to
                                       find out whether Ms. Watkins was telling Mr. Lay the truth?
                                          Mr. DILG. The board had established procedures to guard against
                                       the conflict of interest that they recognized with Mr. Fastow’s posi-
                                       tion in LJM. Those were to have the transactions signed off by Mr.
                                       Buy and Mr. Causey. There was a service agreement that we were
                                       provided that provided for Mr. Kopper to work on behalf of LJM.
                                       That agreement was signed by Mr. Causey.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Now, we have to press again with this hear-
                                       ing because we are checking with some banks. Because according
                                       to Mr. McMahon, some of these banks were threatened or promised
                                       other business if they didn’t invest in these partnerships. You knew
                                       about that, didn’t you?
                                          Mr. DILG. Yes, sir. Mr. McMahon raised that in his initial inter-
                                       view.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Did you interview any one of these banks?
                                          Mr. DILG. We did not.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. You didn’t interview the banks. You didn’t
                                       check on these transactions to see if Mr. Kopper had a proper waiv-
                                       er from conflict of interest. Wasn’t it your job?
                                          Mr. DILG. We were conducting a preliminary review to determine
                                       whether an additional investigation was necessary.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00083   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 84 ===
                                                                                          80

                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Derrick, wasn’t that your job? Wasn’t it
                                       somebody’s job? Mr Sefton, wasn’t it one of your jobs to make sure
                                       that these people negotiating on the other side of the table from
                                       their own corporation had been properly cleared to do so? Whose
                                       job was it? According to Skilling, he is throwing the blame at you
                                       pretty heavily right here. He is saying,‘‘It was their responsibility.’’
                                       He says, ‘‘I left the company. I don’t know what they did after I
                                       left, but it was their responsibility to report to the board and Mr.
                                       Lay that this man needed a waiver. So don’t blame me; blame Vin-
                                       son & Elkins’’ is what he is saying. Should we blame Vinson & Elk-
                                       ins?
                                          Mr. DILG. No, sir.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Who should we look to? Who should Enron,
                                       who should Mr. Lay look to when he asked the question of, ‘‘Why
                                       weren’t we told Mr. Kopper was in a conflict of interest position,
                                       that he wasn’t negotiating at arm’s length, that he never received
                                       a waiver to do this.’’ Who should bear the responsibility for having,
                                       No. 1, known that and not done something about it, and No. 2,
                                       checked on it when Sherron Watkins went to the president of the
                                       corporation and said, ‘‘You have got a corrupt company; check into
                                       it’’?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I think, initially, Congressman, the responsibility
                                       lies with, in this case, Mr. Kopper. Under our Code of Conduct,
                                       each employee is required to certify——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. You have got to be kidding me, Mr. Derrick.
                                       Any employee could go negotiate against a company and it was up
                                       to them to come and get a waiver? And you guys were signing
                                       these documents that said they had gotten waivers and you never
                                       checked to see if they did?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I am not saying that I have signed a document——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. I have got your Code of Conduct in front of
                                       me. You are not supposed to engage in any outside activity or en-
                                       terprise which would interfere in any way with job performance.
                                       You don’t think Mr. Kopper was engaging in enterprises that inter-
                                       fered with his performance? You don’t think these employees who
                                       were investing $5,000 and reaping $1 million reward in 6 weeks
                                       were in a conflict of interest position?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, that is exactly my point. They were, and
                                       under our Code of Conduct, each of those individuals were required
                                       to approach the chairman and chief executive officer to seek an ap-
                                       proval.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Lawyers of the company had to know they
                                       were doing that. You admitted that to us. You have admitted to us
                                       that you knew Kopper was doing that. Whose job was it to tell
                                       them, ‘‘You are in violation of the Code of Ethics. You are fired.’’
                                       Or go to the president and say, ‘‘Get rid of these people. They didn’t
                                       have the courtesy of complying with your Board of Ethics require-
                                       ments—your Code of Ethics requirements.’’
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, initially——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Whose job was that?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, in my judgment, it was initially the employ-
                                       ee’s. To the extent that people in the company became aware that
                                       no conflict had been received, that was something that they should
                                       have reported. But there isn’t a way that I know of for a company




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00084   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 85 ===
                                                                                          81

                                       to, other than relying on the good faith of its employees, under a
                                       Code of Conduct, who are required to report conflicts of interest.
                                       That is where it all starts.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. But what is a requirement of a lawyer who
                                       is a counsel for the corporation who knows that an employee is vio-
                                       lating the Code of Ethics?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, if——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. What is the requirement of a counsel?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. If a lawyer knows that——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Yes.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. [continuing] as well as any other employee of the
                                       company, if they know that, they should have reported it.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. And you knew that Mr. Kopper was working
                                       for LJM and had not received a waiver.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I am sorry, Congressman, I wasn’t working on
                                       these transactions. I wouldn’t know Mr. Kopper if he walked in the
                                       conference room today.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Sefton, did you know Mr. Kopper was
                                       working for LJM, and you don’t think you had any responsibility
                                       to do anything except Mr. Fastow’s word, and Mr. Fastow got his
                                       waiver, he is already working and making millions.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. At the time that I received those assurances, I felt
                                       justified in relying upon them.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Chairman, you know what we have? We
                                       have got the same kind of situation we had with Arthur Andersen
                                       when they said the lawyers let the accountants make the decisions
                                       about what their legal responsibilities were. I can’t believe that the
                                       lawyers at a great American corporation would let the employees
                                       decide whether they could be in conflict of interest like this and
                                       make these investments and reap these benefits out of the very
                                       company that it was supposed to have a fiduciary responsibility for.
                                       These are major offices of your corporation. They are not workers
                                       at the bottom of the ladder; they are workers at the top of the lad-
                                       der.
                                          It is amazing to me that you guys could write a report to the
                                       chairman of the corporation after Ms. Watkins put herself way out
                                       on a limb to tell you all that this was going on, and you never both-
                                       ered to talk to the banks, you never bothered to call in Mr. Kopper
                                       and say, ‘‘Did you get a waiver? Are you operating in conflict of in-
                                       terest? Are you operating in a way detrimental to the corporation
                                       when you owe your fiduciary obligation to the corporation?’’ It is
                                       amazing to me that you could issue that paper to Mr. Lay, which
                                       basically said, ‘‘Don’t believe that lady; everything is fine. Every-
                                       thing is find. Don’t hire any other outside lawyers. Look at what
                                       we did? For heaven’s sake, don’t hire any more accountants. Every-
                                       thing is okay. Now, just tell that lady we looked at it real carefully
                                       and everything is good.’’ That is basically what you did.
                                          Mr. DILG. Can I respond?
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Please respond. Yes, sir, please.
                                          Mr. DILG. I think there are two things with regard to Mr. Kopper
                                       that are different. One, his investment in the Chewco matter,
                                       which was not raised by Ms. Watkins’ letter and was not at all
                                       within the scope of our inquiry, as far as looking at Chewco. Mr.
                                       Kopper did negotiate on behalf of LJM and was reflected as doing




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00085   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 86 ===
                                                                                          82

                                       so in the LJM approval sheets that were signed off on by the two
                                       people that the board had established to make sure that the deals
                                       were done on a basis that was favorable to Enron. There was a
                                       service agreement that was signed by Mr. Causey on June 30, 1999
                                       that recognized Mr. Kopper’s participation——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. But Causey and Buy are in the Office of the
                                       Chairman, you know that. They can’t give waivers, you know that.
                                       You just testified, or Mr. Derrick did, that the Office of the Chair-
                                       man was the only one that could give a waiver, not Causey and
                                       Buy. Is that right?
                                          Mr. DILG. That is correct. We did not check on the waiver of the
                                       Code of Ethics issues. There was an agreement signed by the per-
                                       son that the board had designated to look after Enron’s side on
                                       this.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. What do you think—and this is my final ques-
                                       tion, Mr. Chairman, I apologize—what do you think when you re-
                                       viewed these approval sheets and you wrote a letter to Mr. Derrick,
                                       extensively to him, and to Mr. Lay, saying, ‘‘We checked the ap-
                                       proval sheets, and everything looks okay’’? What do you think
                                       when you saw a blank signature place for Mr. Skilling? Didn’t that
                                       alert you that something is maybe amiss here?
                                          Mr. DILG. We did note in our letter that the Office of the Chair-
                                       man had not signed except on rare occasion. We wanted to bring
                                       that to their attention. The board minutes that we——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Well, no, you said it differently. You said that
                                       in most instances there was no approval signature for the Office of
                                       the Chairman except for several significant transactions. And that
                                       sort of leaves the impression the only time he had to sign was for
                                       significant transactions. What was your understanding of the ap-
                                       proval process? Did the Office of the Chairman have to approve
                                       these transactions?
                                          Mr. DILG. The board minutes that we had that approved the
                                       LJM2 transaction and set up the approval process required Mr.
                                       Buy and Mr. Causey to approve matters on behalf of Enron. There
                                       was nothing in the board minutes that we had that required a sig-
                                       nature by the Office of the Chairman.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Jaedicke testified that his understanding
                                       of the controls was that approval was required of the Office of the
                                       Chairman, or at least a review was required. We got into whether
                                       or not approval and review, but at least review by the Office of the
                                       Chairman. You don’t believe that is true?
                                          Mr. DILG. I understand from the Powers report, which was the
                                       first time that I was aware of the information, that at a Finance
                                       Committee meeting in the fall of 2000, I believe, there was discus-
                                       sion of approval by the Office of the Chairman, and that was put
                                       in. Those minutes were not part of the minutes we were given in
                                       connection with our review. I think those minutes basically related
                                       to the formation of a new entity called LJM3 that didn’t go for-
                                       ward. I am presuming that is why we didn’t see them. We were not
                                       present at that meeting.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. But you did see a blank space.
                                          Mr. DILG. We did, and we noted that in our report.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00086   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 87 ===
                                                                                          83

                                          Chairman TAUZIN. What do you think? What do you think when
                                       you saw a blank space from the chief executive of the corporation
                                       on the approval forms?
                                          Mr. DILG. We felt that it was worth noting in our report that
                                       those spaces had not been filled in.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Wasn’t it a red flag?
                                          Mr. DILG. It was enough of a flag that we felt like it should be
                                       brought to Mr. Derrick’s attention.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. But you never, never, never tried to talk to
                                       Mr. Skilling.
                                          Mr. DILG. We did not try to talk to Mr. Skilling.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is amazing how
                                       much inquiry you can squeeze into a 5-minute period.
                                          The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado for 5 minutes.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Chairman Tauzin,
                                       when you were asking about the Code of Conduct, it occurred to me
                                       we have reached new heights now, because it is not just the fox
                                       guarding the hen house that we used to think about a week ago,
                                       now it has become clear it is the fox guarding the fox. I mean——
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. The hen is guarding the fox.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Yes, or something. You know, the exact same peo-
                                       ple who are the evildoers, who are committing these acts, are the
                                       ones that are supposed to go somehow to the chairman and say,
                                       ‘‘Oh, by the way, I have these conflicts of interest.’’ It is unbeliev-
                                       able to me.
                                          But I actually have a different line of questioning. What I want
                                       to talk about is Mr. Fastow’s compensation, because as I read the
                                       Powers report and also some of the board committee minutes, it
                                       looks to me like the Compensation and Management Committee
                                       and also the Finance Committee told Enron that they should figure
                                       out what Mr. Fastow’s compensation was from LJM1 and LJM2. Is
                                       that correct, Mr. Derrick? In your view, were you guys supposed to
                                       figure out how much Mr. Fastow was making?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I don’t recall a specific instruction from the com-
                                       mittee, Congresswoman. I think the compensation would come up
                                       in terms of what is disclosed in the proxy statement. I think what
                                       you may be referring to——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. But do you think that you should have found out
                                       how much Mr. Fastow was making?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, the teams that were working on the proxy
                                       disclosure issues did examine that question, and my under-
                                       standing——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Did you know how much Mr. Fastow was making?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Pardon me?
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Did you know how much Mr. Fastow was making
                                       from the LJM transactions?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I did not. I was——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Did anybody at Enron, to your knowledge?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Not to my knowledge. My understanding is that
                                       the team that was working on it had concluded it was simply not
                                       practical to ascertain what the compensation was. But I will need
                                       to——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Did anybody ever ask Mr. Fastow?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00087   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 88 ===
                                                                                          84

                                          Mr. DERRICK. I can’t speak to that.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Who was running this team that was supposed to
                                       be finding it out?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, it would have been initially, I think, Mr.
                                       Mintz, in the Global Finance Group, and other people working with
                                       him.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. Do you know if Mr. Mintz tried to find out
                                       from Mr. Fastow what his compensation was?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I don’t personally have knowledge of that.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Mr. Rogers, do you think that management should
                                       have obtained Mr. Fastow’s compensation while he was at LJM—
                                       or involved with LJM?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Yes, ma’am; it is my understanding they did try to
                                       find that out.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. And did you think they were supposed to find that
                                       out?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Yes.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. And in fact when you were interviewed on Janu-
                                       ary 20 by Wilmer Cutler you talked to them about discussions that
                                       you had in a meeting in early 2001 whether anybody knew the
                                       amount of compensation that Mr. Fastow was receiving from the
                                       LJM transactions. Do you remember that meeting in early 2001?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I don’t remember the date, but, yes, I remember
                                       asking that.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. And did you ask anybody to find that infor-
                                       mation out?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Yes.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. You were concerned about that issue, weren’t you?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I knew it was a disclosure issue, yes.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. And is that why you were concerned about it?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Yes.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. And wasn’t there a lot of conversation
                                       around Enron that Mr. Fastow might need to disclose this com-
                                       pensation from LJM on the 1999 and 2000 proxy statements?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Not a lot of conversation that I was a party to, but,
                                       yes, I understand it was discussed.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. But you were a party to conversations that
                                       that information had to be obtained.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Yes. I have read a lot of memos relating to that,
                                       yes.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. You have read a lot of memos relating to that?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Yes.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. And do we have those memos, do you know?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I believe you do.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I am confident you do.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Did you ever try to get Mr. Fastow’s compensation
                                       from LJM?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I didn’t personally.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Did you direct someone else to get that compensa-
                                       tion?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I didn’t direct someone, but someone undertook to
                                       do so, yes.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Who did?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00088   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 89 ===
                                                                                          85

                                          Mr. ROGERS. Mr. Mintz.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Mr. Mintz. And do you know what Mr. Mintz did
                                       to try to get his compensation, to get Mr. Fastow’s compensation
                                       from the LJM transactions?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. It is my understanding that he met with Mr.
                                       Fastow, at least according to his memos, at some length.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. And as far as you know, Mr. Mintz was never suc-
                                       cessful in getting those compensation figures from Mr. Fastow, was
                                       he?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I don’t know if he was or was not. What Mr. Mintz
                                       reported was that the compensation was not determinable after his
                                       conversations with——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Did Mr. Mintz say why?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. He makes references to it in his memo. I don’t re-
                                       member the exact reasons. I believe it had something to do with—
                                       well, first of all, a number of the transactions in that year had not
                                       closed, so it was not determinable. With one of the other trans-
                                       actions, there was an agreement between, as I understand it, be-
                                       tween Mr. Fastow and LJM, which rendered whatever he had been
                                       paid something that was not a final number that could be adjusted.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Well, okay, you didn’t have the final numbers, but
                                       did you ever try to get a ballpark figure? Do you know if Mr. Mintz
                                       ever got a ballpark figure?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I don’t know if he did or not.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Didn’t that concern you that Mr. Mintz was un-
                                       able to get this information that was supposed to be on the finan-
                                       cial statements?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I don’t think it is on the financial statements.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. It may be on the proxy statements. But Mr. Mintz
                                       is an outstanding lawyer. He undertook to get the information.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. He testified in front of us, so, yes, we all love him,
                                       but that is not my question.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Well, what he reported back to——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. My question is did he ever try to get at least a
                                       ballpark figure of what Mr. Fastow was making?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I wasn’t a party to the conversation between Mr.
                                       Mintz and Mr. Fastow, but what Mr. Mintz reported back was the
                                       number was not determinable at that time.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. Have you ever gotten that figure, to this
                                       date?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I have not personally gotten the number. The only
                                       number I am aware of is the $30 million number that has been
                                       published.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Time of the gentlelady has expired.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. So that is the number that—I would ask unani-
                                       mous consent for 1 additional minute.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Without objection. We are trying to be sensitive
                                       to the members’ travel schedules.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you. I have one too, Mr. Chairman.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I am sorry, is there an open—is there a question?
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Yes. The question I was asking was that is the fig-
                                       ure you read in the newspapers, the $30 million?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00089   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 90 ===
                                                                                          86

                                          Mr. ROGERS. I believe that number first was reported in an 8K
                                       current report that Enron filed subsequent to the SEC investiga-
                                       tion, in response to the SEC’s questions. And my understanding, if
                                       my recollection is correct, that the members of the board spoke
                                       with Mr. Fastow.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. If you had known that $30 million at that
                                       time in 2001, would you have been concerned about the red flag
                                       that might raise as to these transactions?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. If I had known at the time that——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Yes.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. [continuing] the number was $30 million?
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. That was $30 million.
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Absolutely.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Do you know to this day how much the real num-
                                       ber ever was?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I do not.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Mr. Derrick, did you know at that time how much
                                       Mr. Fastow was making from the LJM transactions?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. No. I had been told by the team that it was not
                                       practical to ascertain that because of these various open positions.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. And have you ever yet found out how much he
                                       made from those transactions?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. The only thing I can add is, what Mr. Rogers re-
                                       ferred to, was when the board elected or chose two of its members
                                       to sit down with Mr. Fastow and ask that question. And the num-
                                       ber that has been referred to is, I believe, the number that Mr.
                                       Fastow told to those two members of the board.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. And that was in the Powers report?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I believe that is in the Powers report.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. And if you had known at least that $30 mil-
                                       lion at the time, would that have raised a red flag for you?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Yes, Congresswoman; it certainly would have.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. And to this day——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentlelady——
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. [continuing] do you have any idea how much Mr.
                                       Fastow made from LJM?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. The only information I have is what I have just re-
                                       ported.
                                          Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Flor-
                                       ida for 5 minutes.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and let me just say to
                                       the witnesses you came here voluntarily and we appreciate what
                                       you are doing, and we understand that you haven’t had lunch and
                                       so we are very sensitive to that. But I think what we are all having
                                       trouble with is that people were making large sums of money and
                                       no one on this panel has any concern or doesn’t stop to blow the
                                       whistle. It is like the three monkeys who see no evil, hear no evil
                                       and speak no evil. And you folks are unfortunately communicating
                                       that kind of sense to us that you would not have changed a thing
                                       and you did nothing wrong. I mean in retrospect, Mr. Derrick, do
                                       you think there has been any corporate malfeasance at all during
                                       this whole process?




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00090   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 91 ===
                                                                                          87

                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, you say change nothing. In my opening testi-
                                       mony, I have said that had I been given the gift of clairvoyance,
                                       had I been able to foresee these events, I certainly would have done
                                       things differently. In fact, if it were within my power to go back
                                       and change anything, whatever it may be, that would have pre-
                                       vented us from being where we are now, certainly, Congressman,
                                       I would have done that.
                                          But in terms of corporate malfeasance, I have no reason to be-
                                       lieve that—when the board considered this, it honestly believed
                                       that it was taking decisions that it thought was not adverse to the
                                       best interest of Enron and put in place procedures that they hon-
                                       estly believed would protect those interests.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. So today, Mr. Derrick, do you think there has been
                                       any corporate malfeasance, just yes or no?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, if the allegations that have been made at the
                                       end of the day prove to be true, then the answer is yes.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Dilg, do you think there has been corporate
                                       malfeasance based upon what you have seen?
                                          Mr. DILG. We were very disheartened to see some of the things
                                       that came out in November. The participants in South Hampton
                                       was a great surprise to us.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. So you see things today that would indicate, if
                                       true, it is corporate malfeasance.
                                          Mr. DILG. The ownership of and interest in a company doing
                                       business with Enron without going through the proper Code of
                                       Conduct waivers, et cetera, raises grave concerns to me.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. The question has come up of a $40 million that Mr.
                                       Fastow, the CFO, made. Mr. Derrick, you met with 10 members of
                                       our staff, one of those was on a telephone hookup. And per that dis-
                                       cussion they had with you, you left a message with Lay and
                                       Skilling that it was not practical to determine Fastow’s compensa-
                                       tion but that it would be disclosed in the year 2002 and that you
                                       were not aware of Fastow’s compensation at that point. But for the
                                       September 1 board meeting, you said you wrote a list of questions
                                       for the board to ask Mr. Fastow, and ultimately it was decided the
                                       chairman of the Executive Committee, John Duncan, and the Com-
                                       pensation Committee would sit down with Mr. Fastow outside the
                                       meeting, which they did, you said. At a board meeting after that,
                                       they reported that Fastow made $40 million. Is that true? Do you
                                       still stand by your statements to our staff?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. With respect—yes, I do, with one exception. I be-
                                       lieve I made it clear that as to the $40 million I can’t be clear as
                                       to whether that was the amount. It may have been $30 million.
                                       But as to the other things you said, yes, I do, Congressman.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. So you did not know that he made—let us say $40
                                       million just for the discussions—that he made $40 million on these
                                       business transactions, and you did not know that before the Sep-
                                       tember 1 board meeting. Is that true?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I am taking your word it is September 1, but, yes,
                                       that board meeting. Yes, that is correct.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Sefton, did you know that before September 1
                                       board meeting that Mr. Fastow was making $40 million?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No. And was that September 1, 2001?
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Yes, 2002.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00091   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 92 ===
                                                                                          88

                                          Mr. SEFTON. 2002. I left Global Finance in 2000.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Okay. I have—it is Tab number 22 that Mr.
                                       Fastow signed. It is a proxy statement talking as of holdings of eq-
                                       uity securities in the company. And on the last page, he talks
                                       about, in response to questions, he says—they are talking about his
                                       salary and his affiliates and his shares, and he said, ‘‘I suggest that
                                       you talk to Scott Sefton if you want to talk about my arrange-
                                       ments, my salary, and that Scott Sefton is preparing a draft of the
                                       disclosure relating to these transactions, which he will provide
                                       shortly.’’ Do you remember preparing a draft of disclosure on Mr.
                                       Fastow?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Yes.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. And what did that disclosure say?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. It was for the proxy for 2000.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. And it did not talk at all about his salary and how
                                       much his compensation was.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. The disclosure that I worked on was for the related
                                       party transactions.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Did you have an understanding of how much he
                                       made before you left the company?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. So all during the process you never understood it.
                                       You never knew how much he made.
                                          Mr. SEFTON. No.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Rogers, did you?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. No, sir.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. And Mr. Dilg, do you?
                                          Mr. DILG. I did not know until the results came back from the
                                       meetings with Mr. Duncan and the other board member.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Astin?
                                          Mr. ASTIN. No, Congressman, not until the report that Mr. Rog-
                                       ers referred to, the 8K filing that first disclosed the number.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. And Ms. St. Clair? okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair-
                                       man.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you. The Chair recognizes the gen-
                                       tleman from California for 5 minutes.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. One of the
                                       most disturbing facts to emerge from Congress’ investigation of the
                                       Enron collapse is the extent to which the company lobbied for and
                                       took advantage of inadequate regulation and oversight by legisla-
                                       tors and regulators. If not for Enron’s political connections and
                                       power, the company’s true financial status might have been uncov-
                                       ered long ago. I would like to ask some questions about those polit-
                                       ical connections.
                                          From 1989 to 2001, Enron’s PAC, Political Action Committee,
                                       and its employees and family members gave close to $6 million to
                                       Federal candidates and political parties. Press reports indicate that
                                       employees were, at the very least, strongly encouraged to make po-
                                       litical contributions. One press report has cited a 2000 company
                                       memo that recommended employees give money to President
                                       Bush’s campaign. Are any of you aware of this particular memo?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. It is certainly possible that I would have seen it
                                       at the time, Congressman. I don’t have specific recollection of it
                                       now.




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00092   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 93 ===
                                                                                          89

                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Okay. Any of the others. Mr. Sefton, are you aware
                                       of any memo asking employees to contribute?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. I don’t recall a memo relating to the Bush cam-
                                       paign, but the employees of the company were asked from time to
                                       time to consider contributions to, I think, a Political Action Com-
                                       mittee that was set up by the company.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. And how were they asked, through a memo,
                                       through written communication?
                                          Mr. SEFTON. Probably a memo or an e-mail.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Anybody else recall seeing any memos or being
                                       aware of this information? Mr. Rogers?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Yes, sir. I don’t recall any specific request to sup-
                                       port a specific candidate. I do recall getting Political Action Com-
                                       mittee materials. The company did—there was no obligation on any
                                       employee to join the PAC, but the company—all the employees
                                       were given the opportunity to, and I think the company did endorse
                                       being a member of the PAC. But there were no—nothing negative
                                       would happen to an employee if he did not join the PAC.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Were any of them, when they were told they could
                                       voluntarily do this, given a suggested amount they ought to con-
                                       tribute?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Not to my recollection.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Anybody else have a——
                                          Mr. ROGERS. It is possible, I don’t recall.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Well, according to a press story, low-level employ-
                                       ees were encouraged to give $500, and senior executives, at least
                                       $5,000. Do you know whether that would have been accurate?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I don’t recall, but it would be very easy to find out.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Did any of you, as lawyers for Enron, advise the
                                       company on campaign-related matters?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. No, but we did have an employee who was
                                       charged, not as 100 percent of her job, but as part of her job was
                                       advising the PAC issue.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Okay. And could you identify for the record, if not
                                       right now, who the employee had been——
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Certainly; I will be happy to.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. And, Mr. Rogers, you say it would have been easy
                                       to find out if a memo had been sent out. How would we go about
                                       finding out that information?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I would guess the company would have records of
                                       the materials that it would send out with respect to the Enron
                                       PAC.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. The Washington Post reported that a letter was al-
                                       legedly sent by Ken Lay to certain employees in the spring of 1999
                                       asking for contributions to the Bush campaign. One recipient of the
                                       letter, according to the press report, said it was a rather menacing
                                       letter. Are any of you aware of this or other letters or memos from
                                       Ken Lay encouraging employees to contribute to the Bush cam-
                                       paign?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Congressman, I may have received a letter, not in
                                       Mr. Lay’s capacity as the chairman of Enron, but in this private
                                       capacity. I know he was active for a number of candidates, one of
                                       whom was President Bush. And, certainly, I made a number of con-




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00093   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 94 ===
                                                                                          90

                                       tributions to various candidates, and one of those would have been
                                       to Mr. Bush.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. And when you gave contributions to a number of
                                       candidates, were they at the request of Mr. Lay?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. There would have been some of those, but it was
                                       my philosophy to try to support good candidates on both sides of
                                       the aisle. And only a small fraction of those would have been the
                                       result of any communication from Mr. Lay. But, again, it would
                                       have been in Mr. Lay’s capacity, not as chairman of Enron but
                                       rather as a private citizen.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Are you aware of any campaign contributions
                                       being reimbursed, like bonuses or other compensation intended, in
                                       effect, to reimburse employees for what they gave politically?
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Last question, Mr. Waxman.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. I would like to have Mr. Rogers answer it was
                                       well.
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I have no personal recollection of any such reim-
                                       bursement.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Mr. Rogers, are you aware of that?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. Let me make sure I understand the question.
                                       Would you restate that, please?
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. What I am trying to find out is whether you are
                                       aware of any additional compensation that was given to employees
                                       or executives to make up for the contributions they would have
                                       given to campaigns?
                                          Mr. ROGERS. I am not aware of that.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. Are any of you aware of that?
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Apparently not. The time of the gentleman has
                                       expired.
                                          Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Chairman, just a point of information. I think
                                       in all fairness, if the question is going to be asked of the President,
                                       I think the gentleman from California should also ask it of Presi-
                                       dent Clinton too, his same questions.
                                          Mr. WAXMAN. I think that is reasonable. I want to know if any
                                       political campaigns.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. I think the record has demonstrated that the
                                       Enron employees and Enron Political Action Committee, as well as
                                       Enron soft money, went generously to both sides of the aisle, this
                                       election cycle and previous election cycle.
                                          The Chair thanks the gentlemen and lady for their testimony
                                       today. This committee has held 4 days of hearings on the collapse
                                       of Enron, and we have done that because this is the largest bank-
                                       ruptcy in the history of the country. We have done that because not
                                       only did 4,000 Enron employees, at least, lose their jobs, pensions
                                       lost, but teachers’ funds, retirement funds across the country were
                                       lost, $70 billion. Funds invested by parents for their children’s edu-
                                       cation lost because of investments in Enron. There has been a lot
                                       of human suffering as a result of this collapse, not the least of
                                       which, of course, is the tragic death of Mr. Baxter.
                                          It has been interesting to this member that this collapse hap-
                                       pened at a time when all of the commodities in which this company
                                       was trading were in high demand in the country. You had good
                                       supplies, you had great demand, all of the economic reasons for
                                       this company to succeed were in place. And yet it failed. The ac-




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00094   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 95 ===
                                                                                          91

                                       countants have come in and told us that it didn’t fail because of
                                       anything they have done, no one from the company’s management
                                       has said it has failed because of anything that they have done
                                       wrong, and none of you have indicated today that the company be-
                                       cause of anything that you have done wrong.
                                          My final question for you, in retrospect and without the gift of
                                       clairvoyance, as you look back upon this failure, what happened?
                                       Who caused the failure of Enron. Mr. Derrick?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. Well, there are brighter people than I who are
                                       looking at this issue. From my perspective, Congressman, it was a
                                       loss of confidence and panic selling. I believe—I am not a business-
                                       man, I am not a financial person, but certainly it was my sense
                                       that the company still had enormous opportunities. There was, as
                                       some have said, a run on the bank——
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. It wasn’t loss in confidence that you could sell
                                       natural gas and electricity and—it wasn’t like automobiles were
                                       made and people lost confidence in the ability to sell buggy whips,
                                       was it? It was loss of confidence in the management, was it not?
                                          Mr. DERRICK. I can’t speak to that. I can’t say that you are
                                       wrong on that. I don’t know. But experiencing from the inside, it
                                       was simply a panic sale of our shares based on what seemed to be
                                       a loss of confidence, and I think had the company had some oppor-
                                       tunity to have had a circuit breaker in place, that it might have
                                       saved many, many people from the tragedy that they have under-
                                       gone.
                                          Mr. GREENWOOD. Well, it would be my final observation—first,
                                       without objection, I would like to put into the record the documents
                                       to which we have referred today and identified as, ‘‘O&I Financial
                                       Collapse of Enron, March 14, 2002.’’
                                          My only comment in closing would be that once again the com-
                                       mentary from the witnesses is that the company failed because of
                                       loss of confidence of the investors, which sounds an awful lot to me
                                       like blaming the victims, the people who lost the money failed be-
                                       cause they failed to have confidence in the company itself.
                                          This hearing is adjourned.
                                          [Whereupon, at 3 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
                                          [Additional material submitted for the record follows:]




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00095   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 96 ===
                                                                                          92




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\78506.001




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00096   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 97 ===
                                                                                          93




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\78506.002




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00097   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 98 ===
                                                                                          94




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\78506.003




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00098   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 99 ===
                                                                                          95




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\78506.004




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00099   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 100 ===
                                                                                          96




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\78506.005




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00100   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 101 ===
                                                                                          97




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\78506.006




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00101   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 102 ===
                                                                                          98




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\78506.007




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00102   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 103 ===
                                                                                          99




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\78506.008




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00103   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 104 ===
                                                                                          100




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.009




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00104   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 105 ===
                                                                                          101




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.010




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00105   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 106 ===
                                                                                          102




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.011




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00106   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 107 ===
                                                                                          103




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.012




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00107   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 108 ===
                                                                                          104




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.013




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00108   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 109 ===
                                                                                          105




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.014




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00109   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 110 ===
                                                                                          106




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.015




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00110   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 111 ===
                                                                                          107




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.016




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00111   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 112 ===
                                                                                          108




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.017




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00112   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 113 ===
                                                                                          109




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.018




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00113   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 114 ===
                                                                                          110




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.019




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00114   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 115 ===
                                                                                          111




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.020




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00115   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 116 ===
                                                                                          112




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.021




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00116   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 117 ===
                                                                                          113




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.022




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00117   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 118 ===
                                                                                          114




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.023




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00118   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 119 ===
                                                                                          115




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.024




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00119   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 120 ===
                                                                                          116




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.025




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00120   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 121 ===
                                                                                          117




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.026




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00121   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 122 ===
                                                                                          118




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.027




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00122   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 123 ===
                                                                                          119




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.028




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00123   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 124 ===
                                                                                          120




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.029




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00124   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 125 ===
                                                                                          121




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.030




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00125   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 126 ===
                                                                                          122




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.031




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00126   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 127 ===
                                                                                          123




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.032




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00127   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 128 ===
                                                                                          124




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.033




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00128   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 129 ===
                                                                                          125




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.034




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00129   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 130 ===
                                                                                          126




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.035




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00130   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 131 ===
                                                                                          127




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.036




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00131   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 132 ===
                                                                                          128




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.037




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00132   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 133 ===
                                                                                          129




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.038




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00133   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 134 ===
                                                                                          130




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.039




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00134   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 135 ===
                                                                                          131




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.040




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00135   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 136 ===
                                                                                          132




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.041




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00136   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 137 ===
                                                                                          133




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.042




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00137   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 138 ===
                                                                                          134




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.043




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00138   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 139 ===
                                                                                          135




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.044




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00139   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 140 ===
                                                                                          136




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.045




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00140   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 141 ===
                                                                                          137




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.046




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00141   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 142 ===
                                                                                          138




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.047




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00142   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 143 ===
                                                                                          139




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.048




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00143   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 144 ===
                                                                                          140




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.049




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00144   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 145 ===
                                                                                          141




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.050




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00145   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 146 ===
                                                                                          142




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.051




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00146   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 147 ===
                                                                                          143




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.052




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00147   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 148 ===
                                                                                          144




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.053




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00148   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 149 ===
                                                                                          145




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.054




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00149   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 150 ===
                                                                                          146




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.055




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00150   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 151 ===
                                                                                          147




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.056




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00151   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 152 ===
                                                                                          148




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.057




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00152   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 153 ===
                                                                                          149




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.058




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00153   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 154 ===
                                                                                          150




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.059




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00154   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 155 ===
                                                                                          151




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.060




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00155   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 156 ===
                                                                                          152




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.061




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00156   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 157 ===
                                                                                          153




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.062




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00157   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 158 ===
                                                                                          154




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.063




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00158   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 159 ===
                                                                                          155




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.064




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00159   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 160 ===
                                                                                          156




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.065




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00160   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 161 ===
                                                                                          157




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.066




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00161   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 162 ===
                                                                                          158




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.067




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00162   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 163 ===
                                                                                          159




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.068




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00163   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 164 ===
                                                                                          160




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.069




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00164   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 165 ===
                                                                                          161




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.070




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00165   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 166 ===
                                                                                          162




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.071




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00166   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 167 ===
                                                                                          163




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.072




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00167   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 168 ===
                                                                                          164




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.073




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00168   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 169 ===
                                                                                          165




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.074




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00169   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 170 ===
                                                                                          166




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.075




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00170   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 171 ===
                                                                                          167




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.076




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00171   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 172 ===
                                                                                          168




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.077




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00172   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 173 ===
                                                                                          169




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.078




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00173   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 174 ===
                                                                                          170




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.079




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00174   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 175 ===
                                                                                          171




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.080




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00175   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 176 ===
                                                                                          172




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.081




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00176   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 177 ===
                                                                                          173




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.082




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00177   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 178 ===
                                                                                          174




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.083




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00178   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 179 ===
                                                                                          175




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.084




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00179   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 180 ===
                                                                                          176




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.085




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00180   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 181 ===
                                                                                          177




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.086




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00181   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 182 ===
                                                                                          178




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.087




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00182   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 183 ===
                                                                                          179




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.088




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00183   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 184 ===
                                                                                          180




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.089




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00184   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 185 ===
                                                                                          181




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.090




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00185   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 186 ===
                                                                                          182




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.091




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00186   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 187 ===
                                                                                          183




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.092




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00187   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 188 ===
                                                                                          184




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.093




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00188   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 189 ===
                                                                                          185




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.094




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00189   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 190 ===
                                                                                          186




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.095




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00190   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 191 ===
                                                                                          187




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.096




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00191   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 192 ===
                                                                                          188




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.097




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00192   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 193 ===
                                                                                          189




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.098




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00193   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 194 ===
                                                                                          190




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.099




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00194   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 195 ===
                                                                                          191




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.100




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00195   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 196 ===
                                                                                          192




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.101




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00196   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 197 ===
                                                                                          193




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.102




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00197   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 198 ===
                                                                                          194




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.103




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00198   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 199 ===
                                                                                          195




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.104




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00199   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 200 ===
                                                                                          196




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.105




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00200   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 201 ===
                                                                                          197




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.106




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00201   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 202 ===
                                                                                          198




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.107




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00202   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 203 ===
                                                                                          199




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.108




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00203   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 204 ===
                                                                                          200




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.109




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00204   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 205 ===
                                                                                          201




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.110




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00205   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 206 ===
                                                                                          202




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.111




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00206   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 207 ===
                                                                                          203




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.112




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00207   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 208 ===
                                                                                          204




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.113




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00208   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 209 ===
                                                                                          205




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.114




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00209   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 210 ===
                                                                                          206




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.115




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00210   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 211 ===
                                                                                          207




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.116




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00211   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 212 ===
                                                                                          208




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.117




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00212   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 213 ===
                                                                                          209




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.118




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00213   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 214 ===
                                                                                          210




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.119




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00214   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 215 ===
                                                                                          211




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.120




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00215   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 216 ===
                                                                                          212




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.121




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00216   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 217 ===
                                                                                          213




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.122




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00217   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 218 ===
                                                                                          214




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.123




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00218   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 219 ===
                                                                                          215




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.124




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00219   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 220 ===
                                                                                          216




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.125




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00220   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 221 ===
                                                                                          217




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.126




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00221   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 222 ===
                                                                                          218




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.127




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00222   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 223 ===
                                                                                          219




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.128




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00223   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 224 ===
                                                                                          220




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.129




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00224   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 225 ===
                                                                                          221




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.130




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00225   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 226 ===
                                                                                          222




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.131




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00226   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 227 ===
                                                                                          223




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.132




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00227   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 228 ===
                                                                                          224




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.133




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00228   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 229 ===
                                                                                          225




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.134




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00229   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 230 ===
                                                                                          226




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.135




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00230   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 231 ===
                                                                                          227




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.136




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00231   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 232 ===
                                                                                          228




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.137




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00232   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 233 ===
                                                                                          229




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.138




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00233   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 234 ===
                                                                                          230




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.139




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00234   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 235 ===
                                                                                          231




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.140




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00235   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 236 ===
                                                                                          232




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.141




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00236   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 237 ===
                                                                                          233




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.142




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00237   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 238 ===
                                                                                          234




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.143




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00238   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 239 ===
                                                                                          235




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.144




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00239   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 240 ===
                                                                                          236




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.145




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00240   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 241 ===
                                                                                          237




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.146




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00241   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 242 ===
                                                                                          238




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.147




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00242   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 243 ===
                                                                                          239




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.148




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00243   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 244 ===
                                                                                          240




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.149




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00244   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 245 ===
                                                                                          241




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.150




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00245   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 246 ===
                                                                                          242




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.151




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00246   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 247 ===
                                                                                          243




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.152




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00247   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 248 ===
                                                                                          244




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.153




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00248   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 249 ===
                                                                                          245




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.154




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00249   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 250 ===
                                                                                          246




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.155




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00250   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 251 ===
                                                                                          247




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.156




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00251   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 252 ===
                                                                                          248




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.157




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00252   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 253 ===
                                                                                          249




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.158




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00253   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 254 ===
                                                                                          250




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.159




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00254   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 255 ===
                                                                                          251




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.160




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00255   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 256 ===
                                                                                          252




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.161




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00256   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 257 ===
                                                                                          253




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.162




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00257   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 258 ===
                                                                                          254




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.163




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00258   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 259 ===
                                                                                          255




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.164




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00259   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 260 ===
                                                                                          256




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.165




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00260   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 261 ===
                                                                                          257




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.166




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00261   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 262 ===
                                                                                          258




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.167




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00262   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 263 ===
                                                                                          259




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.168




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00263   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 264 ===
                                                                                          260




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.169




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00264   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 265 ===
                                                                                          261




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.170




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00265   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 266 ===
                                                                                          262




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.171




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00266   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 267 ===
                                                                                          263




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.172




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00267   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 268 ===
                                                                                          264




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.173




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00268   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 269 ===
                                                                                          265




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.174




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00269   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 270 ===
                                                                                          266




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.175




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00270   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 271 ===
                                                                                          267




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.176




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00271   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 272 ===
                                                                                          268




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.177




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00272   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 273 ===
                                                                                          269




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.178




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00273   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 274 ===
                                                                                          270




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.179




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00274   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 275 ===
                                                                                          271




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.180




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00275   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 276 ===
                                                                                          272




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.181




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00276   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 277 ===
                                                                                          273




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.182




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00277   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 278 ===
                                                                                          274




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.183




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00278   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 279 ===
                                                                                          275




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.184




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00279   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 280 ===
                                                                                          276




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.185




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00280   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 281 ===
                                                                                          277




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.186




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00281   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 282 ===
                                                                                          278




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.187




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00282   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 283 ===
                                                                                          279




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.188




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00283   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 284 ===
                                                                                          280




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.189




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00284   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 285 ===
                                                                                          281




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.190




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00285   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 286 ===
                                                                                          282




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.191




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00286   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 287 ===
                                                                                          283




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.192




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00287   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 288 ===
                                                                                          284




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.193




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00288   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 289 ===
                                                                                          285




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.194




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00289   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 290 ===
                                                                                          286




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.195




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00290   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 291 ===
                                                                                          287




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.196




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00291   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 292 ===
                                                                                          288




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.197




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00292   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 293 ===
                                                                                          289




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.198




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00293   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 294 ===
                                                                                          290




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.199




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00294   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 295 ===
                                                                                          291




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.200




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00295   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 296 ===
                                                                                          292




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.201




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00296   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 297 ===
                                                                                          293




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.202




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00297   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 298 ===
                                                                                          294




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.203




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00298   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 299 ===
                                                                                          295




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.204




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00299   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 300 ===
                                                                                          296




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.205




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00300   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 301 ===
                                                                                          297




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.206




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00301   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 302 ===
                                                                                          298




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.207




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00302   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 303 ===
                                                                                          299




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.208




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00303   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 304 ===
                                                                                          300




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.209




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00304   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 305 ===
                                                                                          301




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.210




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00305   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 306 ===
                                                                                          302




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.211




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00306   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 307 ===
                                                                                          303




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.212




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00307   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 308 ===
                                                                                          304




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.213




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00308   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 309 ===
                                                                                          305




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.214




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00309   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 310 ===
                                                                                          306




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.215




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00310   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 311 ===
                                                                                          307




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.216




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00311   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 312 ===
                                                                                          308




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.217




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00312   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 313 ===
                                                                                          309




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.218




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00313   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 314 ===
                                                                                          310




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.219




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00314   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 315 ===
                                                                                          311




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.220




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00315   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 316 ===
                                                                                          312




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.221




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00316   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 317 ===
                                                                                          313




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.222




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00317   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 318 ===
                                                                                          314




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.223




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00318   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 319 ===
                                                                                          315




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.224




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00319   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 320 ===
                                                                                          316




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.225




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00320   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 321 ===
                                                                                          317




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.226




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00321   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 322 ===
                                                                                          318




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.227




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00322   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 323 ===
                                                                                          319




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.228




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00323   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 324 ===
                                                                                          320




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.229




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00324   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 325 ===
                                                                                          321




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.230




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00325   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 326 ===
                                                                                          322




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.231




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00326   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 327 ===
                                                                                          323




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.232




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00327   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 328 ===
                                                                                          324




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.233




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00328   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 329 ===
                                                                                          325




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.234




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00329   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 330 ===
                                                                                          326




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.235




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00330   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 331 ===
                                                                                          327




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.236




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00331   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 332 ===
                                                                                          328




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.237




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00332   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 333 ===
                                                                                          329




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.238




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00333   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 334 ===
                                                                                          330




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.239




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00334   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 335 ===
                                                                                          331




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.240




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00335   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 336 ===
                                                                                          332




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.241




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00336   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 337 ===
                                                                                          333




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.242




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00337   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 338 ===
                                                                                          334




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.243




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00338   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 339 ===
                                                                                          335




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.244




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00339   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 340 ===
                                                                                          336




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.245




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00340   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 341 ===
                                                                                          337




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.246




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00341   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 342 ===
                                                                                          338




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.247




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00342   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 343 ===
                                                                                          339




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.248




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00343   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 344 ===
                                                                                          340




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.249




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00344   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 345 ===
                                                                                          341




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.250




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00345   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 346 ===
                                                                                          342




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.251




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00346   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 347 ===
                                                                                          343




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.252




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00347   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 348 ===
                                                                                          344




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.253




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00348   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 349 ===
                                                                                          345




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.254




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00349   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 350 ===
                                                                                          346




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.255




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00350   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 351 ===
                                                                                          347




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.256




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00351   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 352 ===
                                                                                          348




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.257




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00352   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 353 ===
                                                                                          349




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.258




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00353   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 354 ===
                                                                                          350




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.259




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00354   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 355 ===
                                                                                          351




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.260




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00355   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 356 ===
                                                                                          352




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.261




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00356   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 357 ===
                                                                                          353




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.262




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00357   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 358 ===
                                                                                          354




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.263




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00358   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 359 ===
                                                                                          355




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.264




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00359   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 360 ===
                                                                                          356




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.265




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00360   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 361 ===
                                                                                          357




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.266




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00361   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 362 ===
                                                                                          358




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.267




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00362   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 363 ===
                                                                                          359




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.268




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00363   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 364 ===
                                                                                          360




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.269




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00364   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 365 ===
                                                                                          361




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.270




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00365   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 366 ===
                                                                                          362




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.271




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00366   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 367 ===
                                                                                          363




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.272




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00367   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 368 ===
                                                                                          364




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.273




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00368   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 369 ===
                                                                                          365




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.274




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00369   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 370 ===
                                                                                          366




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.275




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00370   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 371 ===
                                                                                          367




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.276




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00371   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 372 ===
                                                                                          368




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.277




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00372   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 373 ===
                                                                                          369




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.278




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00373   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 374 ===
                                                                                          370




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.279




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00374   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 375 ===
                                                                                          371




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.280




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00375   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 376 ===
                                                                                          372




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.281




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00376   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 377 ===
                                                                                          373




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.282




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00377   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 378 ===
                                                                                          374




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.283




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00378   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 379 ===
                                                                                          375




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.284




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00379   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 380 ===
                                                                                          376




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.285




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00380   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 381 ===
                                                                                          377




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.286




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00381   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 382 ===
                                                                                          378




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.287




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00382   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 383 ===
                                                                                          379




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.288




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00383   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 384 ===
                                                                                          380




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.289




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00384   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 385 ===
                                                                                          381




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.290




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00385   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 386 ===
                                                                                          382




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.291




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00386   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 387 ===
                                                                                          383




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.292




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00387   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 388 ===
                                                                                          384




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.293




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00388   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 389 ===
                                                                                          385




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.294




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00389   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 390 ===
                                                                                          386




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.295




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00390   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 391 ===
                                                                                          387




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.296




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00391   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 392 ===
                                                                                          388




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.297




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00392   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 393 ===
                                                                                          389




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.298




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00393   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 394 ===
                                                                                          390




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.299




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00394   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 395 ===
                                                                                          391




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.300




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00395   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 396 ===
                                                                                          392




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.301




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00396   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 397 ===
                                                                                          393




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.302




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00397   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 398 ===
                                                                                          394




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.303




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00398   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 399 ===
                                                                                          395




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.304




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00399   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 400 ===
                                                                                          396




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.305




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00400   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 401 ===
                                                                                          397




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.306




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00401   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 402 ===
                                                                                          398




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.307




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00402   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 403 ===
                                                                                          399




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.308




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00403   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 404 ===
                                                                                          400




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.309




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00404   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 405 ===
                                                                                          401




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.310




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00405   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 406 ===
                                                                                          402




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.311




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00406   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 407 ===
                                                                                          403




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.312




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00407   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 408 ===
                                                                                          404




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.313




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00408   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 409 ===
                                                                                          405




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.314




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00409   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 410 ===
                                                                                          406




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.315




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00410   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 411 ===
                                                                                          407




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.316




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00411   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 412 ===
                                                                                          408




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.317




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00412   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 413 ===
                                                                                          409




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.318




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00413   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 414 ===
                                                                                          410




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.319




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00414   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 415 ===
                                                                                          411




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.320




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00415   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 416 ===
                                                                                          412




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.321




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00416   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 417 ===
                                                                                          413




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.322




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00417   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 418 ===
                                                                                          414




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.323




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00418   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 419 ===
                                                                                          415




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.324




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00419   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 420 ===
                                                                                          416




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.325




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00420   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 421 ===
                                                                                          417




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.326




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00421   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 422 ===
                                                                                          418




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.327




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00422   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 423 ===
                                                                                          419




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.328




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00423   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 424 ===
                                                                                          420




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.329




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00424   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 425 ===
                                                                                          421




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.330




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00425   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 426 ===
                                                                                          422




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.331




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00426   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 427 ===
                                                                                          423




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.332




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00427   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 428 ===
                                                                                          424




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.333




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00428   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 429 ===
                                                                                          425




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.334




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00429   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 430 ===
                                                                                          426




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.335




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00430   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 431 ===
                                                                                          427




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.336




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00431   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 432 ===
                                                                                          428




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.337




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00432   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 433 ===
                                                                                          429




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.338




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00433   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 434 ===
                                                                                          430




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.339




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00434   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 435 ===
                                                                                          431




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.340




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00435   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 436 ===
                                                                                          432




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.341




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00436   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 437 ===
                                                                                          433




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.342




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00437   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 438 ===
                                                                                          434




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.343




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00438   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 439 ===
                                                                                          435




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.344




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00439   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 440 ===
                                                                                          436




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.345




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00440   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 441 ===
                                                                                          437




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.346




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00441   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 442 ===
                                                                                          438




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.347




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00442   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 443 ===
                                                                                          439




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.348




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00443   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 444 ===
                                                                                          440




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.349




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00444   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 445 ===
                                                                                          441




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.350




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00445   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 446 ===
                                                                                          442




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.351




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00446   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 447 ===
                                                                                          443




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.352




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00447   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 448 ===
                                                                                          444




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.353




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00448   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 449 ===
                                                                                          445




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.354




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00449   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 450 ===
                                                                                          446




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.355




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00450   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506

=== PAGE 451 ===
                                                                                          447




                                                                                                                                             g:\graphics\78506.356




VerDate Jun 13 2002   08:36 Jul 17, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00000   Frm 00451   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\78506   pfrm17   PsN: 78506
