
=== PAGE 1 ===
                                           DESTRUCTION OF ENRON-RELATED DOCUMENTS
                                                    BY ANDERSEN PERSONNEL



                                                                             HEARING
                                                                                   BEFORE THE

                                                               SUBCOMMITTEE ON
                                                         OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS
                                                                                       OF THE


                                                   COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
                                                          COMMERCE
                                                   HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
                                                         ONE HUNDRED SEVENTH CONGRESS
                                                                                SECOND SESSION


                                                                                JANUARY 24, 2002



                                                                       Serial No. 107–80

                                                 Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce




                                                                                      (
                                           Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.access.gpo.gov/congress/house



                                                                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                            77–569CC                            WASHINGTON : 2002

                                                      For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
                                                   Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800
                                                           Fax: (202) 512–2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402–0001




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000    Frm 00001    Fmt 5011    Sfmt 5011   E:\HEARINGS\77569       pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 2 ===
                                                            COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
                                                           W.J. ‘‘BILLY’’ TAUZIN, Louisiana, Chairman
                                      MICHAEL BILIRAKIS, Florida                 JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
                                      JOE BARTON, Texas                          HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
                                      FRED UPTON, Michigan                       EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
                                      CLIFF STEARNS, Florida                     RALPH M. HALL, Texas
                                      PAUL E. GILLMOR, Ohio                      RICK BOUCHER, Virginia
                                      JAMES C. GREENWOOD, Pennsylvania           EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
                                      CHRISTOPHER COX, California                FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
                                      NATHAN DEAL, Georgia                       SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
                                      STEVE LARGENT, Oklahoma                    BART GORDON, Tennessee
                                      RICHARD BURR, North Carolina               PETER DEUTSCH, Florida
                                      ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                     BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
                                      GREG GANSKE, Iowa                          ANNA G. ESHOO, California
                                      CHARLIE NORWOOD, Georgia                   BART STUPAK, Michigan
                                      BARBARA CUBIN, Wyoming                     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
                                      JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois                     TOM SAWYER, Ohio
                                      HEATHER WILSON, New Mexico                 ALBERT R. WYNN, Maryland
                                      JOHN B. SHADEGG, Arizona                   GENE GREEN, Texas
                                      CHARLES ‘‘CHIP’’ PICKERING, Mississippi    KAREN MCCARTHY, Missouri
                                      VITO FOSSELLA, New York                    TED STRICKLAND, Ohio
                                      ROY BLUNT, Missouri                        DIANA DEGETTE, Colorado
                                      TOM DAVIS, Virginia                        THOMAS M. BARRETT, Wisconsin
                                      ED BRYANT, Tennessee                       BILL LUTHER, Minnesota
                                      ROBERT L. EHRLICH, Jr., Maryland           LOIS CAPPS, California
                                      STEVE BUYER, Indiana                       MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
                                      GEORGE RADANOVICH, California              CHRISTOPHER JOHN, Louisiana
                                      CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire             JANE HARMAN, California
                                      JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
                                      MARY BONO, California
                                      GREG WALDEN, Oregon
                                      LEE TERRY, Nebraska
                                                              DAVID V. MARVENTANO, Staff Director
                                                              JAMES D. BARNETTE, General Counsel
                                                   REID P.F. STUNTZ, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel



                                                          SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS
                                                          JAMES C. GREENWOOD, Pennsylvania, Chairman
                                      MICHAEL BILIRAKIS, Florida             PETER DEUTSCH, Florida
                                      CLIFF STEARNS, Florida                 BART STUPAK, Michigan
                                      PAUL E. GILLMOR, Ohio                  TED STRICKLAND, Ohio
                                      STEVE LARGENT, Oklahoma                DIANA DEGETTE, Colorado
                                      RICHARD BURR, North Carolina           CHRISTOPHER JOHN, Louisiana
                                      ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
                                        Vice Chairman                        JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan,
                                      CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire           (Ex Officio)
                                      W.J. ‘‘BILLY’’ TAUZIN, Louisiana
                                        (Ex Officio)

                                                                                      (II)




                                                                                          2




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00002   Fmt 0486   Sfmt 0486   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 3 ===
                                                                                     CONTENTS

                                                                                                                                                                   Page
                                      Testimony of:
                                          Andrews, C.E., Senior Executive, Andersen LLP; Michael C. Odom, Audit
                                            Partner, Andersen LLP; Dorsey L. Baskin, Jr., Managing Director,
                                            Professional Standards Group, Andersen LLP; and Nancy Temple, At-
                                            torney, Andersen LLP ...................................................................................                30
                                          Duncan, David, Former Andersen Partner-in-Charge of Enron Engage-
                                            ment ...............................................................................................................    26

                                                                                                     (III)




                                                                                                       3




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319      PO 00000       Frm 00003       Fmt 0486      Sfmt 0486      E:\HEARINGS\77569            pfrm09     PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 4 ===
VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00004   Fmt 0486   Sfmt 0486   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 5 ===
                                              DESTRUCTION OF ENRON-RELATED
                                            DOCUMENTS BY ANDERSEN PERSONNEL

                                                                   THURSDAY, JANUARY 24, 2002

                                                                HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
                                                        COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE,
                                                SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS,
                                                                                          Washington, DC.
                                         The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:40 a.m., in room
                                      2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James C. Greenwood
                                      (chairman) presiding.
                                         Members present: Representatives Greenwood, Bilirakis,
                                      Stearns, Burr, Whitfield, Bass, Tauzin (ex officio), Deutsch, Stupak,
                                      Strickland, DeGette, John, Rush, and Dingell (ex officio).
                                         Also present: Representatives Ganske, Fossella, Waxman, Mar-
                                      key, Engel, Green and Jackson-Lee.
                                         Staff present: Tom DiLenge, majority counsel; Jennifer Safavian,
                                      majority counsel; Mark Paoletta, majority counsel; David Cavicke,
                                      majority counsel; William Carty, legislative clerk; Peter Kielty, leg-
                                      islative clerk; Shannon Vildostegui, majority counsel; Edith
                                      Holleman, minority counsel; Consuela Washington, minority coun-
                                      sel; and Jonathan Cordone, minority counsel.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The hearing will come to order. The Chair rec-
                                      ognizes himself for the purposes of making an opening statement.
                                         We are here this morning to confront one critical aspect in the
                                      collapse of the Enron Corporation. This is only the first step in a
                                      thorough and rigorous examination by the Energy and Commerce
                                      Committee into what the chief executive officer of Andersen, Mr.
                                      Berardino, referred to in recent testimony as a tragedy. It is surely
                                      that. More than 4,000 employees lost their jobs. Thousands more
                                      lost their life savings. Millions of investors, both great and small,
                                      watched in disbelief as $70 billion in wealth vanished, but not be-
                                      fore 600 Enron employees divvied up more than a $100 million in
                                      bonuses this past November.
                                         The essential tenet in our Nation’s unparalleled achievement is
                                      that private enterprise in a well-regulated marketplace is a great
                                      engine for human freedom, innovation, improved standards of liv-
                                      ing, better quality of life, and individual liberty. That is why when
                                      the marketplace endures a collapse such as this, we have a duty
                                      to restore confidence by putting real and effective safeguards in
                                      place for the future and by bringing any wrongdoing into the bright
                                      light of public scrutiny so that those responsible suffer the con-
                                      sequences.
                                         Today’s hearing will explore how one of the world’s premiere pro-
                                      fessional organizations could have actually compounded the cata-
                                                                                          (1)




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00005   Fmt 6633     Sfmt 6633   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 6 ===
                                                                                          2

                                      strophic business failure by allowing the systematic destruction of
                                      Enron-related audit documents at a time when it was clear to ev-
                                      eryone, certainly to Andersen, that government investigators and
                                      civil litigants would soon be demanding the documents needed to
                                      understand how things could have gone so wrong so quickly.
                                         To its credit, Andersen voluntarily disclosed the destruction to
                                      this committee and the Department of Justice and then promptly
                                      provided us with most requested information on this subject.
                                         While committee investigators have not had a full opportunity to
                                      interview all those involved, and while we have not yet received all
                                      of the documentation requested, we have interviewed the key wit-
                                      nesses, including Mr. Duncan, Ms. Temple and Mr. Odom, of whom
                                      the latter two will be testifying today. I thank these three individ-
                                      uals for their timely cooperation with the committee. I am, how-
                                      ever, disappointed that while Mr. Duncan has complied with the
                                      subpoena requiring his appearance today, by invoking his fifth
                                      amendment rights, as we expect he will today, he will hamper the
                                      important work of this committee in our search for the truth about
                                      what transpired at Andersen during the critical period we are ex-
                                      amining.
                                         But before we begin the litany of what we know and what we
                                      have learned, I want to say what I find most troubling. It is clear
                                      that scores of professionals and support staff were involved in the
                                      shredding of paper and deletion of computer files relating to the
                                      Enron audit. Yet to date, committee investigators have been unable
                                      to locate or learn about a single Andersen employee who raised any
                                      concerns or objections about destroying Enron-related documents,
                                      even after the SEC inquiry became public. That behavior is a far
                                      cry from the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants
                                      first principle of professional conduct, which states that, quote, in
                                      carrying out their responsibilities as professionals, members should
                                      exercise sensitive professional and moral judgments in all of their
                                      activities.
                                         So what have we learned so far? Some key points seem
                                      uncontrovertible. First, there was an unusually high degree of con-
                                      cern throughout the Andersen chain of command in the fall of 2001
                                      about ensuring that individuals working specifically on Enron mat-
                                      ters complied with Andersen’s document retention policies, which
                                      might better be termed destruction policies since they call for dis-
                                      posal of all nonessential draft or conflicting documentation relating
                                      to an audit, including the e-mails, voicemails and desk files of
                                      those working on the audit.
                                         This may be commonplace and even appropriate in most cases,
                                      but when a high-profile client is about to implode in an accounting
                                      scandal, those, quote, nonessential documents may be just what in-
                                      vestigators and litigants will be looking for, and it is clear that An-
                                      dersen’s senior management knew just that. How could they not,
                                      given their recent and embarrassing experience with the firm’s
                                      audit of Waste Management, Inc.?
                                         Second, Andersen’s legal group waited until November 9, after
                                      Andersen had already received a subpoena from the Securities and
                                      Exchange Commission and had been named in at least one civil
                                      lawsuit relating to Enron, to give instructions to its Enron audit
                                      personnel to suspend normal document destruction policies. We




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00006   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 7 ===
                                                                                          3

                                      now know the destruction of records continued up to that last day,
                                      maybe even beyond, according to Andersen and others.
                                         Andersen’s managing partner and CEO Mr. Berardino said over
                                      the weekend that the firm’s policy was that all document destruc-
                                      tion should have stopped once Andersen learned in mid-October
                                      about the SEC inquiry into Enron’s related party transaction. So
                                      why didn’t the firm advise its personnel of that until nearly 3
                                      weeks later?
                                         Third, Andersen has sought to place the blame for this debacle
                                      solely on Mr. Duncan, the partner in charge of the Enron account,
                                      who, according to Andersen, orchestrated an expedited effort
                                      among the engagement team to destroy documents after he learned
                                      of the SEC inquiry. Mr. Duncan surely has a lot of explaining to
                                      do, given the facts as the committee has uncovered them. He cer-
                                      tainly is guilty of poor judgment, if not worse. Even if he truly be-
                                      lieved he was instructed by Andersen’s legal counsel on October 12
                                      to clean up the Enron files, as he has told the committee investiga-
                                      tors, that does not explain why he waited until October 23, after
                                      learning of the SEC inquiry, to call an urgent meeting of his Enron
                                      audit managers to discuss compliance with the firm’s document re-
                                      tention and destruction policies. It is also inexplicable that he
                                      would not seek legal counsel before doing so, rather than relying
                                      on an e-mail from Ms. Temple sent prior to the SEC inquiry.
                                         Fourth, the now well-publicized e-mails from Ms. Temple to An-
                                      dersen’s personnel working on Enron matters in the mid-October
                                      timeframe to remind them of the firm’s retention and destruction
                                      policies were by all accounts highly unusual and of questionable
                                      timing. She has told committee investigators that her intent was
                                      to ensure that proper documentation of key conclusions was being
                                      generated and retained at this critical juncture in the Enron ac-
                                      count. We have no reason at this point to doubt her good inten-
                                      tions, but as she herself conceded, the policy also requires the de-
                                      struction of all other records, and it was absolutely reasonable for
                                      recipients of those e-mails to view her reminders in exactly that
                                      way.
                                         And the fact that she never acted to instruct or advise Andersen
                                      personnel otherwise until November 9 only served to confirm such
                                      interpretations and to compound these errors. Indeed, the Novem-
                                      ber 10 memorandum confirming her November 9 voicemail to Mr.
                                      Duncan makes plain that Andersen’s legal group believed the obli-
                                      gation to start preserving all Enron-related documents did not kick
                                      in until that time. This is particularly hard to swallow, given what
                                      Andersen already knew by then, accounting errors with billion-dol-
                                      lar impacts, serious allegations from within Enron about account-
                                      ing scandals, internal investigations and reviews by Enron and An-
                                      dersen, a plummeting Enron stock price, an SEC inquiry, civil law-
                                      suits and daily press reports raising the specter of much worse to
                                      come.
                                         This is not to say that Ms. Temple alone was at fault. It appears
                                      clear that she was consulting closely with her superiors in that
                                      legal group, as well as outside counsel that had already been re-
                                      tained by Andersen by the mid-October time period.
                                         Perhaps it is too late to save the reputations and careers of many
                                      of those caught up in the web of the Enron collapse, but for those




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00007   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 8 ===
                                                                                          4

                                      in business and the professionals who may watch these pro-
                                      ceedings, it would be wise to recall the admonition of an ancient
                                      Japanese proverb: The reputation of a thousand years may be de-
                                      termined by the conduct of 1 hour.
                                         The Chair would note that a number of members of the full En-
                                      ergy and Commerce Committee who are not members of this sub-
                                      committee have asked to participate in today’s hearing. We, of
                                      course, are happy to do that. While the members of the sub-
                                      committee will be recognized for opening statements, the members
                                      of the full committee who are not members of the subcommittee
                                      will not be afforded the opportunity for opening statements, but
                                      will have the opportunity to ask questions, and I will now recognize
                                      the ranking member of the full committee Mr. Dingell for 5 min-
                                      utes.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, you are most courteous and gra-
                                      cious. I commend you, Mr. Chairman, the chairman of the full com-
                                      mittee Mr. Tauzin, and Mr. Deutsch for these hearings today, and
                                      I would note that we on this side are anxious to join you in an ef-
                                      fort to develop all of the facts and to pursue wrongdoers as far as
                                      is necessary.
                                         We are here today to address a serious breach in corporate integ-
                                      rity, the destruction of documents by an accounting firm bearing on
                                      the corporate wrongdoing of its client and perhaps on its own
                                      wrongdoing, during a time when accounting wrongdoing was at
                                      issue in the press and a matter of regulatory attention. The event
                                      was either criminally stupid or stupidly criminal, or both. We must
                                      confront why were senior Arthur Andersen employees especially re-
                                      minded by their lawyers to implement their document retention
                                      policy, in other words, get rid of papers, just as concerns about
                                      Enron’s accounting were reaching a fever pitch.
                                         Why didn’t Arthur Andersen’s litigation attorney or its outside
                                      litigation counsel send Andersen’s Enron team a memo on October
                                      22, the day Enron announced an SEC inquiry, and tell them to re-
                                      tain all documents? Mr. Berardino, who refuses to be with us
                                      today, told us Sunday on Meet the Press that Andersen’s policy
                                      was to do so, yet Ms. Temple did not write such a memo until No-
                                      vember 10, after Andersen had received a subpoena. Why did Ar-
                                      thur Andersen management let this happen? Why did anyone at
                                      Andersen in their right mind think that document destruction,
                                      when an SEC inquiry involving accounting practices was under
                                      way, was in any way appropriate? Was that the real Andersen pol-
                                      icy, which is what company officials told our staff in interviews?
                                         Today we start to learn what happened. Today we start the proc-
                                      ess of holding people accountable. Today we start to determine
                                      what kind of tough action is required to prevent this kind of affront
                                      to our system of laws from happening again. And if these witnesses
                                      can’t tell us, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing from others
                                      who can. And I suspect we will have to hear from others before we
                                      have gotten the answers we seek today on these matters.
                                         I also look forward to additional hearings on the accounting
                                      skullduggery that flourished. How should all of these shadowy spe-
                                      cial partners and partnerships have been disclosed; and how were
                                      they not and why not? How did Arthur Andersen’s overlapping
                                      roles as outside and insider auditors and its conflicting roles as




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00008   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 9 ===
                                                                                          5

                                      auditors and consultant hurt full and fair disclosure? How did the
                                      lack of transparency, accountability and enforcement for the ac-
                                      counting industry enable the Enron shell game to go undiscovered?
                                      Or was it discovered and not told? How has the additional legal
                                      perfection and protection given the accounting industry by Con-
                                      gress over President Clinton’s veto hurt the ability of victims to
                                      seek redress?
                                        What happened here? Are Andersen’s document destruction and
                                      accounting shenanigans a matter of individual conceit of—wayward
                                      individuals intent on protecting their own careers and futures? Are
                                      those a matter of corporate conceit—a company thinking that it
                                      was above the law and acting in that fashion? Are these a matter
                                      of industry conceit—an industry thinking that its powerful political
                                      patrons would protect it once again as they did when we sought to
                                      see to it that the practice of consulting and auditing were sepa-
                                      rated?
                                        I look forward, Mr. Chairman, to a most vigorous hearing, and
                                      we on this side look forward to working with you and seeing to it
                                      that we have a most vigorous inquiry and pursuit of wrongdoing
                                      and look forward to a continuation and expansion of a vigorous,
                                      thorough and careful investigation. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                        [The prepared statement of Hon. John D. Dingell follows:]
                                       PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN D. DINGELL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
                                                             FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                         We are here today to address a serious breach in corporate integrity—the destruc-
                                      tion of documents by an accounting firm bearing on the corporate wrongdoing of its
                                      client during a time the accounting wrongdoing was at issue in the press and a mat-
                                      ter of regulatory attention. This destruction was criminally stupid, or stupidly crimi-
                                      nal.
                                         Why were senior Arthur Andersen employees especially reminded by their law-
                                      yers to implement their document retention policy—in other words, to get rid of
                                      paper—just as concerns about Enron’s accounting were reaching a fever pitch? Why
                                      didn’t Arthur Andersen’s litigation attorney or its outside litigation counsel send An-
                                      dersen’s Enron team a memo on October 22—the day Enron announced an SEC in-
                                      quiry—and tell them to retain all documents? Mr. Berardino, who refused to testify
                                      today, told us Sunday on ‘‘Meet the Press’’ that Andersen’s policy was to do so. Yet
                                      Ms. Temple did not write such a memo until November 10, after Andersen received
                                      a subpoena.
                                         Why did Arthur Andersen management let it happen? Why did anyone at Arthur
                                      Andersen in their right mind think that document destruction when an SEC inquiry
                                      involving accounting practices was underway was appropriate? Was that the real
                                      Andersen policy, which is what company officials told our staff in interviews?
                                         Today we start to learn what happened. Today we start the process of holding
                                      people accountable. Today we start to determine what tough action is required to
                                      prevent this kind of affront to our system of laws from ever happening again. And
                                      if these witnesses can’t tell us, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing from those
                                      who can.
                                         I also look forward to additional hearings on the accounting skullduggery that
                                      flourished. How should all of these shadowy special partnerships have been dis-
                                      closed? How did Arthur Andersen’s overlapping roles as outside and inside auditors,
                                      and its conflicting roles as auditor and consultant, hurt full and fair disclosure? How
                                      did the lack of transparency, accountability, and enforcement for the accounting in-
                                      dustry enable the Enron shell game to go undiscovered? How has the additional
                                      legal protection given the accounting industry by Congress over President Clinton’s
                                      veto hurt the ability of victims to seek redress?
                                         What happened here? Are Arthur Andersen’s document destruction, and account-
                                      ing shenanigans, a matter of individual conceit—wayward individuals intent on pro-
                                      tecting their careers? Are these a matter of corporate conceit—a company thinking
                                      it was above the law? Are these a matter of industry conceit—an industry thinking
                                      that its powerful political patrons would protect it once again?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00009   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 10 ===
                                                                                          6
                                         I look forward to a most vigorous hearing, and the continuation and expansion
                                      of a most vigorous investigation.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the ranking member, and
                                      would note that the bipartisanship has been exemplary up to date.
                                      I expect it will continue, and we will pursue each and every one
                                      of the issues raised by the gentleman from Michigan.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, we do want to note that the inquiry
                                      to date has been conducted in a proper, thorough, fair, impartial,
                                      bipartisan fashion. For that we commend you.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
                                         The Chair recognizes the chairman of the full committee, Mr.
                                      Tauzin, for an opening statement.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me echo those
                                      sentiments, Mr. Dingell, and express my full appreciation for the
                                      fact that this investigation began with a bipartisan staff, a team
                                      of investigators, and your cooperation and assistance has been
                                      deeply appreciated, will continue to be appreciated as we go for-
                                      ward. You can be assured again that we will keep you and all of
                                      your staff thoroughly informed as we go forward, sir, and involved.
                                         Mr. Chairman, let me personally thank you and the staff of our
                                      committee for the extraordinary work already done on this inves-
                                      tigation. Let me first explain where we are, and hopefully where
                                      we are going, with this investigation. Last year when we an-
                                      nounced it, we made it clear that before we held public hearings,
                                      we intended to get the facts. We intended to have our investigators
                                      interview the witnesses, dig up the documents and to get the evi-
                                      dence before we actually put witnesses before our committee to ex-
                                      plain what happened to the American public and to learn ourselves
                                      how we might, No. 1, understand, and, second, deal with this in-
                                      credible tragedy for American investors, Enron employees and
                                      other creditors of this massive corporation.
                                         When we made that announcement, we indeed put that inves-
                                      tigative team to work, and we have learned a lot. The Washington
                                      Post detailed some of what we have learned, including instances
                                      where Enron Corporation dealing in numerous partnerships, using
                                      the corporate equity to borrow money and to accumulate debt that
                                      was not disclosed to investors and others on their balance sheet,
                                      miraculously and through accounting tricks and gimmicks con-
                                      verted that debt into a phony income that never appeared and per-
                                      haps never would appear to the corporation, and, as one of the
                                      whistleblowers wrote in a memo, perhaps not only misled, but
                                      fraudulently misled consumers and investors in this important cor-
                                      poration.
                                         At one point it is clear to our investigators and—through our
                                      reading of their results that this incredible corporation somehow
                                      suspended the rules of corporate ethics and perhaps even put cor-
                                      porate morality on vacation and accumulated massive amounts of
                                      debts that were not reported on its balance sheet and were some-
                                      how allowed to count as income, again income from these partner-
                                      ships that never truly should have been counted as income, very
                                      much like the MicroStrategy case, where had its arrangements
                                      with NCR been reported authentically, realistically, MicroStrategy
                                      would have reported losses rather than enormous gains, and con-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00010   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 11 ===
                                                                                          7

                                      sumers and investors might have gotten the truth instead of a lot
                                      of phony baloney.
                                         The bottom line is that we are uncovering instances of corporate
                                      behavior that I think almost every corporation in America would
                                      abhor and would condemn, and we are preparing to lay it all out
                                      for the American public at a series of hearings on the Enron oper-
                                      ations. That process was interrupted abruptly by an amazing ad-
                                      mission by Arthur Andersen of a massive coordinated effort to de-
                                      stroy documents that may be extremely relevant to our investiga-
                                      tion and to the investigation that we are working hand in glove
                                      with the SEC and now with the Justice Department.
                                         We will hear today of conversations and e-mails and discussions
                                      dating back to early fall about the problems at Enron and about
                                      the need for somebody to explain them properly to people in this
                                      country who are investing in this company, and at the same time
                                      a decision to invoke something known as a document retention pol-
                                      icy.
                                         The chairman has put it correctly. The document retention policy
                                      which we have a copy of, vague in its language, can properly be de-
                                      scribed as a document retention and destruction policy. Why else
                                      would corporate employees and attorneys within Arthur Andersen
                                      have instructed its members, including Mr. Duncan, to expedi-
                                      tiously carry out the policy, even working overtime if necessary to
                                      complete it within a matter of weeks, the policy of getting rid of
                                      documents in the file? If it was simply a retention policy, a simple
                                      1-hour process of locking the files would have done the job. Instead
                                      a massive overtime effort involving scores and scores of employees
                                      to get rid of documents, documents which we have sought, the SEC
                                      is seeking, and obviously the Justice Department is now interested
                                      in.
                                         I don’t know whether crimes were committed, but it is clear to
                                      us that our investigation and other investigations have been im-
                                      peded by this policy of destruction. We are going to learn a lot
                                      about it today. And the reason we have scheduled this hearing in
                                      advance of the Enron hearings is because our investigation depends
                                      upon the full cooperation of Arthur Andersen and Enron, its em-
                                      ployees, in obeying the law, in retaining and providing to this com-
                                      mittee and to other government agencies the documents relevant to
                                      this case, and we will brook no exception to that rule. So let the
                                      word go out to all those who currently work for these two firms
                                      that we fully expect their cooperation and we expect to receive all
                                      the documents that we request.
                                         I am disappointed that this is the first time in my tenure as
                                      chairman that I have had to sign subpoenas to compel the appear-
                                      ance of witnesses before our committee, not even until the Ford
                                      Firestone case were we obliged to sign a subpoena. I am dis-
                                      appointed we have reached this point, and I suspect we will be
                                      there again when we conduct our full committee hearings on
                                      Enron. But let me make it clear, this committee will cut no one any
                                      slack as we go forward. We are going to lay the facts down, and
                                      we are going to try to find some answers and hopefully some solu-
                                      tions that will give American investors and consumers some con-
                                      fidence in the system again. And where we have made policy that




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00011   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 12 ===
                                                                                           8

                                      needs to be changed, we will boldly face the fact that we need to
                                      strengthen those policies and those standards, and we will do so.
                                        And I want to thank again Mr. Dingell for his cooperation, and
                                      you, Mr. Chairman, for the extraordinary work you are doing.
                                      There are many hours yet to go, but before we finish; I believe we
                                      are going to lay all the facts on the table for the American people
                                      to make their own decisions, but more importantly, if there has
                                      been corporate wrongdoing, we will unroot it. If there has been per-
                                      sonal or corporate attempts to hide the facts, we will uncover them,
                                      and people will answer for them, and in the end we are going to
                                      do our best to make sure something like this awful tragedy never
                                      occurs again.
                                        We are going to learn, for example, why Enron decided to change
                                      pension managers in the middle of this crisis and therefore invoke
                                      a 60-day period when its own employees could not dump the stock
                                      as some of its corporate officers were dumping. We are going to
                                      learn a lot before we are through, but in the end we are going to
                                      try and get some answers, too, and the questions raised by you, Mr.
                                      Chairman and Mr. Dingell, are deeply appropriate. And before we
                                      have finished, we hopefully will pass some changes in policies and
                                      laws that will help ensure that investors and consumers can have
                                      some confidence again in the audit systems, in the reporting sys-
                                      tems, in the way in which Americans learn whether corporations
                                      are really earning money or just accumulating debt. Thank you,
                                      Mr. Chairman.
                                        [The prepared statement of Hon. W.J. ‘‘Billy’’ Tauzin follows:]
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. W.J. ‘‘BILLY’’ TAUZIN, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
                                                                  ENERGY AND COMMERCE
                                         Thank you Chairman Greenwood. And let me commend you for putting together
                                      this morning’s hearing, which will take us on a path of inquiry we certainly did not
                                      expect to be on when the Committee began ramping up its Enron investigation in
                                      December—the destruction of potentially critical documents.
                                         Yet this is a path we must—and will—follow not only so we can eventually piece
                                      together as fully as possible the facts surrounding Enron’s financial collapse, but
                                      also so we can make very, very clear that this Committee will not allow its inves-
                                      tigations to be hindered in any way.
                                         Overall, our wide-ranging investigation, which we will address in more detail at
                                      next week’s full Committee hearings, involves sorting out the complex bookkeeping
                                      and various parties and policies that had a role in that collapse. It also involves a
                                      dogged pursuit of the various leads—wherever they take us—that might explain
                                      why people did what they did and how things went so wrong.
                                         Only with such full information will we then be able to consider how Congress
                                      might address the policy issues raised by Enron’s actions. Which brings me back to
                                      the disturbing topic of today’s hearing: Enron-related audit documents were de-
                                      stroyed by employees of Andersen—the company’s own accounting firm—when signs
                                      of outside investigations were emerging early this past fall.
                                         So we have a situation where the Committee is trying to conduct a thorough, in-
                                      depth investigation and now it is facing destruction of documents that may well
                                      have provided critical answers to its questions.
                                         The loss of these documents certainly came as a surprise to our Committee inves-
                                      tigators when they were invited by Andersen to look through its Enron materials
                                      earlier this month. And the loss certainly is hindering our ability to create a full
                                      picture of what Andersen knew about Enron’s bookkeeping.
                                         The document destruction raises several troubling questions about Andersen’s re-
                                      lationship with Enron and role in its collapse.
                                         Our witnesses today should help us sort through some of the issues raised by
                                      these troubling activities.
                                         For example, why did key Andersen employees suddenly decide—in October, just
                                      as it was becoming clear that outside investigation was imminent—to enforce docu-
                                      ment destruction policies? And why did destruction continue for several weeks after




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002    Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00012   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 13 ===
                                                                                          9
                                      investigations commenced, which was clearly against Andersen policy, according to
                                      Mr. Berardino?
                                         The destruction also raises some broader questions about document-retention poli-
                                      cies that we may have to address: For example, how do corporations implement
                                      these policies, particularly when investigations may be developing? Is this a wide-
                                      spread, though under-appreciated, problem?
                                         Revelations of document destruction have severely harmed Andersen’s reputation.
                                      I hope what we learn today will help us get a more accurate picture of Andersen’s
                                      policies, and whether the actions it took represent broader problems within the com-
                                      pany, the industry as a whole, or the mistaken decisions of a handful of individuals.
                                         In the end, what we gather should help us understand more fully where we are
                                      in our investigation, and where we need to look next as we proceed into some of
                                      the substantive issues involving Enron directly.
                                         There is, however, another message this hearing should impart—one highlighted
                                      by emerging news of document destruction at Enron, now under investigation by the
                                      FBI: This Committee takes document destruction very seriously. It will not allow
                                      efforts to impede its investigations to go unpunished.
                                         Thank you again, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the chairman and recognizes
                                      for an opening statement the ranking member of the subcommittee,
                                      the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Deutsch.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, all the pre-
                                      vious speakers have alluded to what the big picture of the Enron
                                      disaster is, and the big picture really is that the public accounting
                                      system and our capital market system failed, and that failure, in
                                      terms of the implication it has to our macroeconomy, potentially
                                      could be very, very significant.
                                         There, you know, was not an Enron prior to Enron. I take great
                                      exception to the Secretary of Treasury’s comments right after
                                      Enron filing for bankruptcy that this was business as usual in
                                      America; that companies, you know, succeed, and companies fail.
                                      That is the case, but the seventh largest company in America effec-
                                      tively imploding in a matter of weeks has not happened before,
                                      should not happen again, and that is in a sense the big picture of
                                      what we are looking at and what we will end up being able to de-
                                      termine, and whether the issues were systemic or criminal or, you
                                      know, specific, I think we will determine, and this committee has
                                      shown in the past that we have incredibly competent staff and
                                      competent Members to get to that point.
                                         There are many issues as well that I think are part of that. I
                                      mean, obviously this hearing is a component of that, but there are
                                      many issues as well, and, again, just to put in perspective my—the
                                      chairman of the committee mentioned the figure of $100 million of
                                      bonuses that were given during the period of—before the implosion
                                      of Enron to management. There was also literally over a billion dol-
                                      lars, $1.3 billion of stock held by managers of Enron that was sold
                                      prior to Enron’s implosion.
                                         We also again are aware of a number of political appointees in
                                      the administration who sold stock prior to the implosion of Enron.
                                      What we are also aware of, though, is that for the thousands of
                                      Enron employees and their 401(k)s, for them personally, many of
                                      whom were restricted from selling at least part of their stock, in
                                      some cases maybe all of their stock, for the lockout period, they
                                      also were very directly affected, but in an opposite—completely op-
                                      posite way in that they lost over $1 billion. Now, that number is
                                      huge, but the number is personal, and, you know, we have seen
                                      people, you know, whether in television stories or congressional




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00013   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 14 ===
                                                                                      10

                                      hearings, but some of my colleagues in the Houston area have
                                      talked to dozens of constituents that tell horror stories on a daily
                                      basis. I mean, just again in the scope, the pension fund, the Flor-
                                      ida, lost $300 million.
                                        You know, K-Mart filed for bankruptcy this week. It was not a
                                      surprise. The public accounting system in a sense worked. Ana-
                                      lysts, the public, anyone who was looking at their balance sheet
                                      could, in fact, understand what was going on. The question today,
                                      you know, obviously is are there other Enrons in our public mar-
                                      kets; are there other people who have gamed—other corporations
                                      and individuals who have gamed the system, whether through sys-
                                      temic problems or corrupt activities, that will implode tomorrow?
                                      And if there is not that transparency and faith in the capital sys-
                                      tem, there is a significant problem.
                                        What I would like to do, I know the chairman has said that
                                      members who are not on the subcommittee cannot take opening
                                      statements, but I haven’t used my 5 minutes. I would like to yield
                                      to Mr. Green from Houston for the remainder of my 5 minutes to
                                      talk about some of the specific issues.
                                        [The prepared statement of Hon. Peter Deutsch follows:]
                                       PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. PETER DEUTSCH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
                                                             FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

                                         Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this very important hearing. What we are
                                      dealing with today is the alleged destruction of documents by Arthur Andersen, the
                                      accounting firm for Enron, which unexpectedly declared bankruptcy on December
                                      2nd. While document destruction is the scope of today’s hearing, securing confidence
                                      in our capital markets is the fundamental issue facing Congress.
                                         It was no surprise to anyone that Kmart Corporation declared bankruptcy this
                                      week. With Kmart, the system worked—but why in the case of Enron was the entire
                                      Wall Street Community shocked to witness the sudden collapse of America’s seventh
                                      largest corporation? Sophisticated analysts were caught completely off guard, but
                                      the real tragedy are the thousands of workers and seniors who have lost billions
                                      in retirement savings, including a $300 million loss in Florida’s pension system. If
                                      the analysts couldn’t understand Enron’s books, average shareholders and workers
                                      didn’t stand a chance.
                                         We are going to address in detail why Andersen’s Enron team continued to purge
                                      their files of drafts, memos, e-mails and the back-and-forth discussions about ac-
                                      counting decisions that Enron made and Arthur Andersen approved—even after (1)
                                      Enron announced the initiation of an inquiry by the Securities and Exchange Com-
                                      mission into the financial accounting of certain off-the-books special purpose entities
                                      by Enron; (2) Enron established a special committee of its board to look into related
                                      party transactions and their inclusion in Enron’s financial statements; (3) an Enron
                                      ‘‘core consultation group’’ established at Andersen was discussing litigation; and (4)
                                      Andersen retained litigation counsel.
                                         Not until November 10th, after Andersen itself received a subpoena was anyone
                                      told to stop implementing the company’s document retention policy, thus finally
                                      halting the destruction of documents. Mr. Berardino told Meet the Press on Sunday
                                      that the company’s policy was not to shred documents ‘‘if you have a reasonable
                                      basis to anticipate an investigation.’’ He stated that basis was not established until
                                      October 22nd, the day that the SEC publicly announced it inquiry. Mr. Berardino
                                      chose not to be here today to explain exactly what Andersen’s policy is. But from
                                      our Subcommittee’s investigation, it appears that Mr. Berardino’s understanding of
                                      the policy was not observed by the relevant principals—not the lawyers, not the ac-
                                      countants. In fact, the lawyers kept reminding the Enron team to comply with the
                                      retention policy, which was a highly unusual move in a company in which complying
                                      with the written policy appeared to occur on an irregular basis at best. Perhaps that
                                      is why the three partners that Andersen put on ‘‘administrative leave’’ are actually
                                      still in the office every day. Perhaps that explains why no one representing Ander-
                                      sen has—to this day—questioned these partners or their staff to get their version
                                      of what exactly happened.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00014   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 15 ===
                                                                                      11
                                        Perhaps, more importantly, Mr. Chairman, is the fact that companies are allowed
                                      to release financial reports to shareholders that no one can understand. Even the
                                      professional analysts recommending purchase of Andersen stock until at least Octo-
                                      ber 24 cannot figure out how Enron was making money. Unlike Kmart’s collapse,
                                      the rapid bankruptcy of Enron was a total shock. Employees, shareholders, public
                                      pension plans, professional investors and banks lost billions of dollars, and there are
                                      many tragic personal stories.Ensuring transparency in our financial accounting sys-
                                      tem is essential to securing public confidence in America’s capital markets. Some-
                                      thing has to be done to ensure that publicly held companies and their accountants
                                      provide accurate financial information that the average investor can understand.
                                        Mr. Chairman, I look forward to learning the facts about Andersen’s role in the
                                      Enron debacle. I also look forward to additional hearings when we will focus on
                                      Enron’s destruction of documents and the role of company management in the col-
                                      lapse of America’s seventh largest corporation.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank my colleague
                                      from Florida. I want to thank the chairman for allowing me as a
                                      member of the full committee to——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. If the gentleman would desist, it is going to be
                                      a courtesy that is going to have to be accorded to all of the Mem-
                                      bers, and the gentleman Mr. Green contacted me earlier and asked
                                      if he could participate in the hearing, and we said of course he can,
                                      but under our rules and under our procedures, members who are
                                      not on the subcommittee are not afforded the opportunity to make
                                      opening statements. I will be very liberal with the precursors and
                                      the introductions to the questions that Mr. Green wants to make
                                      to the witnesses, but I think we are going to need to draw a line
                                      with regard to the opening statements.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With that, I would just
                                      like permission to submit an opening statement.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Certainly it will be a part of the record and——
                                         [The prepared statement of Hon. Gene Green follows:]
                                      PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
                                                                 THE STATE OF TEXAS

                                        Mr. Chairman: I want to begin by thanking you for allowing me the opportunity
                                      to participate in today’s important hearing.
                                        The Enron meltdown and the associated causes need to be throughly examined,
                                      and that all starts with today’s hearing.
                                        Enron’s economic collapse brought on by the decision makers at Enron and it’s
                                      supposed watchdogs at Arthur Andersen have devastated investors, employees,
                                      creditors large and small, and our Houston Community as a whole.
                                        For only a 16 year old company, Enron was an integral part of Houston’s art,
                                      medical, educational, and business community.
                                        Enron’s name is even on our new Major League Baseball stadium.
                                        Enron’s demise has taken the American Dream away from thousands of employ-
                                      ees and stockholders, and I am hearing more and more of these stories every day.
                                        Former employees now have no income, no health insurance for their children,
                                      and no pension for their retirement and the fulfillment of the American dream.
                                        Our committee’s job is not to prosecute, that will come if we can find someone
                                      at the Department of Justice who has not recuse themselves.
                                        No, our job is to investigate how we can prevent this from happening again.
                                        Over the last several weeks it appears that, Arthur Andersen has attempted to
                                      hide facts and destroy documents related to their work for the Enron Corporation.
                                        After being briefed by committee staff, reading all the recent news accounts, and
                                      talking to impacted Enron workers, I am stunned by the activity of Arthur Ander-
                                      sen a once venerated 88 year old company.
                                        What I find most interesting is that Arthur Anderson’s experiences with both the
                                      Waste Management and Sunbeam corporations seemed to be only practice for their
                                      crown jewel of bankruptcies, Enron.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00015   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 16 ===
                                                                                      12
                                        I am hopeful that today’s witnesses will be able to shed some light on Arthur An-
                                      dersen’s ‘‘document destruction policy’’ 1. Not a document preservation policy.
                                        As a lawyer, I always understood that if their was even the hint of some kind
                                      of official investigation that it was better to retain documents rather then destroy
                                      them.
                                        This is because if an investigation is started and the investigators learn that I
                                      started a large scale shredding operation, it makes me look guilty.
                                        Ms. Temple’s e-mail to Mr. Odom that was subsequently relayed to Mr. Duncan
                                      reminding everyone of the so-called ‘‘document preservation policy’’ is at least highly
                                      suspicious and at most criminal.
                                        Mr. Chairman, Arthur Andersen definitely played a role in the Enron collapse,
                                      but we all know the true problem resides with Ken Lay, Jeffrey Skilling, and An-
                                      drew Fastow.
                                        Arthur Andersen is only a large cog in the wheel that was Enron, and the Com-
                                      mittee needs to stay focus on this fact.
                                        I want to thank you again Mr. Chairman for allowing me to participate today,
                                      and I look forward to hearing the witness testimony.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. If I could yield back my time, then, and just men-
                                      tion, you know, I don’t know how much we will get in this hearing,
                                      but Mr. Green—I know my colleague also from Houston area as
                                      well has unfortunately—I mean, we just came back from a couple-
                                      week break where he was telling me some of the stories before the
                                      hearing started, and literally, I mean, tearing can come to your
                                      eyes, that he is met the people, he has talked to people on a daily
                                      basis. Obviously that information of what the status of Enron was
                                      not provided for them, and clearly the insiders knew what was
                                      going on.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Would the gentleman yield?
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. I am out of time. If he would——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Just quickly to announce that we are going to
                                      have a full committee hearing on Enron to lead off the rest of the
                                      hearings by the subcommittees, and the gentleman will, of course,
                                      have a chance then to make full opening statements.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Thank you.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. And if I may say so, the gentleman from Texas
                                      Mr. Green has expressed his profound concern with regard to the
                                      well-being of his constituents, and we appreciate his participation
                                      this morning.
                                         The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida Mr. Bili-
                                      rakis for an opening statement.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I don’t
                                      have a prepared opening statement, but I would just like to make
                                      a couple of points very briefly. One is that both Mr. Tauzin and
                                      Dingell have emphasized bipartisanship of this hearing and of the
                                      entire investigation, and of the subsequent hearings that are going
                                      to take place. I think we should all keep that in mind. This par-
                                      ticular hearing is limiting itself, as I understand it, to the destruc-
                                      tion of Enron-related documents by personnel working for the com-
                                      pany, and I would hope that we would limit ourselves to that. As
                                      much as we all would want to go into the other areas, I hope that
                                      we would try and hold off on those.
                                         The second point as has been made by so many others in other
                                      ways is credibility, or I guess I like to say maybe lack of credibility.
                                        1 Arthur Anderson had a policy known as the ‘‘documentation preservation policy’’ that re-
                                      quired their auditors to destroy all documents not specifically related to their final audit report.
                                      Ms. Temple sent an e-mail to Mr. Odom reminding him of this policy on Enron related docu-
                                      ments.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00016   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 17 ===
                                                                                      13

                                      We depend on you accountants and you auditors. We, the American
                                      people, depend on you so very much. We depend on your truth. We
                                      depend on your veracity. We depend on you not hiding and on you
                                      not misstating and not miscommunicating to us the facts as you
                                      see them. What is happening here is that we are losing that sense
                                      of credibility in you. I am not sure that any of the American people
                                      are paying attention at all, although I expect that they practically
                                      all are. I am not sure that they will, in the future place, complete
                                      confidence in information that they might receive from the auditors
                                      and the accountants of any of the companies throughout this coun-
                                      try of ours. And for that, you should be, I think, very, very much
                                      ashamed.
                                         Now, I don’t know what happened. I don’t know why the docu-
                                      ments were destroyed. We are supposed to go into these hearings
                                      with an open mind, and I like to think that we all have an open
                                      mind. However, I think we all probably have been back there sort
                                      of saying, hey, if they destroyed these documents the way they did
                                      when they probably should not have, they must have had some-
                                      thing to hide. That is certainly there, and I hope that you will clear
                                      that up.
                                         Did the process of destruction of documents mean that you are
                                      hiding the truth, that you did not reflect the truth, that you did
                                      not really do the job that American people expected you to do, even
                                      though you were employed by the company in the process of report-
                                      ing their activities? So many people are let down, not only the
                                      stockholders around the country, but certainly the employees who
                                      have lost so much in their retirement fund. Certainly it is a shame
                                      when you see a big company go under the way it has, and it is a
                                      terrible crime that retirement funds have been lost. However, I
                                      think more than anything else we have lost that sense of credibility
                                      that we have always had in the auditors and in the accountants,
                                      and I think that is just really terrible. And, again, you should be
                                      ashamed of all that.
                                         Having said all that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman from Florida
                                      and recognizes for his opening statement for 3 minutes the gen-
                                      tleman from Michigan Mr. Stupak.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for holding this impor-
                                      tant hearing. This is the first of what will likely be many hearings
                                      this committee will hold on the collapse of Enron and the roles that
                                      the executives at Enron and Arthur Andersen played in that col-
                                      lapse. Today’s hearing about shredding documents by Arthur An-
                                      dersen employees is one with extremely serious implications, in-
                                      cluding possible civil and criminal penalties. I look forward to
                                      learning more about Andersen’s policies on document retention and
                                      destruction.
                                         In reviewing the materials provided by the committee, it appears
                                      that there were—was a clear effort on Andersen’s part to cleanse
                                      their files after they were made aware that the SEC had begun an
                                      inquiry on October 22 and well after Andersen was informed by
                                      one of their former employees who was working for Enron that
                                      shady accounting practices were going on at Enron.
                                         While I do look forward to hearing about what Andersen’s official
                                      policy is on document retention, I also hope that our panelists will




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00017   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 18 ===
                                                                                      14

                                      be able to shed some light on what is being done to recover the doc-
                                      uments that were purged from computers and shredded by staff.
                                      Certainly Andersen runs backups of their computer files, just as
                                      my office does, and would have them available to recover many of
                                      the deleted files. Hopefully Mr. Baskin will be able to provide us
                                      with an update as to what is being done to recover these docu-
                                      ments.
                                         The actions taken by Andersen and Enron executives in recent
                                      months give us reason to be concerned about the cavalier attitude
                                      that is all too prevalent in today’s corporate world. I can’t help but
                                      believe that this cavalier attitude was encouraged by the passage
                                      over a Presidential veto of the Securities Litigation Reform Act of
                                      1995.
                                         In 1995, only a few other members on this committee and I op-
                                      posed the bill, which essentially shredded the rights of investors to
                                      take action against companies for these deplorable business ac-
                                      tions. The Security Litigation Reform Act, or the securities rip-off
                                      act as some of us called it back then, provides immunity from the
                                      private fraud liability for written or oral corporate forward-looking
                                      statements even when those statements are deliberately false. This
                                      so-called reform act significantly limits victims’ recoveries by cur-
                                      tailing joint and several liability, making it more difficult for Enron
                                      employees to sue corporate officials who cashed in close to a billion
                                      dollars worth of stock while Enron was collapsing.
                                         Finally, the Securities Reform Act failed to restore the liability
                                      of aiders and abetters in private action. Here we have Andersen
                                      aiding Enron or Enron aiding Andersen, and the whole crooked
                                      bunch avoids liability. So once again, the defrauded shareholders
                                      are left holding an empty bag.
                                         Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, we are seeing firsthand the re-
                                      sults of that terrible law. Thousands of Enron employees who used
                                      to have what they thought would be a secure retirement will now
                                      be forced to work well into what should be their retirement years
                                      and have little ability to take action against the individuals who
                                      shredded their hopes for a secure retirement.
                                         Chairman Tauzin said this morning, and I compliment him, he
                                      said in a TV interview that our first commitment must be to the
                                      investors. I agree, and we can help these and millions of other
                                      shareholders by immediately repealing the 1995 Securities Reform
                                      Act so we can put teeth back into our security exchange laws.
                                         Mr. Chairman, it is not just the employees who are taking a
                                      beating on their retirement hopes. There are countless numbers of
                                      people, ranging from teachers in California, police and fire officials
                                      in New York City, who have lost hundreds of millions of dollars in
                                      their pension plans and 401(k)s. That is a subject of future hear-
                                      ings, which the chairman said we will be having beginning next
                                      week, and I look forward to discussing this in more detail and more
                                      depth at future hearings. And I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the
                                      time.
                                         [The prepared statement of Hon. Bart Stupak follows:]
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. BART STUPAK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
                                                               FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                         Mr. Chairman, I thank you for holding this important hearing this morning. This
                                      is the first of what will likely be several hearings that this committee will hold re-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00018   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 19 ===
                                                                                      15
                                      garding the collapse of Enron and the roles of the executives at Enron and Arthur
                                      Andersen in that collapse.
                                         Today’s hearing about the shredding of documents by Arthur Andersen employees
                                      is one with extremely serious implications including possible civil and criminal pen-
                                      alties. I look forward to learning more about Anderson’s policy on document reten-
                                      tion and destruction. In reviewing the materials provided by the committee, it ap-
                                      pears that there was a clear effort on Anderson’s part to cleanse their files AFTER
                                      they were made aware that the SEC had begun an inquiry on October 22nd and
                                      well after Andersen was informed by one of their former employees who was work-
                                      ing for Enron that shady accounting practices were going on at Enron.
                                         While I do look forward to hearing about what Andersen’s official policy is on doc-
                                      ument retention, I also hope that our panelists will be able to shed some light on
                                      what is being done to recover the documents that were purged from computers and
                                      shredded by staff. Certainly Andersen runs back-ups of their computer files, just as
                                      my office does, and would have them available to recover many of the deleted files.
                                      Hopefully Mr. Baskin will be able to provide us with an update as to what is being
                                      done to recover these documents.
                                         The actions taken by Andersen and Enron executives in recent months give us
                                      reason for concern about the cavalier attitude that is all too prevalent in today’s cor-
                                      porate world. I can’t help but believe this cavalier attitude was encouraged by the
                                      passage—over a presidential veto—of the Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
                                      In 1995 only a few other members on this committee and I opposed the bill which
                                      essentially shredded the rights of investors to take action against companies for
                                      these deplorable business actions. The Securities Litigation Reform Act, or Securi-
                                      ties Rip Off Act as some of us called it, provides immunity from private fraud liabil-
                                      ity for written or oral corporate forward looking statements even when those state-
                                      ments are deliberately false. This so-called Reform Act ‘‘significantly limits victims
                                      recoveries by curtailing joint and several liability making it more difficult for Enron
                                      shareholders to sue corporate officials who cashed in close to 1 billion dollars worth
                                      of stock while Enron was collapsing. Finally, the Security Reform Act failed to re-
                                      store the liability of aiders and abettors in private action. Here we have Andersen
                                      aiding Enron or Enron aiding Andersen and the whole crooked bunch avoids liabil-
                                      ity, so once again the defrauded shareholders are left holding an empty bag.
                                         Unfortunately Mr. Chairman, we are seeing first hand the results of that terrible
                                      law. Thousands of Enron employees who used to have what they thought would be
                                      a secure retirement will now be forced to work well into what should be their retire-
                                      ment years and have little ability to take action against the individuals who shred-
                                      ded their hopes of a secure retirement. Chairman Tauzin said this morning in a TV
                                      interview that ‘‘our first commitment is to the investors. I agree and we can help
                                      these and millions of other shareholders by immediately repealing the 1995 Securi-
                                      ties Litigation Reform Act—so we can put teeth back into out security exchange
                                      laws.
                                         Mr. Chairman, it is not just the Enron employees who have taken a beating on
                                      their retirement hopes. There are countless numbers of people ranging from teach-
                                      ers in California to police and fire officials in New York who have lost hundreds
                                      of millions of dollars in their pension plans and 401K’s , but that is a subject for
                                      future hearings and I look forward to discussing this more in depth at those hear-
                                      ings.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman from Michi-
                                      gan and recognizes for the purposes of an opening statement for 3
                                      minutes the gentleman from Florida Mr. Stearns.
                                        Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and let me commend
                                      you for having this hearing and, of course, also to commend the
                                      staff on both sides of the aisle for all the work they did, of course,
                                      during the holidays when lots of the Members were back enjoying
                                      the Christmas holidays.
                                        The hearings, of course, today are focusing on destruction of doc-
                                      uments, an allegation that will carry serious implications should
                                      deliberate wrongdoing be discovered. I think I am not alone. I
                                      think all of my colleagues would agree that a person will fare bet-
                                      ter in cooperating with this subcommittee and the full committee’s
                                      investigation as opposed to subverting our efforts. We need to have




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00019   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 20 ===
                                                                                      16

                                      answers for investors, and we need to develop transparency on this
                                      question of the auditing of large corporations.
                                         Florida State pension fund incurred a loss to the tune of $300
                                      million. Individual constituents have called me to render their com-
                                      plaints at losing their retirement savings from their 401(k) ac-
                                      counts. And I promised, as my colleagues on both sides have, to do
                                      everything possible to get to the bottom of this matter and prevent
                                      a reoccurrence. So I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses.
                                         It is my understanding that a memo from February 2001 detailed
                                      Andersen’s concern with Enron and whether that company’s deal-
                                      ing would harm Andersen’s reputation. I think I can say that An-
                                      dersen now has wounded its own reputation. It is self-inflicted. So
                                      if they are here today, it is their own fault. Mr. David Duncan, the
                                      former Andersen partner in charge, is alleged to have ordered the
                                      expedited destruction of Enron-related documents. One of our wit-
                                      nesses, a counsel for Arthur Andersen, Ms. Temple, prior to the
                                      document destruction e-mailed a, ‘‘reminder,’’ of Andersen’s docu-
                                      ment retention policy. So is Mr. Duncan being made a scapegoat
                                      here this morning, for it sees maybe an explicit order was given to
                                      destroy a document, yet backsides were covered through the, ‘‘re-
                                      minder’’ e-mail on document retention.
                                         This is kind of like the code word—the code red instruction that
                                      Colonel Jessup used in A Few Good Men, that movie, as you will
                                      remember. When he issued the code red, it was a term that did not
                                      appear in any manual or standard operating procedure, yet carried
                                      specific actions once it was given.
                                         So, Mr. Chairman, I think this hearing should give us an oppor-
                                      tunity to get to the bottom of this destruction of documents, and
                                      I might say, the chairman of our full committee has also talked
                                      about transparency in auditing procedures. I would like to note
                                      that I chair the committee that has jurisdiction over the Financial
                                      Accounting Standards Board, and I would like to know personally
                                      if our accounting standards are responsive to today’s challenge
                                      posed by the increasingly complex business and financial trans-
                                      actions of companies like Enron. Are there other companies doing
                                      this same procedure with these limited partnerships, sheltering of
                                      the debt? So we need to look at these standards and to assure our
                                      constituents and the American public that there is transparency
                                      and honesty dealing with these accounting procedures.
                                         So, again, I commend you and the full chairman of the staff for
                                      the work you are doing.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman from Florida
                                      and recognizes for the purposes of an opening statement for 3 min-
                                      utes the gentleman from Ohio Mr. Strickland.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like to
                                      submit a longer opening statement, and I will be short.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Without objection, the gentleman’s statement
                                      will be a part of the record.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. It isn’t clear exactly when the collapse of Enron
                                      began, but on October 16, 2001, Enron announced its third-quarter
                                      results, which included a loss of more than $600 million, and dis-
                                      closures of a $1.2 billion reduction in shareholder equity. The next
                                      day, October 17, the SEC opened an informal inquiry into Enron’s
                                      business practices, and on October 22, Enron publicly acknowl-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00020   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 21 ===
                                                                                      17

                                      edged the SEC’s inquiry was under way. Only 1 day later, the An-
                                      dersen/Enron audit managers met, and the team was instructed to
                                      ensure that they are in compliance with the firm’s, ‘‘documentation
                                      retention and destruction policies.’’
                                         Subsequently and alarmingly, an estimated thousands of Enron-
                                      related documents were destroyed. This destruction of documents
                                      takes place after the SEC began its inquiry. Furthermore, the de-
                                      struction of documents continues not for a few hours or for a few
                                      days, but I understand it wasn’t until November 9, 2001, that an
                                      e-mail was sent to the Enron audit team calling for, ‘‘no more
                                      shredding.’’
                                         This behavior by Enron’s accounting firm is brazen, outrageous,
                                      and completely unacceptable. In fact, the document shredding may
                                      render it impossible for this committee, the other House and Sen-
                                      ate committees, the SEC and the Department of Justice to know
                                      exactly who and what led to Enron’s collapse.
                                         Andersen was responsible for auditing Enron’s books and recog-
                                      nizing the company’s problems. Not only did the accounting firm
                                      neglect to do its job, but it may have made it impossible for the
                                      SEC to do its job because it continued to destroy documents rel-
                                      evant to the agency’s investigation.
                                         When Enron declared bankruptcy last month, thousands of work-
                                      ers found themselves unemployed, and investors, including many of
                                      those same unemployed workers, lost billions of dollars when
                                      Enron’s stock fell. As workers and investors suffered the con-
                                      sequences of Enron’s apparently fraudulent behavior, and the com-
                                      pany’s executives, embarrassed perhaps, but rich, walk away with
                                      millions of dollars, the employees walk away with little or nothing.
                                         It is imperative that we uncover what happened and that we
                                      take steps to see that those who are responsible are punished, and
                                      having worked in a maximum security prison before I came to this
                                      institution, I am tired of white collar crime being treated dif-
                                      ferently than other kinds of crime in this country, and if crimes
                                      have been committed, it is my fervent hope that those responsible
                                      will see the inside of a jail cell. I yield back my time.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman from Ohio
                                      and recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina Mr. Burr for 3
                                      minutes for the purposes of an opening statement.
                                         Mr. BURR. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         I don’t think anyone at this hearing is happy with the reasons
                                      for why we are here today, but today in this exercise we must
                                      faithfully discharge our duties to uncover that which has been cov-
                                      ered up. We must begin to publicly uncover and inquire of the ac-
                                      tions taken by Arthur Andersen in its work on behalf of the Enron
                                      Corporation. Why did Andersen engage in what is alleged to be a
                                      large-scale destruction of documents related to Enron’s financial
                                      well-being?
                                         We know from testimony given to our committees as early as Au-
                                      gust that Andersen had already convened a working group to re-
                                      view Enron’s third-quarter charges, charges in its October 16 press
                                      release that revealed a loss of $618 million and a reduction in
                                      shareholder equity of approximately $1.2 billion due to charges as-
                                      sociated with various partnerships. We know that Ms. Temple was
                                      concerned enough about misstatements in the third-quarter press




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00021   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 22 ===
                                                                                      18

                                      release, that she suggested to Mr. Duncan that portions of his
                                      memo for company files be deleted so that it does not suggest that
                                      Andersen concluded the release was misleading.
                                         Why is this important? Because it appears that some at Ander-
                                      sen were seeking to avoid a similar outcome to what had happened
                                      with their client Sunbeam in the middle of the last year. As it was
                                      reported by The Wall Street Journal in November, according to the
                                      SEC’s May settlement order with Sunbeam, Andersen auditors had
                                      routinely dismissed so many violations of general accepted account-
                                      ing procedures as immaterial, that they eventually piled up to
                                      produce significant distortions in Sunbeam’s financial statements,
                                      making the barely solvent consumer products maker look hand-
                                      somely profitable. Sunbeam filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protec-
                                      tion this past February 2001.
                                         This article went on to say that under generally accepted ac-
                                      counting procedures, misstatements aren’t immaterial simply be-
                                      cause they fall beneath the numerical threshold. According to an
                                      SEC accounting bulletin, under certain circumstances, the SEC
                                      says intentional immaterial misstatements are unlawful. One rea-
                                      son is that when immaterial statements are combined with other
                                      misstatements, they can, according to the SEC bulletin, render the
                                      financial statement taken as a whole to be materially misleading.
                                         What I hope to come away from this hearing and this phase—
                                      and I emphasize ‘‘this phase’’—of our investigation is were docu-
                                      ments destroyed by Andersen that would have proven that an—
                                      that they had made intentionally immaterial statements as related
                                      to Enron? When did Andersen hire outside counsel to represent
                                      them, and did the document destruction start, continue, or accel-
                                      erate once they received that outside legal advice? Were Andersen
                                      officials aware of an SEC investigation, but did little to stop the de-
                                      struction of documents?
                                         Mr. Chairman, the chore before us today will require some hard
                                      work and heavy lifting. Before I go any further, I want to commend
                                      the staffs on both sides of the aisle who gave up nights, weekends
                                      and holidays to make sure that we were ready to start this inves-
                                      tigation today. It has been said that hard work will reveal char-
                                      acter of those involved in the task at hand. Some will turn up their
                                      sleeves, some will turn up their nose, and some just won’t turn up
                                      at all. I look forward to working with those who choose to turn up
                                      their sleeves in this endeavor to uncover that which has been cov-
                                      ered up, and I yield back.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman from North
                                      Carolina and recognizes for 3 minutes the gentlelady from Colorado
                                      for the purpose of making an opening statement.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I make my
                                      statement, I would like to ask unanimous consent that all the full
                                      committee members who are here but not being allowed to make
                                      opening statements be allowed to submit their statements for the
                                      record.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Without objection, the opening statements from
                                      the full committees members present who are not members of the
                                      subcommittee will be incorporated into the record.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00022   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 23 ===
                                                                                      19

                                         Mr. Chairman, by now we are all painfully familiar with the
                                      events that led to the collapse of Enron. When Enron reported a
                                      significant financial loss more than a year ago, we soon learned
                                      that it had inflated its earnings by straying from generally accept-
                                      ed accounting principles. Subsequently, the SEC opened investiga-
                                      tions into Enron and later Arthur Andersen. This whole debacle
                                      has shown Congress and the SEC that we will need to, among
                                      other things, strengthen the laws which protect investors and build
                                      stronger protections to prevent the inevitable conflict between com-
                                      panies that audit and provide other services to their clients.
                                         Today, though, the issue is focused specifically on the destruction
                                      of Enron-related documents by Arthur Andersen employees. This
                                      panel will need to help us understand exactly what Andersen’s doc-
                                      ument destruction protocol is, which documents should be de-
                                      stroyed under it and the conditions that govern its use.
                                         Specific actions were taken—that were taken by Andersen em-
                                      ployees are also in need of scrutiny. Through press accounts and
                                      through staff, we have learned that an internal memo was sent to
                                      David Duncan, who is here today but apparently not going to tes-
                                      tify, the head of Andersen’s Houston branch, from Nancy Temple,
                                      a lawyer in the company’s Chicago headquarters. The memo report-
                                      edly detailed Andersen’s standard document destruction and reten-
                                      tion protocol. Five days later Enron received a letter of inquiry
                                      from the SEC, initiated after Enron reported significant changes to
                                      its financial standing. According to press accounts, despite the SEC
                                      inquiry into one of its clients, Andersen had begun to and contin-
                                      ued to shred documents related to its business dealings with Enron
                                      and did not make any change to that policy, even after it was—it
                                      received a letter of inquiry from the SEC.
                                         I frankly don’t want to leave this room today until I learn two
                                      things. First, what exactly was the document preservation protocol
                                      at Andersen in this instance, and what has been done in past simi-
                                      lar instances as some of my colleagues have alluded to? Second, the
                                      exact time line of who knew what when and the implications of this
                                      employee knowledge on the destruction of documents.
                                         The committee’s investigation has thus far discovered that imple-
                                      mentation of Andersen’s document destruction protocol may have
                                      been ambiguous. It was generally understood by Andersen employ-
                                      ees that the policy was not applied uniformly, and no particular
                                      manager on any level oversaw compliance with the policy. We need
                                      to find out the implication of that matter.
                                         We also need to find out whether senior members of Andersen
                                      were aware of Enron’s potential accounting problems possibly in
                                      August of 2001.
                                         I will be asking the panelists a number of questions around these
                                      issues. Mr. Chairman, I congratulate you in calling this hearing
                                      today and look forward to learning the answers to these questions.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentlelady from Colorado
                                      and recognizes for 3 minutes for the purpose of an opening state-
                                      ment the gentleman from Kentucky Mr. Whitfield.
                                         Mr. WHITFIELD. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
                                         This is really a sad day for our country, and I know that there
                                      isn’t anyone on this committee that is particularly excited about
                                      this endeavor. This is the first of many hearings that will be held




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00023   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 24 ===
                                                                                      20

                                      on this subject, and our goal, of course, is to find out the truth. We
                                      know for a fact that 4,000 some-odd people have lost jobs. We know
                                      for a fact that stockholders from around the country have lost most
                                      of their equity in this company. We know for a fact that employ-
                                      ees—loyal employees of the company have had their pension plans
                                      eliminated, the value of their 401(k)s eliminated. And we know for
                                      a fact that Sherron Watkins in her letter to Mr. Lay back in Au-
                                      gust pointed out—this is quite sad, I think—that—it said, employ-
                                      ees question our accounting proprietary consistently and con-
                                      stantly.
                                         I have even heard one manager-level employee from the principal
                                      investments group say, I know it would be devastating to all of us,
                                      but I wish we would get caught. We are such a crooked company.
                                      And then one of the real advocates for Enron, Mr. David Fleischer,
                                      an analyst at Goldman Sachs, had told Mr. Lay at a financial ana-
                                      lyst meeting, there is an appearance that you are hiding some-
                                      thing. And he went on to say, they have engaged in a number of
                                      transactions that one wonders about and that are hard to under-
                                      stand. They have not been as forthcoming in explaining them, but,
                                      he said, I am still recommending the stock, because I don’t think
                                      accountants and auditors would have allowed total shenanigans.
                                      And in the absence of total shenanigans going on at this company,
                                      there is tremendous value here.
                                         So we want to get to the facts. We want to discover the truth.
                                      And as we go forward, Congress is going to have to come up and
                                      come forward with some solutions to prevent this type of activity
                                      in the future, look at conflicts between one entity serving as a con-
                                      sultant and as an auditor, and try to determine how the Director
                                      of the Division of Investment at the SEC in 1997 provided an ex-
                                      emption from the Foreign Investment Act of 1940 for Enron alone.
                                         Do we need pension reform? Why did the board of directors of
                                      Enron waive their ethical standards for corporate executives to
                                      enter into partnerships with Enron for the purpose—or at least
                                      what happened was hiding debt? All of these questions must be an-
                                      swered, and as I said, it is a sad day, and many of us do have con-
                                      stituents impacted by this. And when you think of the employees
                                      of this company and their loyalty to this company being totally
                                      wiped out while executives walked off with millions and millions
                                      and millions of dollars, it really is a sad day, and I want to thank
                                      the chairman for having this hearing.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman from Ken-
                                      tucky and recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. John.
                                         Mr. JOHN. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for holding this
                                      hearing. This is a very important topic, and what I envision is
                                      going to be a series of very in-depth, very lengthy and very serious
                                      hearings over the next few months, several months, engaging the
                                      full committee also, on what went wrong with the energy giant
                                      Enron. The hearing today focuses on what I believe is a first appro-
                                      priate step, and that, of course, is document shredding. I believe it
                                      is really important for us to start here to understand and uncover
                                      what exactly went wrong.
                                         I think the work of this committee is very clear. First, it is to
                                      get the testimony from individuals so that we can understand and
                                      uncover the facts; second, determine if there were criminal activi-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00024   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 25 ===
                                                                                      21

                                      ties that were engaged in; and third, to seek out the appropriate—
                                      appropriate, if necessary, legislative solutions affecting accounting,
                                      managerial and corporate relationships so this tragedy will never
                                      happen again in America.
                                         I will have a more in-depth and comprehensive opening state-
                                      ment at the full committee hearing next week, which will be more
                                      global in its reach, and I look forward to the testimony today from
                                      the witnesses. I thank the chairman for his——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Would the gentleman yield?
                                         Mr. JOHN. Sure. Yes, I will yield to the chairman.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. The Chair feels compelled to clarify that with
                                      the new announcements, disclosures of potential record destruction
                                      at Enron Corporation itself, that the full committee hearing is
                                      scheduled for February 6. If you will all put that on your calendar.
                                      The investigators will use the time in between to examine thor-
                                      oughly those new allegations of Enron destruction. I thank the gen-
                                      tleman for yielding.
                                         Mr. JOHN. Thank you, and I yield back to the chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                      nizes the gentleman from New Hampshire, Mr. Bass, for an open-
                                      ing statement.
                                         Mr. BASS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And has been
                                      stated before, the purpose of the hearing is to deal with the very
                                      specific issue of shredding of documents. Hopefully the—this hear-
                                      ing will lead to broader issues that will be addressed by Mr.
                                      Stearn’s subcommittee, perhaps the full committee, dealing with
                                      issues of accounting practices and changes in the regulatory struc-
                                      ture that govern the proper disclosure and honest, trustworthy dis-
                                      closure of financial information in the corporate world.
                                         As my friend from Kentucky said, this is going to be a—to a
                                      great extent—a very sad process that we go through here for the
                                      4,000 or so people whose lives have been shredded by the actions
                                      of a few who may have acted in a certainly unethical, if not illegal,
                                      manner in covering up what may be one of the biggest corporate
                                      scandals in recent American history.
                                         I hope as a result of this hearing, and hearings that will follow,
                                      that we can to some measure restore a feeling of confidence in the
                                      integrity of not only accounting practices, but in business reporting
                                      practices which will have a salutary impact on the capital markets
                                      in this country, because this is not a good time in this country to
                                      have this kind of an issue arise.
                                         We are economically fragile right now. The last thing we need to
                                      have is to have investors lose confidence in the—in the nature and
                                      structure of corporations and business and to have allegations,
                                      such as the ones that will be discussed and investigated over the
                                      next few weeks, prove to be true.
                                         So I want to thank my colleagues for helping bring this matter
                                      out and bring a resolution, because if we don’t, the implications are
                                      going to be not only significant to the business world but to the
                                      economy and this Nation and the world. I yield back.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman from New
                                      Hampshire and recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush,
                                      for an opening statement.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00025   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 26 ===
                                                                                       22

                                         Mr. RUSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today’s hearing
                                      on the destruction of Enron-related documents. Today, many thou-
                                      sands of Americans have awaked not knowing how they will sur-
                                      vive today or tomorrow.
                                         At the same time, several high-level executives are waking up
                                      with their economic futures in top-notch shape. For them, the col-
                                      lapse of Enron may be little more than a financial speed bump.
                                         Today’s hearing will be an important part in answering the ques-
                                      tions asked by many Americans. That question is simply: Why was
                                      corporate misconduct and malfeasance allowed to happen? Why
                                      was Enron’s arrogance and avarice allowed to trample the future
                                      of Enron’s employees?
                                         Enron, which was once the seventh largest company in America,
                                      has wreaked havoc on the lives of thousands of former employees
                                      and stockholders. Furthermore, given the major role that Enron
                                      played in the energy industry, the ripple effects will be felt
                                      throughout our economy for some time to come. Other Americans
                                      will pay for Enron’s corporate greed.
                                         Simply put, this is indeed a financial catastrophe. One economist
                                      stated it perfectly when he said the following, and I quote: You can
                                      look at the system of concentric circles from management to direc-
                                      tors and the audit committee to regulators and analysts and so
                                      forth and so forth. This was like a nuclear meltdown where the
                                      core was melted through all layers.
                                         Today, as we begin to look at the first of many layers of that
                                      meltdown, I am hopeful that we will be able to conduct a straight-
                                      forward discussion. That discussion should allow us to move on
                                      that core issue that asks: What deliberate, negligent, or reckless
                                      actions taken by Enron itself led to the financial and personal ruin
                                      of thousands of unsuspecting shareholders?
                                         That said, I will remind the witnesses of the importance of to-
                                      day’s hearing, which is not about excuses, nor is it about
                                      fingerpointing done in the hopes of getting off the hook. Instead,
                                      this hearing is about those thousands of workers who were left to
                                      perish in this financial meltdown while those at the controls ran
                                      for safe cover. And ultimately this hearing is an important step in
                                      making sure that the American public is shielded from this sort of
                                      travesty in the future.
                                         And, Mr. Chairman, last I want to say that I hope that my gut
                                      suspicions are not accurate this morning, and I hope that although
                                      the hearing is aimed at the actions, possible criminal actions of Ar-
                                      thur Andersen, I hope that this hearing is not about letting Enron
                                      off the hook and distracting and diverting the attention of the ac-
                                      tions of the Enron executives and using others an scapegoats for
                                      their actions.
                                         Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
                                         [The prepared statement of Hon. Bobby L. Rush follows:]
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
                                                                 FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

                                        Today, thousands of Enron employees awoke not knowing how they will survive
                                      today or tomorrow. At the same time, several high level executives awoke with their
                                      economic futures in good condition. For them, the collapse of Enron may be little
                                      more than a financial speed bump.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002    Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00026   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 27 ===
                                                                                       23
                                         Today’s hearing will be an important part in beginning to answer the questions
                                      asked by millions of Americans. Those questions are simply: Why was this corporate
                                      misconduct and negligence allowed to occur? Why were Enron’s top-level managers
                                      allowed to arrogantly and greedily trample on the future of their employees?
                                         Enron, once the seventh largest company in America, has wreaked havoc on the
                                      lives of thousands of their employees and stockholders. Furthermore, given the
                                      major role that Enron played in the energy industry, the ripple effects of their col-
                                      lapse are will be felt throughout our economy for some time to come. Americans will
                                      pay for Enron’s corporate greed. This is a financial catastrophe.
                                         One economist stated it perfectly when he said the following: ‘‘You can look at the
                                      Enron collapse as a system of concentric circles from management to directors, and
                                      the audit committee to regulators. This was like a nuclear meltdown where the core
                                      was melted through all layers.’’
                                         As we begin to look at the first of many layers of that meltdown, I am hopeful
                                      that we will be able to conduct a straight-forward discussion. I would remind the
                                      witnesses of the importance of today’s hearing. It is not about excuses and finger
                                      pointing done in the hopes of getting off the hook. It is about those thousands of
                                      workers who were left to perish in this financial meltdown, while those at the con-
                                      trols ran for safe cover. The hearing is a critical first step in making sure that the
                                      American public is forever shielded from this sort of travesty.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. I thank the gentleman. Mr. Rush, if you want
                                      to see us investigate the Enron Corporation, I suggest you fasten
                                      your seatbelt.
                                        [Additional statements submitted for the record follow:]
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD BURR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
                                                            FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

                                         Mr. Chairman, I don’t think anyone at this hearing is happy with the reasons for
                                      which we must be here today. But today, in this exercise—we must faithfully dis-
                                      charge our duties to uncover that which has been covered up.
                                         We must begin to publicly uncover and inquire of the actions taken by Arthur An-
                                      dersen in its work on behalf of the Enron Corporation.
                                         Why did Andersen engage in what is alleged to be a large scale destruction of doc-
                                      uments related to Enron’s financial well-being? We know from testimony given to
                                      our Committee’s as early as August, that Andersen had already convened a working
                                      group to review Enron’s Third Quarter charges, charges that in its Oct 16 press re-
                                      lease revealed a loss of $618 MILLION and a reduction in shareholder equity of ap-
                                      proximately $1.2 BILLION due to charges associated with various partnerships. We
                                      know that Ms. Temple was concerned enough about misstatements in the Third
                                      Quarter press release that she suggested to Mr. Duncan that portions of his memo
                                      for company files be deleted so that it does not suggest that ‘‘[Andersen has] con-
                                      cluded the release is misleading.’’ Why is this important?
                                         Because it appears that some at Andersen were seeking to avoid a similar out-
                                      come to what happened with their client Sunbeam in the middle of last year.
                                         As it was reported by the Wall Street Journal in November, ‘‘according to the
                                      SEC’s May settlement order with Sunbeam, Andersen auditors had routinely dis-
                                      missed so many violations of Generally Accepted Accounting Procedures (GAAP) as
                                      immaterial that they eventually piled up to produce significant distortions in Sun-
                                      beam’s financial statements, making the barely solvent consumer-products maker
                                      look handsomely profitable. Sunbeam filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy-court protec-
                                      tion this past February (2001).’’
                                         The article went on to say, ‘‘Under GAAP, misstatements aren’t immaterial sim-
                                      ply because they fall beneath a numerical threshold, according to an SEC account-
                                      ing bulletin. Under certain circumstances, the SEC says intentional immaterial
                                      misstatements are unlawful. One reason is that when immaterial misstatements are
                                      combined with other misstatements, they can (according to the SEC bulletin):
                                      ‘render the financial statements taken as a whole to be materially misleading.’ ’’
                                         What I hope to come away with from this hearing and this phase of our investiga-
                                      tion is:
                                      • Were documents destroyed by Andersen that would have proved they had inten-
                                           tionally made immaterial statements as they related to Enron?
                                      • When did Andersen hire outside counsel to represent them as it pertained to their
                                           client Enron?
                                      • Were Andersen officials aware of an SEC investigation yet did nothing to stop the
                                           destruction of documents?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002    Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00027   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 28 ===
                                                                                      24
                                        Mr. Chairman, the chore before will require some hard work and heavy lifting.
                                      Before I go any further, I want to commend the staffs on both sides of the aisle who
                                      sacrificed nights, weekends and holidays to get this investigation to where we are
                                      today. It has been said that hard work will reveal the character of those involved
                                      in the task at hand. Some will turn up their sleeves, some will turn up their noses,
                                      and some just won’t turn up at all. I look forward to working with those who chose
                                      to turn up their sleeves in this endeavor to uncover that which has been covered
                                      up.

                                       PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT EHRLICH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
                                                            FROM THE STATE OF MARYLAND

                                         Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, the failure of any business is deeply
                                      disappointing as investors are stripped of wealth and worker’s incomes, security,
                                      and future dreams are altered. Employees and their families bear the brunt of this
                                      failure with many experiencing a profound sense of loss, anger, and shame. As the
                                      failure ripples through related enterprises, rocking businesses and communities—
                                      disillusionment and loss is left in its wake. Unfortunately, the tempest of a failed
                                      enterprise is in direct proportion to its size, and I applaud your conducting this in-
                                      quiry of Enron, once our nation’s 7th largest company.
                                         On December 2, 2001, energy-giant Enron shocked the energy and financial com-
                                      munities by filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Enron is the largest corporation in
                                      American history to file for bankruptcy. In addition to investor losses, the sudden
                                      and dramatic fall in Enron’s stock price has stripped the retirement accounts of
                                      many current and retired Enron employees, whose savings were largely based on
                                      Enron stock.
                                         Mr. Chairman, my colleagues and I support the committee’s efforts to discover
                                      whether or not Enron engaged in illegal business practices. We want to understand
                                      why executives received large bonuses and compensation during Enron’s financial
                                      decline while other employees were prevented from selling their stock and lost their
                                      entire life savings. We want to understand how such a large corporation was able
                                      to hide its debt and collapse without any warning from responsible regulatory agen-
                                      cies and auditors. There are many questions to be answered: Did Enron’s use of a
                                      large number of partnerships contribute to its collapse? Was there a failure on the
                                      performance of federal regulators? Did federal regulators have authority to ade-
                                      quately oversee the complex commodity trading and financial transactions—the
                                      foundation of Enron’s rapid growth? Through your guidance, these and many other
                                      questions will be answered.
                                         Further, I am troubled by the performance of one of our country’s most pre-
                                      eminent accounting firms and auditors. Strong, diligent, and effective accounting
                                      and auditing practices are the foundation of capitalism and fundamental to main-
                                      taining investor and lender confidence in our capital markets. The Enron collapse
                                      has brought a crisis of confidence in the accounting profession and changes are re-
                                      quired to regain the public’s trust. Deceptive accounting and auditing practices must
                                      not go unchecked.
                                         Mr. Chairman, I applaud your efforts to review accounting standards, practices,
                                      and services and their effects in the Enron collapse. If there are flaws in the regu-
                                      latory system, then the laws must be changed to guarantee that a debacle of this
                                      magnitude will never happen again. I agree with President Bush’s State of the
                                      Union statement that through stricter accounting standards and tougher disclosure
                                      requirements, corporate America must be made more accountable to employees and
                                      shareholders and held to the highest standards of conduct. This must be an era of
                                      corporate responsibility.
                                         The American people know that deliberate destruction of evidence by an employee
                                      in an ongoing investigation brings its own State and Federal criminal and civil pen-
                                      alties as does failure to comply with SEC regulations and directives. Americans
                                      know that our court system will resolve the many lawsuits seeking justice and com-
                                      pensation. Illegal and duplicitous actions should not and cannot be tolerated. Ameri-
                                      cans know that some may attempt to use this failure and business scandal that has
                                      hurt so many as a tool for petty politics and opinion manipulation. We owe those
                                      who have worked hard, played by the rules, and have lost so much a strong, bipar-
                                      tisan investigation, or risk victimizing them a second time.
                                         Mr. Chairman, your efforts to promote dependable, affordable, and environ-
                                      mentally-sound production and distribution of energy are well known. Opponents
                                      may try to confuse deregulation with illegal and duplicitous actions. I continue to
                                      believe that the competitive market place, protected from potential abuse of power
                                      through proper oversight and legal protections, is the foundation for a strong econ-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00028   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 29 ===
                                                                                      25
                                      omy, the basis for national security, and provides the best products and services to
                                      our citizens. I agree with President Bush that it is critical, particular in the energy
                                      market, to provide Americans the right of choice with regard to products and serv-
                                      ices.
                                        Finally, this committee’s investigation into Enron’s business practices will prevent
                                      future business collapses of this nature, determine the effectiveness of Federal over-
                                      sight and regulatory agencies, and make clear whether changes to Federal law are
                                      necessary to protect employees and shareholders. We must and will get to the bot-
                                      tom of Enron’s failure and work to ensure it never happens again.
                                        Thank you Mr. Chairman.

                                       PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL E. GILLMOR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
                                                               FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

                                        Thank you Mr. Chairman, for giving us the opportunity to explore the recent
                                      events with regard to the destruction of Enron-related documents by Andersen per-
                                      sonnel. I am also glad to see the witnesses from Andersen and look forward to hear-
                                      ing their testimony.
                                        Over the past few years, like many of the members here, I have distributed a
                                      questionnaire to my constituents in an effort seek further input regarding the issues
                                      of day. Of note, one of my questions inquires whether members of a household in-
                                      vested in stocks or mutual funds. Here lies my motivation and concern. Of those
                                      that responded to this year’s survey, 83% answered ‘‘yes.’’ With the number of pri-
                                      vate shareholders on the rise, it is important that as we listen to Andersen’s docu-
                                      ment retention and destruction policies carefully, keeping in mind the actions of
                                      those in corporate management. More importantly, their actions should never come
                                      at the expense of the shareholder. I look forward to further congressional oversight
                                      regarding this issue.

                                             PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. EDWARD J. MARKEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
                                                        CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS
                                          Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for extending to me the courtesy of participating in
                                      today’s hearing.
                                          I think it is outrageous that the same executives who may be responsible for the
                                      destruction of workers’ pensions—and the destruction of documents that might
                                      prove their guilt—are currently protected by Congress when defrauded worker’s ac-
                                      tually try to recover their life savings. But, sadly, it is true. Why? Because in 1995,
                                      Arthur Anderson and the other big accounting firms succeeded in lobbying Congress
                                      to strictly limit their future liability for securities fraud. That bill passed over the
                                      President’s veto as part of the Republican Contract with America. And today, we
                                      are seeing the grim results—Arthur Anderson can no longer be held jointly and sev-
                                      erally liable when a court has found them guilty of securities fraud. I believe that
                                      this ill-advised law has directly contributed to a rising tide of accounting failures,
                                      culminating in the Enron-Arthur Anderson fiasco. The types of internal checks and
                                      balances that a healthy concern about litigation risk used to create within each ac-
                                      counting firm has been undermined. The many honest and decent people who want
                                      to do the right thing get overruled, and the increasing revenues coming from con-
                                      sulting and non-audit businesses put growing pressure to sign off on the ‘‘cooked
                                      books’’ of major clients.
                                          Yesterday, I introduced legislation aimed helping to address this problem. This
                                      bill would, among other things, require auditors to retain copies of all documents
                                      generated during the course of an audit for a period of four years and establish
                                      criminal penalties of up to ten years imprisonment for auditors that knowingly and
                                      willfully destroy such documents. The bill also would reform the liability standards
                                      applicable to accountants in securities fraud cases and provide an exemption from
                                      the ‘‘Catch 22’’ discovery stay that allows accounting firms to escape accountability
                                      for their actions. I look forward to working with Members on this and other reforms.
                                      Clearly, we have a system that is very broken, and we need to work together to fix
                                      it.
                                          Today’s hearing is focused on the disturbing reports that employees of Arthur An-
                                      derson have destroyed documents in connection with the Enron debacle. I think it’s
                                      appalling that Anderson CEO Joseph Berardino has declined the Subcommittee’s in-
                                      vitation to testify on this matter, when he was somehow able to make an appear-
                                      ance on Meet the Press last Sunday. I have also read that Mr. Berardino has agreed
                                      to appear before the House Financial Services Committee on February 4th. If Mr.
                                      Berardino can appear to answer questions on national television and before other




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00029   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 30 ===
                                                                                      26
                                      Committees, it seems to me that he should be able to appear before this Sub-
                                      committee so that we can get to the bottom of why his firm destroyed documents
                                      being sought by the SEC, by the Justice Department, and by defrauded workers and
                                      investors.
                                         Now, I have many questions about the underlying transactions and investments
                                      whose accounting treatment helped to bring Enron to bankruptcy, but I understand
                                      that this is not the subject of today’s hearing. I would merely hope, Mr. Chairman,
                                      that we will have a chance to thoroughly examine Enron’s investments in
                                      broadband, its energy trading operations, and its derivatives and other structured
                                      financings in the detail needed to understand just what happened here and what
                                      lessons we can learn from this massive fraud and misbehavior. That will require
                                      more than a single hearing of all of the principals to do properly.
                                         Thanks again, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to participate in today’s hearing.
                                      I look forward to the testimony.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair will now call the first panel. Mr.
                                      Duncan, will you please come forward.
                                        Please be seated right there. Thank you, sir.
                                        Good morning, Mr. Duncan.
                                        Mr. DUNCAN. Good morning.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Duncan is here with us today under sub-
                                      poena. To date, Mr. Duncan has cooperated with this committee in
                                      our search for the facts by submitting to an interview last week
                                      with our committee investigator that lasted more than 4 hours. Yet
                                      we received a letter from his counsel yesterday stating that Mr.
                                      Duncan authorized his counsel to advise the committee that he
                                      will, quote, rely on his constitutional right not to testify, close
                                      quote.
                                        I believe that this privilege should be personally exercised before
                                      the Members, and that is why we have requested Mr. Duncan’s ap-
                                      pearance here today, and request that he reconsider.
                                        Mr. Duncan, you are aware that the committee is holding an in-
                                      vestigative hearing, and, in doing so, we have the practice of taking
                                      testimony under oath. Do you have objection to testifying under
                                      oath?
                                        Mr. DUNCAN. No, sir.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you. The Chair also advises you that
                                      under the rules of the House and the rules of the committee, you
                                      are entitled to be advised by counsel. Do you desire to be advised
                                      by counsel during your testimony today?
                                        Mr. DUNCAN. Yes, sir.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. In that case, would you please rise and
                                      raise your right hand and I will swear you in.
                                        [Witness sworn.]
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you, Mr. Duncan. You are now under
                                      oath and you may give a 5-minute summary of your written testi-
                                      mony if you choose to.

                                              TESTIMONY OF DAVID DUNCAN, FORMER ANDERSEN
                                                PARTNER-IN-CHARGE OF ENRON ENGAGEMENT
                                        Mr. DUNCAN. I have no summary, sir.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay.
                                        The Chair will recognize himself for questioning. Mr. Duncan,
                                      Enron robbed the bank. Arthur Andersen provided the getaway
                                      car, and they say that you were at the wheel.
                                        I have a specific question for you, Mr. Duncan. You were fired
                                      by Anderson last week for orchestrating an expedited effort among




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00030   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 31 ===
                                                                                      27

                                      the Andersen-Enron engagement team to destroy thousands of
                                      paper documents and electronic files relating to the Enron matter
                                      after learning of an inquiry by the Securities and Exchange Com-
                                      mission into Enron’s complex financial transactions.
                                         Did you give an order to destroy documents in an attempt to sub-
                                      vert governmental investigations into Enron’s financial collapse,
                                      and, if so, did you do so at the direction or suggestion of anyone
                                      at Anderson or at Enron?
                                         Mr. DUNCAN. Mr. Chairman, I would like to answer the commit-
                                      tee’s questions, but on the advice of my counsel I respectfully de-
                                      cline to answer the question based on the protection afforded me
                                      under the Constitution of the United States.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Well, let me be clear, Mr. Duncan. Are you re-
                                      fusing to answer the question on the basis of the protections af-
                                      forded to you under the fifth amendment to the United States Con-
                                      stitution?
                                         Mr. DUNCAN. Again, on the advice of my counsel, I respectfully
                                      decline to answer the question based on the protection afforded me
                                      under the United States Constitution.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Will you invoke your fifth amendment rights in
                                      response to all of our questions here today?
                                         Mr. DUNCAN. Respectfully, that will be my response to all of your
                                      questions.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. I am disappointed to hear that, but it is there-
                                      fore the Chair’s intention to dismiss the witness.
                                         Mr. Duncan, we thank you for your attendance today and your
                                      respect for this committee’s process. You are dismissed and per-
                                      haps we will see you on another occasion.
                                         Mr. DUNCAN. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. I continue on my time.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, may I raise a point of inquiry at
                                      this time?
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The gentleman is recognized.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. I assume the witness is being excused but may be
                                      recalled at a later time; is that correct?
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. That is correct.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. And that the witness remains subject to the proc-
                                      ess of the committee, and that if the committee’s need is such, that
                                      we will be recalling him; is that correct?
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. That is correct.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Very well. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Does the ranking member of the subcommittee
                                      wish to be recognized?
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Mr. Chair, I think also, just in terms of clarifica-
                                      tion, that we have the ability to grant immunity, but at this time
                                      we have chosen not to, based upon our working with the Justice
                                      Department as well as the SEC.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Duncan’s attorney has repeatedly made it
                                      clear that Mr. Duncan would have testified this morning had the
                                      committee been willing to grant immunity to him. We have chosen
                                      not to do that. I think that would be improper, certainly at this
                                      time, in view of the Justice Department’s investigation.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. I want to make it clear that that is a bipartisan
                                      agreement in that respect that the investigation is continuing.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00031   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 32 ===
                                                                                      28

                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Would the gentleman yield? I also wanted to
                                      say clearly on the record that our joint bipartisan team of inves-
                                      tigators is working on a daily basis in consultation with Justice De-
                                      partment officials. The decisions we make regarding granting any
                                      right of immunity to testify will be made in terms of that consult-
                                      ative proceeding with the Justice Department.
                                         I thank the chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
                                         Continuing on my time, I think it is very important to lay out
                                      for the subcommittee, our panel, and our audience our apparent
                                      understanding of Mr. Duncan’s recollection of relevant events
                                      based on the committee counsel’s interview of Mr. Duncan last
                                      week.
                                         It is my understanding that Mr. Duncan said that during the
                                      September and October time period, he participated in frequent
                                      meetings and teleconferences with a group of senior-level Andersen
                                      partners in Houston and Chicago to discuss matters relating to the
                                      Enron account. That group included Ms. Nancy Temple from the
                                      legal group and Mr. Michael Odom, the audit and practice director,
                                      both of whom are testifying today.
                                         The consultation group which was created in late August or early
                                      September was fluid in membership and was formed in response to
                                      growing concerns over the accounting for Enron special purpose en-
                                      tities.
                                         Specifically, Mr. Duncan said that the group was formed at the
                                      suggestion of Mr. Odom and himself in response to, one, Sherron
                                      Watkins’ allegations of accounting improprieties on the Enron
                                      Raptor and LJM transactions; two, the $1 billion accounting error
                                      discovered in August by Enron and Andersen with respect to the
                                      accounting for the Raptor entities; and, three, the rapidly declining
                                      stock price of the Enron merchant assets transferred to the Raptor
                                      partnerships which made it look like there would be a significant
                                      write-down by Enron.
                                         During these conference calls, prior to October 12, 2001, Mr.
                                      Duncan recalls receiving advice from Ms. Temple with respect to
                                      the proper documentation of Andersen’s evolving position with re-
                                      spect to the correct accounting for the Raptor transactions.
                                         Also prior to receiving Ms. Temple’s October 12 e-mail regarding
                                      compliance with Andersen’s documentation retention policy, Mr.
                                      Duncan recalls Ms. Temple on one or two of these three group con-
                                      ference calls asking him, quote, ‘‘How are you on compliance with
                                      the document retention policy on Enron?’’ he said that his response
                                      to her was, ‘‘At best, irregular.’’
                                         Mr. Duncan then received Ms. Temple’s October 12 e-mail for-
                                      warded from Mr. Odom with the note ‘‘more help.’’ He did not know
                                      what Mr. Odom meant by that phrase, but he viewed Ms. Temple’s
                                      e-mail as a follow-up to the question she had posed to him orally
                                      about compliance with the retention policy, and as advice from his
                                      attorney to ensure that the entire Enron audit engagement team
                                      was in compliance with that policy.
                                         He added that he had never before during his lengthy tenure at
                                      Andersen been asked about compliance with the retention policy,
                                      nor had he ever received such an e-mail about ensuring compliance
                                      with that policy from anyone in Andersen’s legal group.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00032   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 33 ===
                                                                                      29

                                        Mr. Duncan does not recall the precise date, but sometime after
                                      October 12, 2001, Mr. Duncan met with his top Enron audit part-
                                      ners, Mr. Tom Bauer, Ms. Deborah Cash, and Mr. Roger Willard,
                                      to discuss the advice that he had received from Ms. Temple. Ac-
                                      cording to Mr. Duncan, the meeting participants concluded that
                                      they should call a meeting of all of the Enron audit managers to
                                      discuss timely compliance with the retention policy.
                                        Mr. Duncan does not recall when this meeting occurred, but does
                                      not dispute that his secretary sent out an e-mail on October 23,
                                      2001, calling an urgent meeting of the Enron managers for later
                                      that same day.
                                        Just days earlier, on either Friday, October 19, or Saturday, Oc-
                                      tober 20, Mr. Duncan had first learned of the SEC informal inquiry
                                      of Enron. He recalled that he had discussions with the Andersen
                                      Consultation Group about the SEC development over the weekend,
                                      including Ms. Temple. He also recalled that on October 22, he and
                                      other Andersen engagement team members met with Enron chief
                                      accounting officer, Rick Causey, to discuss the SEC inquiry.
                                        Duncan said that Causey requested Andersen’s assistance in cre-
                                      ating documents to explain the related party transactions to the
                                      SEC. Mr. Duncan said that at the meeting he called with all of the
                                      Andersen audit managers on the Enron account, whenever it may
                                      have occurred, he advised them of the importance of compliance
                                      with the document retention policy, and handed out copies of the
                                      policy to the participants.
                                        Mr. Duncan said that he observed individuals on the engagement
                                      team actively complying with the firm’s document policies by
                                      shredding documents, and that the activity continued up until No-
                                      vember 9 when he received a voice-mail from Ms. Temple ordering
                                      the preservation of all Enron-related documents.
                                        Mr. Duncan also said that he destroyed some of his own Enron-
                                      related documents in an effort to comply with Andersen’s document
                                      retention and destruction policies.
                                        Again, that is my understanding of Mr. Duncan’s interview with
                                      committee staff. Mr. Deutsch, would you agree that I have charac-
                                      terized our current understanding of Mr. Duncan’s recollection of
                                      relevant events accurately?
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. I would.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you. With that, I would call the second
                                      panel of witnesses to the table.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, while the witnesses are coming for-
                                      ward, I would like to request to proceed out of order for about 1
                                      minute.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Without objection, the gentleman, Mr. Dingell,
                                      will be recognized to speak out of order for 1 minute.
                                        Mr. DINGELL. I assure you with thanks, Mr. Chairman, you have
                                      nothing to fear from this request.
                                        I have the pleasure to introduce an old friend to this committee
                                      who is known and loved by us all, Mr. Jack Valenti who is in the
                                      room.
                                        And I have also the pleasure to introduce a new friend of the
                                      committee, somebody that you have been watching, I think with
                                      great enjoyment, in one of the most popular of the shows, The So-
                                      pranos. That is Ms. Lorraine Bracco, who is here present with us




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00033   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 34 ===
                                                                                      30

                                      this morning as a part of an effort we are making to bring forth
                                      information with regard to the inadequate treatment of women
                                      managers in the marketplace and discrimination against them.
                                        So we thank her for that, and I am pleased to welcome her. And
                                      I have, Mr. Chairman, stayed under my 1 minute.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Will the gentleman yield quickly? Just to
                                      point out, we may need your character’s services before this hear-
                                      ing is over.
                                        Ms. BRACCO. I am available.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Welcome. The Chair calls the second panel, Mr.
                                      Dorsey L. Baskin, Jr., managing director, Professional Standards
                                      Group, Andersen; Mr. Andrews, the global managing partner; Ms.
                                      Nancy Temple, attorney, Andersen; and Mr. Michael C. Odom,
                                      audit partner at Andersen.
                                        Good morning. The Chair welcomes our next panel of witnesses.
                                      You are aware that the committee is holding an investigative hear-
                                      ing and that when doing so, we have the practice of taking testi-
                                      mony under oath.
                                        Do you have any objections to testifying under oath? Seeing no
                                      such objection, the Chair then also advises you that under the
                                      rules of the House and the rules of the committee, you are entitled
                                      to be advised by counsel.
                                        Do any of you desire to be advised by counsel during your testi-
                                      mony today? Mr. Baskin you—state your counsel’s name for the
                                      record, Mr. Baskin.
                                        Mr. BASKIN. Mark Gitenstein.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Andrews?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. Mark Gitenstein and Stan Brand.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Ms. Temple?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. Yes. Mark Hansen, Reid Figel, and Silvija Strikis.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. You know the name of your attorney. Very
                                      good. Mr. Odom.
                                        Mr. ODOM. Peter Flemming.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. In that case, would you please rise and
                                      raise your right hands so I can swear you in?
                                        [Witnesses sworn.]
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you. The Chair advises you that you are
                                      now under oath, and would recognize Mr. Andrews for 5 minutes
                                      to make an opening statement, Mr. Andrews?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. Actually, Mr. Baskin is making the opening state-
                                      ment.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Baskin, then you are recognized for 5 min-
                                      utes for your opening statement.
                                      TESTIMONY OF C.E. ANDREWS, SENIOR EXECUTIVE, ANDER-
                                       SEN LLP; MICHAEL C. ODOM, AUDIT PARTNER, ANDERSEN
                                       LLP; DORSEY L. BASKIN, JR., MANAGING DIRECTOR, PRO-
                                       FESSIONAL STANDARDS GROUP, ANDERSEN LLP; AND
                                       NANCY TEMPLE, ATTORNEY, ANDERSEN LLP
                                        Mr. BASKIN. Thank you. Chairman Tauzin, Congressman Dingell,
                                      Chairman Greenwood, Congressman Deutsch, members of the com-
                                      mittee, my name is Dorsey Lee Baskin, Jr. Since 1999 I have been
                                      managing director of Andersen’s Assurance Professional Standards
                                      Group, which has firm-wide responsibility for providing guidance




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00034   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 35 ===
                                                                                      31

                                      on auditing standards, including professional standards relating to
                                      the preservation of audit work papers and client files.
                                         I have been at Andersen for almost 25 years since receiving my
                                      MBA from Texas A&M University in 1977. I am here with my part-
                                      ner, C. E. Andrews, who is managing partner for Andersen’s global
                                      audit practice. He and I will both answer the committee’s ques-
                                      tions.
                                         I would like to make three essential points at the outset of our
                                      testimony. First, as our CEO has said, this is indeed a tragedy on
                                      many levels. Second, the committee and the broader public should
                                      know that Andersen came forward voluntarily and disclosed the de-
                                      struction of documents by Andersen personnel. However improper
                                      that destruction was, Andersen did not hide from its obligations to
                                      do what it could to take corrective action. We promptly alerted all
                                      investigative authorities, including this committee.
                                         Although the firm was well aware of the potentially devastating
                                      impact this disclosure could have on our reputation, we did the
                                      right thing. We certainly are not proud of the document destruc-
                                      tion, but we are proud of our decision to step forward and accept
                                      responsibility.
                                         Third, it bears emphasis that Andersen has cooperated fully and
                                      unreservedly with all of the ongoing investigations into the destruc-
                                      tion of Enron-related documents. We are determined to get to the
                                      bottom of what happened. We have publicly acknowledged and will
                                      continue to acknowledge mistakes that we have made. We have
                                      tried and will continue to try to answer every question that is put
                                      to us. And we will take whatever decisive action is necessary to re-
                                      store public confidence in the firm.
                                         I have to tell you in all candor that we are limited in what we
                                      can say today about the destruction of documents by Andersen per-
                                      sonnel working on the Enron engagement. Our investigation into
                                      that destruction is far from complete. We have not yet had the op-
                                      portunity to review all of the many relevant documents or to hear
                                      from all of the people who have relevant information.
                                         But, having said that, this is what I can tell you about Ander-
                                      sen’s retention and destruction of documents. To begin with, it is
                                      the usual routine and wholly legitimate practice of auditors to pre-
                                      serve their final working papers while disposing of drafts, personal
                                      notes, and other materials that are not necessary to support the
                                      audit report.
                                         So far as I am aware, this is the policy of all of the large account-
                                      ing firms. This policy toward document disposal reflects long-
                                      standing and sound audit practice. It is designed to assure that the
                                      audit work papers, which are the principal materials reflecting and
                                      documenting the conclusions of the audit, unambiguously reflect
                                      the judgments that actually were reached.
                                         This understanding of proper audit practice was reflected in the
                                      Andersen document retention policy in effect last fall, which pro-
                                      vided that documents other than work papers ordinarily should be
                                      disposed of when no longer needed, but that such documents
                                      should be retained when litigation has commenced or is threatened.
                                         Of course, precisely when that occurs often will require the appli-
                                      cation of informed judgment to the particular circumstances of a
                                      given case, and that may well be a point at which reasonable peo-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00035   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 36 ===
                                                                                      32

                                      ple can differ. As for the destruction of Enron-related documents,
                                      we know that on October 23, just 6 days after the SEC requested
                                      information from Enron, David Duncan, Andersen’s lead partner on
                                      the Enron engagement, called an urgent meeting of the Enron en-
                                      gagement team, in which he organized an expedited effort to shred,
                                      or otherwise dispose of, Enron-related documents.
                                         This effort was undertaken without any consultation with others
                                      in the firm, or, so far as we are aware, with legal counsel. Over
                                      the course of the next several days, a very substantial volume of
                                      documents and e-mails were disposed of by the Enron engagement
                                      team. This activity appears to have stopped shortly after Mr. Dun-
                                      can’s assistant sent an e-mail to other secretaries on November 9,
                                      the day after Andersen received a subpoena from the SEC telling
                                      them no more shredding.
                                         Once this activity came to light, Andersen’s response was imme-
                                      diate. Andersen notified the Department of Justice, the SEC, and
                                      all relevant congressional committees. At the same time, the firm
                                      suspended its records management policy and asked former Sen-
                                      ator Danforth to conduct an immediate and comprehensive review.
                                         On January 15, approximately 2 weeks after our CEO learned
                                      about the document destruction, Andersen dismissed Mr. Duncan.
                                      The firm also placed three of our partners from the Enron engage-
                                      ment on administrative leave, pending completion of the investiga-
                                      tion into their responsibility for these events.
                                         The firm relieved four partners in its Houston office of their
                                      management responsibilities, and the firm indicated that it will
                                      take disciplinary action against any Andersen personnel who are
                                      found to have acted improperly.
                                         I should address the question why Andersen took the forceful ac-
                                      tion it did regarding Mr. Duncan. In our view, Mr. Duncan’s ac-
                                      tions reflected a failure of judgment that is simply unacceptable in
                                      a person who has major responsibilities at our firm. He was the
                                      lead engagement partner for a significant client, exercising very
                                      substantial responsibility within the firm, yet our investigation in-
                                      dicated that he directed the purposeful destruction of a very sub-
                                      stantial volume of documents, just as the government investigation
                                      was beginning.
                                         This is the kind of conduct that Andersen cannot tolerate. When
                                      Andersen CEO Joe Berardino testified before Congress almost 6
                                      weeks ago, he observed that all of us here today, and many others
                                      who are not here, have a responsibility to seek out and evaluate
                                      the facts and take needed action. We have tried to fulfill that re-
                                      sponsibility.
                                         We uncovered the document destruction. Our firm’s management
                                      brought it to the attention of the governmental authorities. We al-
                                      ready have started to implement decisive disciplinary and remedial
                                      action. We are continuing our investigation, resolved to take all
                                      steps that are necessary to restore public confidence in the integ-
                                      rity of our firm. Thank you.
                                         [The prepared statement of C.E. Andrews and Dorsey L. Baskin,
                                      Jr. follows:]




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00036   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 37 ===
                                                                                      33
                                      PREPARED STATEMENT OF C.E. ANDREWS, GLOBAL MANAGING PARTNER—ASSURANCE
                                        AND BUSINESS ADVISORY, ANDERSEN, AND DORSEY L. BASKIN, JR., MANAGING DI-
                                        RECTOR, ASSURANCE PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS GROUP, ANDERSEN

                                         Chairman Tauzin, Congressman Dingell, Chairman Greenwood, Congressman
                                      Deutsch, Members of the Committee.
                                         C.E. Andrews is managing partner for Andersen’s global audit practice. Dorsey L.
                                      Baskin, Jr. is Managing Director of Andersen’s Assurance Professional Standards
                                      Group, which has firm-wide responsibility for providing guidance on auditing stand-
                                      ards, including professional standards relating to the preservation of audit work pa-
                                      pers and client files.
                                         We would like to make two essential points at the outset of our testimony. First,
                                      this Committee and the broader public should know that Andersen came forward
                                      voluntarily and disclosed the destruction of documents by Andersen personnel. How-
                                      ever improper that destruction was, Andersen did not hide from its obligation to do
                                      what it could to take corrective action; we promptly alerted all investigative authori-
                                      ties, including this Committee. Although the firm was well aware of the potentially
                                      devastating impact this disclosure could have on our reputation, we did the right
                                      thing. We certainly are not proud of the document destruction—but we are proud
                                      of our decision to step forward and accept responsibility.
                                         Second, it bears emphasis that Andersen has cooperated fully and unreservedly
                                      with all of the ongoing investigations into the destruction of Enron-related docu-
                                      ments. We are determined to get to the bottom of what happened. And we will take
                                      whatever decisive action is necessary to restore public confidence in the firm.
                                         The Committee is holding this hearing at an extraordinary time. The cir-
                                      cumstances surrounding the collapse of Enron are now being investigated by myriad
                                      committees and subcommittees of Congress, including this Committee; the House
                                      Financial Services Subcommittee; the Senate Commerce Committee; the Senate
                                      Governmental Affairs Committee; and the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on In-
                                      vestigations.
                                         In addition, of course, investigations are being conducted by the Securities and
                                      Exchange Commission; the U.S. Department of Justice; and the U.S. Department
                                      of Labor.
                                         And not least, Andersen is conducting its own inquiry into all of the cir-
                                      cumstances of the Enron audit, including the destruction of documents by Andersen
                                      personnel. This is not a face-saving exercise on our part. It is absolutely essential
                                      to Andersen’s continued success that there be a thorough, entirely credible deter-
                                      mination of what happened and what went wrong. We know that our reputation is
                                      our single most important asset—and the one on which our firm’s existence is pre-
                                      mised. We therefore are determined to get to the bottom of what happened, to pub-
                                      licly acknowledge and correct any errors that we made, and to take all actions that
                                      are necessary to ensure that such mistakes do not recur in the future.
                                         The proof of our commitment to a thorough and transparent response to the
                                      events at Enron is visible in the steps that we already have taken. Andersen’s CEO,
                                      Joe Berardino, testified before the a House committee in December and acknowl-
                                      edged that Andersen auditors made an error in judgment regarding the Enron
                                      audit. As we’ll explain in more detail later, we likewise have acknowledged that the
                                      destruction of documents by the Enron engagement team was wrong, and we have
                                      taken forceful steps in response.
                                         Our commitment also is manifest in the full cooperation that we have given to
                                      all of the official inquiries into Enron’s collapse. While others whose assistance has
                                      been sought by investigators have not cooperated and were nowhere to be seen at
                                      previous congressional hearings, we have answered every question put to us and ap-
                                      peared whenever requested. Although this is a very painful time for our firm and
                                      the questions are sometimes difficult to answer, Joe Berardino and C.E. Andrews,
                                      each testified before congressional committees last month. Mr. Berardino has ad-
                                      dressed issues raised by the press, and he and Andersen’s other top executives have
                                      tried to respond fully and honestly to the concerns both of our clients and of the
                                      tens of thousands of Andersen partners and employees who had no connection at
                                      all to the Enron audit.
                                         We have, moreover, gone the extra mile in cooperating with the governmental in-
                                      vestigations:
                                      • We have made diligent efforts to provide all relevant materials to investigative
                                           bodies; to accommodate this Committee, for example, we produced a substantial
                                           volume of material on a significantly expedited basis.
                                      • We gave the Committee the names of Andersen personnel who have knowledge
                                           about events relating to Enron, including document destruction, and, to the ex-
                                           tent possible, encouraged these individuals to cooperate with the Committee’s




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00037   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 38 ===
                                                                                      34
                                            requests for interviews. We did not object to the testimony of any Andersen per-
                                            sonnel with direct knowledge relevant to the inquiry, including Ms. Nancy Tem-
                                            ple.
                                      • We have provided briefings to congressional staff on Enron accounting issues and,
                                            to the extent we are able, on matters relating to the destruction of documents.
                                      • We have invested incalculable man hours responding to governmental requests for
                                            documents and information.
                                         Finally, to assure that we resolve all issues relating to the destruction of docu-
                                      ments in a manner that is beyond reproach, we retained former Sen. John Danforth
                                      and his law firm to review Andersen’s document retention policies and, ultimately,
                                      to ensure that Andersen takes all appropriate disciplinary action against personnel
                                      involved in improper document destruction.
                                         Our investigation into the destruction of documents by Andersen personnel is far
                                      from complete. We nevertheless will endeavor to be as helpful and forthcoming as
                                      possible—although we must add the caveat that there may well be questions that
                                      neither we, nor anyone else at Andersen, will be able to answer at this time to the
                                      Committee’s satisfaction.
                                         This is what we can tell you about Andersen’s retention and destruction of docu-
                                      ments.
                                         To begin with, it is the usual, routine, and wholly legitimate practice of auditors
                                      to preserve their final work papers while disposing of drafts, personal notes, and
                                      other materials that are not necessary to support the audit report. So far as we are
                                      aware, this is the policy of all large audit firms.
                                         This policy towards document disposal reflects sound audit practice. It is designed
                                      to assure that the audit work papers—which are the principal materials reflecting
                                      and documenting the conclusions of the audit—unambiguously reflect the judgments
                                      that actually were reached. To this end, auditors routinely dispose of preliminary
                                      or draft documents that might create confusion about the auditor’s analysis or con-
                                      clusions. It is the audit work papers, rather than preliminary materials, that are
                                      the real evidence of how the audit proceeded.
                                         Generally Accepted Auditing Standards, commonly referred to by their initials as
                                      GAAS, provide guidance on the purpose and nature of documentation retained by
                                      auditors. The applicable general standard, Section 339 of the codification of audit
                                      standards, provides that auditors should keep for a period of time their working pa-
                                      pers that support their reports.
                                         The standard provides that the purpose of working papers is to: (a) provide the
                                      principal support for the audit report, including the reference in the report to com-
                                      pliance with GAAS; and (b) aid the auditor in the conduct and supervision of the
                                      audit. Work papers consist of many different types of documents, including sched-
                                      ules and details of account balances; memoranda relating to business and financial
                                      reporting risks and management controls; work programs that direct the staff in the
                                      procedures and tests to be performed, and that may document the results thereof;
                                      documentation of procedures and tests such as confirmations of accounts receivable;
                                      records of counts of inventory; results of tests of the operation of controls as the
                                      audit progresses; conclusions reached as the result of tests; a copy of the entity’s
                                      financial statements signed by management to evidence its responsibility for the
                                      final presentation; memoranda related to any accounting and audit issues that arose
                                      during the audit, including conclusions reached; representation letters from manage-
                                      ment; and a copy of the final audit report.
                                         In addition to these period-specific documents, auditors generally keep continuing
                                      or ‘‘evergreen’’ files that contain documents of use to audits for more than one year.
                                      Examples of these documents would be copies of loan agreements, charters, organi-
                                      zation charts, and so on. Auditors also keep client-relationship files that contain
                                      records of billing for fees and other administrative matters. The client-relationship
                                      files are not considered to be part of the work papers because they do not contain
                                      audit evidence relating to the audit report.
                                         According to the section 339 of GAAS, many factors affect the auditors judgment
                                      about the quantity, type, and content of the work papers for a particular engage-
                                      ment, including: (a) the nature of the engagement (b) the nature of the auditors re-
                                      port; (c) the nature of the financial statements, schedules, or other information on
                                      which the auditor is reporting; (d) the nature and condition of the client’s records;
                                      (e) the assessed level of control risk; and (f) the needs in the particular cir-
                                      cumstances for supervision and review of the work.
                                         The January 2002 revision of section 339 of GAAS adds to the standard that audit
                                      documentation should be sufficient to: (a) enable members of the engagement team
                                      with supervision and review responsibilities to understand the nature, timing, ex-
                                      tent and results of auditing procedures performed and the evidence obtained; (b) in-
                                      dicate the engagement team member(s) who performed and reviewed the work; and




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00038   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 39 ===
                                                                                      35
                                      (c) show that the accounting records agree or reconcile with the financial statements
                                      or other information being reported on.
                                         Section 339 of GAAS provides that the auditor should adopt reasonable proce-
                                      dures for safeguarding work papers and should retain them for a period sufficient
                                      to meet the needs of the auditor’s practice and to satisfy any pertinent legal require-
                                      ments of records retention.
                                         Typically the work papers for the previous year’s audit are checked out at the be-
                                      ginning of the next audit by the engagement team and used as a source of informa-
                                      tion during the next audit. Hereafter, the work papers tend to sit in storage for
                                      many years.
                                         This understanding of proper audit practice was reflected in the Andersen docu-
                                      ment retention policy in effect last fall, which provided that documents other than
                                      work papers ordinarily should be disposed of when no longer needed—but that such
                                      documents should be retained when litigation has commenced or is threatened. Pre-
                                      cisely when that occurs often will require the application of informed judgment to
                                      the particular circumstances of a given case, and that may well be a point on which
                                      reasonable people can differ. It also may be a point that looks quite different in
                                      hindsight than it did to people making decisions at the time.
                                         Looking at this policy now, in light of recent events and with the benefit of hind-
                                      sight, we have to say that it is not a model of clarity—although our guess is that,
                                      if the document retention policies of other large businesses were subjected to the
                                      same close scrutiny, they likely also would reveal ambiguities and questions about
                                      their application to particular cases.
                                         As we mentioned, we are still investigating the destruction of Enron-related docu-
                                      ments by Andersen personnel, and there is much still to learn. But we can say this
                                      much about what we know about the destruction of Enron-related documents. On
                                      October 17 the SEC requested information from Enron about its financial account-
                                      ing and reporting. Several days later, on October 23, David Duncan, Andersen’s lead
                                      partner on the Enron engagement, called an urgent meeting of the Enron engage-
                                      ment team at which he organized an expedited effort to shred or otherwise dispose
                                      of Enron-related documents. This effort was undertaken without any consultation
                                      with others in the firm or, so far as we are aware, with legal counsel.
                                         Over the course of the next several days, a very substantial volume of documents
                                      and emails—involving many of the Enron-related materials that ultimately were de-
                                      stroyed were disposed of by the Enron engagement team, including Mr. Duncan. So
                                      far as we have been able to determine to date, however, no audit work papers were
                                      destroyed.
                                         This activity appears to have stopped shortly after Mr. Duncan’s assistant sent
                                      an e-mail to other secretaries on November 9—the day after Andersen received a
                                      subpoena from the SEC—telling them ‘‘no more shredding.’’
                                         Enron-related documents also were destroyed by others at the firm, although the
                                      volume and circumstances of their activities appear to have been quite different
                                      from those of Mr. Duncan. We are continuing our investigation into that aspect of
                                      these events.
                                         On Friday, January 4—shortly after the firm’s internal inquiry informed Ander-
                                      sen’s CEO about the document destruction—Andersen voluntarily notified the De-
                                      partment of Justice and the SEC. On January 7, Andersen met with Justice Depart-
                                      ment and SEC attorneys and briefed them on what we knew. On January 10, An-
                                      dersen also disclosed the destruction to all relevant congressional committees and
                                      to the public. At the same time, the firm suspended its records management policy,
                                      asking Sen. Danforth to conduct an immediate and comprehensive review of that
                                      policy and to recommend improvements.
                                         On January 15, approximately two weeks after our CEO learned about the docu-
                                      ment destruction, Andersen dismissed Mr. Duncan, the lead engagement partner.
                                      The firm also placed three other partners from the Enron engagement on adminis-
                                      trative leave pending completion of the investigation into their responsibility for
                                      these events. The firm relieved four partners in its Houston office of their manage-
                                      ment responsibilities. And the firm indicated that it will take disciplinary action
                                      against any Andersen personnel who are found to have acted improperly. Anyone
                                      at Andersen who purposely destroyed work papers, or who destroyed Enron-related
                                      documents after having been informed of the Nov. 8 subpoena to Andersen, will be
                                      dismissed; discipline for other improper conduct will depend on the nature and se-
                                      verity of the acts involved.
                                         Finally, as we have mentioned, Andersen retained Sen. Danforth and his firm to
                                      ensure that all appropriate steps are taken to deal internally with misconduct by
                                      Andersen personnel.
                                         We should address the question why Andersen took the forceful action it did re-
                                      garding Mr. Duncan. In our view, Mr. Duncan’s actions reflected a failure of judg-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00039   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 40 ===
                                                                                      36
                                      ment that is simply unacceptable in a person who has major responsibilities at our
                                      firm. He was the lead engagement partner for a significant client, exercising very
                                      substantial responsibility within the firm. Yet our investigation indicated that he
                                      directed the purposeful destruction of a very substantial volume of documents—and
                                      in doing so, he gave every appearance of destroying these materials in anticipation
                                      of a government request for documents. This is the kind of conduct that Andersen
                                      cannot tolerate.
                                         The case of Mr. Duncan was clear enough to allow us to draw conclusions about
                                      his responsibility at an early stage of the inquiry. That is not true of other Andersen
                                      personnel who were involved with the destruction of documents. Our investigation
                                      continues; persons who are found to have acted inappropriately, whatever their posi-
                                      tion in the firm, will be dealt with accordingly.
                                         Let me conclude by noting that when Joe Berardino testified almost six weeks
                                      ago, he ended his remarks by stating that ‘‘[a] day does not go by without new infor-
                                      mation being made available and I would observe that all of us here today—and
                                      many others who are not here—have a responsibility to seek out and evaluate the
                                      facts and take needed action.’’ We have tried to fulfill that responsibility. We uncov-
                                      ered the document destruction; our firm’s management brought it to the attention
                                      of the governmental authorities; we already have started to implement decisive dis-
                                      ciplinary and remedial action; and we are continuing our investigation, resolved to
                                      take all steps that are necessary to restore public confidence in the integrity of our
                                      firm.
                                         This is, of course, a very painful and difficult period for Andersen. But Andersen’s
                                      great strength is its 85,000 employees in 84 countries around the world; its 28,000
                                      Andersen Personnel in the United States contribute to the economic life of virtually
                                      State in the Union. We are determined to respond to this test openly and with com-
                                      plete candor, and to face up honestly to our responsibilities to our clients and to
                                      the public.
                                         Thank you.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
                                        Ms. Temple, do you have an opening statement?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. I do not, Mr. Chairman.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Odom, do you have an opening statement?
                                        Mr. ODOM. No, sir.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Odom, I understand from your attorney
                                      that you have a letter addressed to me that you would like to have
                                      incorporated into the record?
                                        Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. Without objection, that letter will be in-
                                      corporated into the record.
                                        The Chair would note for the witnesses and for the members that
                                      each of you should have a binder that has—two binders that have
                                      in it the documents to which we will refer during the course of the
                                      hearing, and we will refer to the documents by tab number so that
                                      you can refer to them to assist you in responding to the questions.
                                        And I would suggest at this point you might want to turn to Tab
                                      28.
                                        Mr. BURR. Mr. Chairman, do we also have a copy of Mr. Odom’s
                                      letter?
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Yes. The staff will copy and circulate Mr.
                                      Odom’s letter.
                                        [The material referred to follows:]




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00040   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 41 ===
                                                                                      37




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00041   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 42 ===
                                                                                      38




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00042   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 43 ===
                                                                                      39




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00043   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 44 ===
                                                                                      40




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00044   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 45 ===
                                                                                      41




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00045   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 46 ===
                                                                                      42




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00046   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 47 ===
                                                                                      43




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00047   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 48 ===
                                                                                      44




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00048   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 49 ===
                                                                                      45




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00049   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 50 ===
                                                                                      46




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00050   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 51 ===
                                                                                      47




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00051   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 52 ===
                                                                                      48




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00052   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 53 ===
                                                                                      49




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00053   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 54 ===
                                                                                      50




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00054   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 55 ===
                                                                                      51




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00055   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 56 ===
                                                                                      52




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00056   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 57 ===
                                                                                      53




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00057   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 58 ===
                                                                                      54




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00058   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 59 ===
                                                                                      55




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00059   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 60 ===
                                                                                      56




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00060   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 61 ===
                                                                                      57




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00061   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 62 ===
                                                                                      58




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00062   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 63 ===
                                                                                      59




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00063   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 64 ===
                                                                                      60




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00064   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 65 ===
                                                                                      61




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00065   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 66 ===
                                                                                      62




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00066   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 67 ===
                                                                                      63




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00067   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 68 ===
                                                                                      64




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00068   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 69 ===
                                                                                      65




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00069   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 70 ===
                                                                                      66




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00070   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 71 ===
                                                                                      67




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00071   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 72 ===
                                                                                      68




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00072   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 73 ===
                                                                                      69




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00073   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 74 ===
                                                                                      70




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00074   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 75 ===
                                                                                      71




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00075   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 76 ===
                                                                                      72




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00076   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 77 ===
                                                                                      73




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00077   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 78 ===
                                                                                      74




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00078   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 79 ===
                                                                                      75




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00079   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 80 ===
                                                                                      76




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00080   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 81 ===
                                                                                      77




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00081   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 82 ===
                                                                                      78




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00082   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 83 ===
                                                                                      79




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00083   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 84 ===
                                                                                      80




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00084   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 85 ===
                                                                                      81




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00085   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 86 ===
                                                                                      82




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00086   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 87 ===
                                                                                      83




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00087   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 88 ===
                                                                                      84




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00088   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 89 ===
                                                                                      85




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00089   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 90 ===
                                                                                      86




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00090   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 91 ===
                                                                                      87




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00091   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 92 ===
                                                                                      88




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00092   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 93 ===
                                                                                      89




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00093   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 94 ===
                                                                                      90




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00094   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 95 ===
                                                                                      91




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00095   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 96 ===
                                                                                      92




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00096   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 97 ===
                                                                                      93




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00097   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 98 ===
                                                                                      94




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00098   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 99 ===
                                                                                      95




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00099   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 100 ===
                                                                                      96




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00100   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 101 ===
                                                                                      97




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00101   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 102 ===
                                                                                      98




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00102   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 103 ===
                                                                                      99




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00103   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 104 ===
                                                                                      100




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00104   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 105 ===
                                                                                      101




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00105   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 106 ===
                                                                                      102




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00106   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 107 ===
                                                                                      103




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00107   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 108 ===
                                                                                      104




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00108   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 109 ===
                                                                                      105




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00109   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 110 ===
                                                                                      106




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00110   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 111 ===
                                                                                      107




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00111   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 112 ===
                                                                                      108




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00112   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 113 ===
                                                                                      109




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00113   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 114 ===
                                                                                      110




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00114   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 115 ===
                                                                                      111




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00115   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 116 ===
                                                                                      112




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00116   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 117 ===
                                                                                      113




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00117   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 118 ===
                                                                                      114




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00118   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 119 ===
                                                                                      115




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00119   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 120 ===
                                                                                      116

                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes for
                                      inquiry. And let me address my first question to Mr. Baskin and/
                                      or Mr. Andrews for response.
                                        I would like to read for you a quote from a Georgetown law pro-
                                      fessor who is an expert on corporate legal ethics. Mr. Milton Regan
                                      from the Washington Post last Sunday says this. And if you look
                                      at Tab 28 in your binder, it says that as soon as an accounting firm
                                      knows that a company it audits is under government investigation,
                                      the firm’s general counsel or compliance officer would typically
                                      send a notice reminding employees of the need to preserve docu-
                                      ments related to the inquiry and that, ‘‘requirement of preserving
                                      documents would override any internal document retention policy.’’
                                        Mr. Lynn Turner, the former top accountant for the SEC and a
                                      longtime member of the Profession in Accounting Firms sent me a
                                      letter to the same effect, saying that an SEC inquiry into a client
                                      would normally prompt a letter from the auditor’s counsel to its
                                      employees, directing them to preserve related records. I would like
                                      to make this letter part of the record.
                                        [The letter follows:]
                                                                                                         January 24, 2002
                                      The Honorable JAMES C. GREENWOOD
                                      Chairman, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations
                                      Committee on Energy and Commerce
                                      U.S. House of Representatives
                                      Washington, D.C. 20515-6115
                                         DEAR CHAIRMAN GREENWOOD: For almost twenty years, I was associated with the
                                      international accounting firm, Coopers & Lybrand, (now PricewaterhouseCoopers).
                                      I served in various capacities in the firm including a partner, member of the na-
                                      tional accounting and auditing office and as the partner responsible for the National
                                      High Technology audit practice. More recently I served as Chief Accountant of the
                                      Securities and Exchange Commission. I am currently an accounting professor on the
                                      faculty of the College of Business of Colorado State University.
                                         It has been my experience in practice, when an accounting firm becomes aware
                                      an investigation or litigation will occur with respect to the performance of an audit,
                                      the communication to the audit team is both in writing and verbal and clear and
                                      concise with respect to document retention. The audit team is informed that any
                                      documents in possession of the firm, its partners or employees are to be maintained
                                      and no documents should be destroyed, altered or otherwise affected.
                                         I would be pleased to provide testimony to this Committee at some future date
                                      to assist the Committee in its work related to the Enron matter and respond to any
                                      further questions you might have.
                                             Sincerely,
                                                                                                          LYNN E. TURNER
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Finally, last Sunday on Meet the Press, your
                                      CEO and managing partner, Mr. Berardino said essentially the
                                      same thing. Let me show you his quotes which should be in Tab
                                      23 of your binder.
                                        He says that your policy states, ‘‘exactly that,’’ meaning that
                                      upon the SEC inquiry all shredding should have stopped. He even
                                      went further, saying that if there is a, ‘‘reasonable anticipation of
                                      an investigation,’’ all destruction should stop.
                                        So I guess the simple question is: Why didn’t anyone at Andersen
                                      notify its employees that an SEC inquiry into Enron financial and
                                      accounting issues had begun and that normal document destruction
                                      policies were suspended? Why did Andersen’s counsel wait nearly
                                      3 weeks to do so?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. Well, Mr. Chairman, in terms of the timing of
                                      that particular period of time and what is going on, and as to why




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00120   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 121 ===
                                                                                      117

                                      our legal counsel did not do that, I can’t address specifically the
                                      legal counsel response. But let me at least explain the situation as
                                      we see it, as we understand it.
                                         First, we clearly recognize that audit work papers should never
                                      be destroyed. That is completely unacceptable. We recognize that
                                      nothing can be destroyed once a subpoena is received. That is com-
                                      pletely unacceptable. And we also recognize that judgment there-
                                      fore needs to be applied in a situation, to apply when any kind of
                                      documents cannot be destroyed.
                                         When we were in this period that you are referring to, in this
                                      late October period, there was a lot going on as it related to the
                                      company. At that point, as you indicate, the company had just re-
                                      leased its third quarter. It had been notified that it was the recipi-
                                      ent of an SEC investigation, a lot of activity was taking place.
                                         Our responsibility and our policy requires the engagement part-
                                      ner, who in this case was Mr. Duncan, to assume and accept re-
                                      sponsibility for managing our policies. As you know, as the record
                                      states, on October 23, Mr. Duncan called a meeting to review our
                                      policies as it pertains to work papers and documents and other re-
                                      lated materials. At the conclusion of that meeting, it appears that
                                      it led to a vast destruction of documents as a result of that.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Andrews, let me interrupt you for a sec-
                                      ond. My understanding of your company’s position is that on the
                                      23rd, Mr. Duncan then set off this process, this initiation to destroy
                                      documents. But what we can’t understand, what I would like to
                                      know is why in God’s name, on October 23, didn’t the chief counsel
                                      for your company, the top brass at Andersen, immediately send out
                                      word to everyone in the company, particularly those involved in the
                                      Enron case, to not touch documents, not shred a document? Why
                                      didn’t that come down from the top immediately?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. With regard to that question, Mr. Chairman, as
                                      it is stated in our policy, the responsibility for that rests with the
                                      engagement partner, a very seasoned, experienced individual. And
                                      we rely on the engagement partner to make that judgment, to
                                      make the judgment of what to do, as well as when to seek counsel.
                                      Without the knowledge, without our knowledge, without the knowl-
                                      edge of the legal counsel, that meeting was called, that meeting
                                      was held, and they proceeded to destroy documents, without con-
                                      sultation, without inquiry as to whether it was proper or improper.
                                      And we find that situation appalling. We did not——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. And all of Mr. Duncan’s superiors in the com-
                                      pany, including Mr. Berardino, and knowing this meltdown was
                                      happening at Enron, knowing that this SEC investigation was on,
                                      sat silently, just assuming that Mr. Duncan would do the right
                                      thing? They gave him no direction whatsoever?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Mr. Chairman, again, Mr. Duncan had been ad-
                                      vised of our policies in the memo on October 12. We expect our en-
                                      gagement partners to understand our policies and apply them, and
                                      we were not aware of the meeting that took place on October 23,
                                      to the best of my knowledge.
                                         So he directed the action. We find that action totally unaccept-
                                      able. That is why when we began our investigation, which is in
                                      process, and we learned of it, we took the action that we have
                                      taken to date. But the investigation is in process and not com-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00121   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 122 ===
                                                                                      118

                                      pleted. We took the action aggressively, because it is a situation we
                                      will not tolerate. It is not the way Andersen personnel are trained
                                      to perform, and it is completely unacceptable. So it is totally out
                                      of bounds with good judgment in that situation. And we took action
                                      as a result of that.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Let me turn to Ms. Temple.
                                         Since I don’t have any other members here right now, I will con-
                                      tinue with the questioning. We have a memo from you, Ms. Tem-
                                      ple, that is dated, I believe, November 10. Tab 20 in your notebook.
                                      And that memo is very explicit. It is very clear that you took action
                                      on that date, in the form of that memo, to make it crystal clear
                                      that no one was to destroy documents.
                                         Can you explain to us why it took you until November 10 to issue
                                      a statement with that clarity, when a month earlier you knew that
                                      the question of retention and destruction of documents was going
                                      to be critical to investigations and to litigation?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I will tell you the cir-
                                      cumstances concerning the November 10 memo and the facts as I
                                      understood them in the previous time period. On November 10, the
                                      memo was sent—it was drafted by our outside counsel, a law
                                      firm—Davis, Polk & Wardwell.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. When was that firm retained?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I did not personally retain that law firm. I know I
                                      spoke to a partner at that law firm on October 16.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Is your testimony that you do not know when
                                      they were retained?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall the exact date of the retention. I know
                                      I spoke to a partner at that law firm on October 16.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. You may proceed.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. It is the legal group’s practice and protocol, when
                                      Arthur Andersen receives a subpoena or a request for documents,
                                      to send a written notification reminder to the members of the en-
                                      gagement team, and we asked our outside counsel to assist us in
                                      that process.
                                         To the best of my recollection, the firm received a subpoena from
                                      the Securities and Exchange Commission the end of the business
                                      day on November 8, and a voice-mail was distributed to the audit
                                      engagement team notifying them of that the following business
                                      day. And once this e-mail was drafted, it was circulated to the en-
                                      gagement team.
                                         Now, moving back in timeframe to the previous period that you
                                      talked about, the firm does have a written policy that provides
                                      guidance. It is self-enforcing, and we trust our partners to exercise
                                      their good judgment and to consult with either the legal group or
                                      the practice directors, as appropriate.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Let me interrupt you for a second. I asked Ms.
                                      Temple when Davis, Polk was retained for this purpose. And her
                                      response is that she didn’t know. Mr. Baskin, Mr. Andrews, do you
                                      know when this firm was retained?
                                         I want to remind you that I asked you last night to be prepared
                                      to answer that question this morning.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Mr. Chairman, the firm was retained on October
                                      9 and commenced work with us on October 16.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00122   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 123 ===
                                                                                      119

                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. And what was the purpose for retaining
                                      that firm on October 9?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Well as—if we just—for a moment, what was
                                      going on during—at that particular period of time, around that Oc-
                                      tober 9 time——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Are they handling the potential litigation for
                                      the firm now?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Are they handling it now? Yes, they are. What
                                      was going on at that particular time was that we were involved—
                                      the company was closing its third quarter. They were about to
                                      reach conclusions on the third quarter. There were a lot of financial
                                      reporting issues occurring during that period that were obviously
                                      unusual and were concerning. So we engaged them to help us with
                                      the financial reporting issues and with possible litigation.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. On October 9, when you retained this firm, you
                                      did so because Andersen considered it likely that you were going
                                      to confront litigation?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. No, Mr. Chairman, that is not what I said. We en-
                                      gaged them to help us with that third quarter closing as it related
                                      to financial reporting issues and possible litigation and within the
                                      accounting literature, if you will, the term ‘‘possible’’ is used fre-
                                      quently but does not mean probable. We had no reason at that par-
                                      ticular point in time to expect litigation, no.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Even given the Sherron Watkins memo that
                                      you were aware of at that time, you didn’t think that it was likely
                                      that you were going to face litigation? You hired the firm that is
                                      now handling your litigation, but on October 9, you didn’t hire
                                      them for that purpose?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. On October 9 we made the decision, the principal
                                      reason that we were hiring the firm was to help with the complex
                                      issues that were going on in the third quarter. There were a num-
                                      ber of accounting issues. There were disclosure issues. And there
                                      were issues, as you referred to, the Ms. Watkins memo. There were
                                      a number of items going on in that third quarter that it would be
                                      normal in a situation like that, I believe in my experience, to
                                      have—we engaged legal counsel to advise us on things in many
                                      other situations.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Let me ask you, Ms. Temple, when did you de-
                                      cide that it was likely that Andersen was going to face litigation
                                      over this matter?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall making a particular determination
                                      that Andersen was likely to face litigation or being asked to make
                                      that determination. At this time, looking back in retrospect, I can
                                      see all of the events that eventually did occur that we did not an-
                                      ticipate at the time. And, as Mr. Andrews stated, litigation is a
                                      possibility in this profession.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. I believe you told our investigators that it
                                      wasn’t until sometime in November that you thought that it was
                                      likely that there would be litigation?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Once it came to my attention that the company in-
                                      tended to restate prior financial statement reporting periods, I defi-
                                      nitely considered that the firm would likely be sued at that point.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00123   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 124 ===
                                                                                      120

                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. When is the first time that Davis, Polk gave
                                      the company any advice whatsoever, or counsel whatsoever, with
                                      regard to document retention and destruction?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I believe in my conversations on October 16, I dis-
                                      cussed the documentation and retention issues that had arisen as
                                      of that date with Davis, Polk.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Baskin or Mr. Andrews, or Ms. Temple,
                                      you may want to answer this question. The document in Tab 29 in
                                      your binder is a copy of an Enron announcement to its employees
                                      and others on the Enron worldwide e-mail list, which I believe in-
                                      cludes Andersen, on October 25, 2001, telling them to preserve
                                      records relating to the related party transactions, including the ac-
                                      counting of those transactions.
                                         Did Andersen learn about this action by Enron, which, by the
                                      way, also seems rather late given that it is 8 days after Enron
                                      learned of the SEC inquiry, and, if so, why didn’t Andersen act
                                      right then to order its employees to do the same?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. This is the first time that I have read this memo.
                                      But as it pertains to our actions, again we believe that it was the
                                      engagement partner’s responsibility in this situation, given what
                                      was occurring in that late October period—which is when the date
                                      of this memo—that there was enough information available that, in
                                      that partner’s judgment, the instructions and oversight of that
                                      partner would in fact cause us not to destroy documents, and cer-
                                      tainly you would not convene a meeting and give instructions, if
                                      you will, if that apparently is what happened, to destroy docu-
                                      ments.
                                         So we would agree that during this period, it would be appro-
                                      priate to, at a minimum, seek counsel before doing such an exer-
                                      cise. And destruction of documents in that period is wrong. We
                                      have admitted that. It is wrong. And once we learned of that, once
                                      we learned of that in our investigation, we took firm action. That
                                      is not Andersen. That is not what we encourage our employees to
                                      do. It is inappropriate.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. The chairman of the subcommittee has had to
                                      go to the floor to make a vote and will return shortly. His time has
                                      expired, but we will explore this question further in detail as we
                                      go forward.
                                         The Chair is pleased to recognize the ranking member of the sub-
                                      committee, Mr. Deutsch, for a round of questions.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. I had a chance to read your testimony, but not to
                                      listen, because we are trying to save time in terms of people’s com-
                                      ments.
                                         Mr. Andrews, if you can give me a sense of has anything like
                                      this, in your knowledge, ever occurred before in a ‘‘Big 5’’ account-
                                      ing firm, with the destruction of documents with the time line that
                                      we are here.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I want to make sure I understand.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Basically the time line. You are aware of an inves-
                                      tigation and documents were destroyed? I mean, I accept the fact
                                      that documents should be destroyed after an audit. But I guess the
                                      disturbing issue is just the time line, that apparently people did
                                      know that there was an SEC investigation and then the documents




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00124   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 125 ===
                                                                                      121

                                      were still destroyed, even though they knew that there was an in-
                                      vestigation.
                                         I mean, that seems to me the heart of the issue. And then the
                                      question becomes, you know—I mean, why were they destroyed,
                                      then? Because that really seems like where there is a conflict.
                                      Whether it is illegal or not, we are not going to determine today.
                                      But factually, that does seem, if this occurred—would you question
                                      whether that occurred?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Whether do you——
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. From the timing, that it occurred after—at least
                                      employees of Andersen were aware of an SEC investigation?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, if I may, let me talk about the time
                                      line, what occurred, and what our conclusions are related to that
                                      in this stage of our investigation, and recognize—my qualification
                                      is that we are only partially through our own investigation. We
                                      took action at a date in that investigation when we felt we had con-
                                      clusive information to take some action. But we are not completed
                                      with the investigation, as is the SEC, as is the committee inves-
                                      tigating this, as is the Department of Justice. So it is in process.
                                         Now, what happened during that period and what was going on,
                                      I believe I am agreeing with your statement in the sense that once
                                      the company had been notified of the SEC investigation, once the
                                      company had was a recipient of a lawsuit, once the company was
                                      clearly on high alert—and we were aware of that; I agree we were
                                      all on high notice at that point. That needs to be a very careful pe-
                                      riod of time.
                                         And what in fact happened apparently is the next day, after re-
                                      ceipt of the SEC letter, October 23, Mr. Duncan had a meeting of
                                      the engagement team, which then led to a massive destruction, a
                                      rush, an expedited destruction of documents. I agree. That is to-
                                      tally inappropriate. We do not condone that. That is not what the
                                      firm’s policy would encourage to do.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Can I just inject the fact—so the time line that
                                      you are saying is even after Andersen itself received notice, not
                                      public notice, not Enron receiving notice of the SEC, but you are
                                      testifying that Andersen actually received notice and then the de-
                                      struction continued?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Let me clarify that. We were aware of the notice
                                      that the company had received.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Not Andersen?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Correct.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. There is some issue, because your regulations ap-
                                      parently talk about notice to Enron. That again seems to be gam-
                                      ing the system. A notice to Andersen itself that, you know, you are
                                      not in—my understanding is your internal regulations or proce-
                                      dures state that you are not obligated to—that you are not obli-
                                      gated not to destroy documents until you are, as Andersen, aware
                                      of an investigation.
                                         Again, let me tell you that that perspective that I have is just,
                                      you know, looking for loopholes that are not just appropriate, the
                                      same way that Enron was looking for loopholes. If that—that dis-
                                      tinction, I think is worth noting. If you can respond to that.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Yes, Congressman, let me respond. Let me cover
                                      a couple of points. First of all, if the policy is unclear, that obvi-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00125   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 126 ===
                                                                                      122

                                      ously is a problem. What we have done with the policy, once we
                                      learned of this, we have suspended that policy, put in place an in-
                                      terim policy, and we have engaged and hired former Senator Dan-
                                      forth to construct a policy that is as clear as possible.
                                         But let me back up and cover the point of the policy that existed
                                      at that time and why this action would or would not be appro-
                                      priate.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Let me also tell you, 5 minutes goes very fast, and
                                      so I just want to follow up on two specific questions. I am told spe-
                                      cifically by our counsel that Ms. Temple—that the position? In
                                      Enron did not have a subpoena yet, and, based upon outside coun-
                                      sel, you were not required to put out a memo on document reten-
                                      tion. So that was apparently your internal policy.
                                         First of all, why was it? But then—you know, I mean, it is—is
                                      Mr. Duncan telling you, or are you able to tell us that he was fol-
                                      lowing company policy? That is, that he didn’t do anything wrong
                                      is his position; that he didn’t do anything wrong at this point.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, I cannot say more strongly, Mr.
                                      Duncan was not following company policy. Mr. Duncan broke com-
                                      pany policy.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Is he saying that he is following company policy?
                                      Is his position that he was following company policy?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, I can’t respond for Mr. Duncan.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. The gentleman’s time has expired. The Chair
                                      recognizes himself for a round of questions. First of all, I want to
                                      turn to the week of October 9. You have testified October 9 was the
                                      date that Arthur Andersen hired counsel, outside counsel, right?
                                      And the outside counsel firm was Davis, Polk & Wardwell of New
                                      York, right? Is that correct, sir?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Yes, that is correct.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. My understanding is that is a litigation team,
                                      right?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Davis, Polk is a reputable firm. I am sure they do
                                      litigation and other things. But we hired them for purposes to help
                                      us with the financial reporting and possible litigation.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. And possible litigation, right? October 9.
                                         I want to turn to you, Ms. Temple, real quickly. Sometime before
                                      the week of October 12, in your interviews with us you informed
                                      us that there was a conference call about the Enron engagement
                                      team’s compliance with the document retention policy.
                                         Mr. Duncan says that it was you who raised the question about
                                      the retention policy. You had some other recollections of that con-
                                      versation. Give us your recollections of what happened in that con-
                                      ference call. And what date was that?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Sure. Let me give you the context of my role in this
                                      matter. I was asked, beginning on September 28, 2001, to partici-
                                      pate in a conference call. I understood that the firm was addressing
                                      one accounting issue that had risen at that point in time. In be-
                                      tween that time and October 12, I provided legal advice, including,
                                      after consultation with my supervisor and others, about specific
                                      documentation and retention issues.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Ms. Temple, in that conversation that oc-
                                      curred right about the time that the firm was hiring other litiga-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00126   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 127 ===
                                                                                      123

                                      tion counsel—you are the litigation attorney for the firm, is that
                                      not correct?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. My background is in litigation, correct.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. But they just hired an outside litigation firm
                                      to advise them on possible litigation about the same time there is
                                      a conference call and there is a discussion about the retention pol-
                                      icy. And obviously the memo is sent out, following it, regarding
                                      that policy that includes the information about destruction of docu-
                                      ments as well.
                                         You said something to our investigators about conversations in
                                      that conference call referencing changing memos and deleting in-
                                      formation from past memos; substituting a memo to the file for an
                                      old memo with a new memo. Is that accurate? Was that discussion
                                      held in that conference call?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The advice I gave was different from that, Mr.
                                      Chairman. The advice I gave was——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. What were the questions being asked that you
                                      had to give advice?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The team was discussing a draft of a memo about
                                      a particular accounting issue on asset impairment. The advice that
                                      my supervisor and I gave initially was that memo, which was being
                                      currently drafted, needed to be dated——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. What did they want to do that you told them
                                      they couldn’t do? What did they ask you to do?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall, with respect to that particular legal
                                      advice, that there was a question raised. But we pointed out to the
                                      team——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Was there not a request or discussion of sub-
                                      stituting a new memo for an old memo, backdating a memo to the
                                      file?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. No, there was a not a question about backdating
                                      that particular memo. But the date——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Was there a question about substituting it
                                      and deleting information from the memo?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. There was a question in that current memo that
                                      was raised: Can we delete a sentence acknowledging that the firm
                                      had given incorrect accounting advice in the first quarter of 2001?
                                      And I said absolutely not.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. That is what I want to know. Essentially you
                                      said don’t do that?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Right.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Is it customary that in those kind of discus-
                                      sions, when the firm finds itself in error, that anyone would sug-
                                      gest substituting memos or deleting information that was in memos
                                      already in the file? Was that unusual conversation?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I expect the engagement partners to raise questions
                                      about documentation and seek advice, which they were doing,
                                      though other legal advice that I gave on documentation was the—
                                      the memos for any prior periods, first quarter 2001, year end 2000,
                                      could not be changed.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. You are telling them to make no changes. I
                                      understand that. I am asking you, was it customary? Was this un-
                                      usual for members of the firm to be talking to you about changing




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00127   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 128 ===
                                                                                      124

                                      documents, altering documents, substituting documents that were
                                      on file already with regards to Enron operation?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. At the time, based on my recollection, I understood
                                      that there were good faith questions that were being asked about
                                      how to properly document the firm’s——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Was it a good faith question to change a
                                      memo that is already in the file with a new memo?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I received the question and consulted with my
                                      supervisor——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. You said, don’t do it.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I gave the advice. To the best of my knowledge, the
                                      advice was followed.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Were you shocked that they would raise such
                                      a question? Were you alarmed? Were you disturbed? Did it bother
                                      you, as litigation counsel for the firm, that any member would even
                                      suggest altering the record, altering documents, substituting
                                      memos to the file?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall everything going on in my mind. I re-
                                      call making sure and giving advice to make sure that the written
                                      record was complete and accurate and truthful. And I do recall see-
                                      ing that my advice was followed.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. And my time is up, but you do recall also that
                                      October 16 memo, that you did discuss with them changing that
                                      memo so that your name is not included because you might be a
                                      potential witness? Is that correct?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I do recall giving legal advice, after consultation
                                      with others, including outside legal counsel Davis, Polk, that the
                                      audit partner should document the recommendations and commu-
                                      nications he had with the client about the client—Enron’s draft
                                      press release. And I did, after consulting with outside legal coun-
                                      sel—it is our standard practice in the legal group to advise the en-
                                      gagement team not to write down and discuss in their memos legal
                                      advice that the legal group might give, because it may be a waiver
                                      down the road of attorney-client privilege.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you. The Chair recognizes the
                                      gentlelady, Ms. DeGette, for a round of questions.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Ms. Temple, I think that it would be helpful if you would take
                                      the notebook in front of you and turn to document No. 27 before
                                      we get started. Now, Ms. Temple you have been at Arthur Ander-
                                      sen a couple of years; is that right?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I started at Arthur Andersen in July of 2000.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Before that you were a litigation partner at a law
                                      firm, I believe?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. And I assume you are familiar with Arthur
                                      Andersen’s policy on document retention and destruction?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. That is the document that I showed you, docu-
                                      ment No. 27, right?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. If you can tell me, very briefly, under what cir-
                                      cumstances you believe documents should be retained? What—




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00128   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 129 ===
                                                                                      125

                                      when is it? What is the trigger under which documents need to be
                                      retained?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. There are several provisions in the policy that ad-
                                      dress retention.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. In fact, there is an exhibit to document No. 27
                                      here, Exhibit 1, that says examples of situations to be reported.
                                      And that is a list of examples of situations where if you see that
                                      coming, then you treat that as threatened legal action under sec-
                                      tion 2.5 of the litigation procedures, and you retain them; is that
                                      right?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes. There is a list of examples to be reported to
                                      the legal group, that calls for notification. I don’t believe——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. That would trigger, then, a notification such as
                                      the one that you made, I think, on October 12 in your e-mail, right?
                                      It is not just threatened litigation, is it? There are other things
                                      that would trigger Arthur Andersen to recommend retention of doc-
                                      uments?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The policy does require retention of all related ma-
                                      terials if there is threatened litigation or——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Or other situation, right? And one of those situa-
                                      tions would be oral indications from management or owners that
                                      the firm was somehow responsible for the failure of operations or
                                      the failure to detect fraud, right? That is the—that is the third one
                                      on the list of examples of situations to be reported, right?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Right. This list of examples is from the policy state-
                                      ment No. 780, which requires notification to the legal group of
                                      those examples.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Right. So now there was a memo that was written
                                      on August 15, 2001, from Sherron Watkins, an Enron vice-presi-
                                      dent, alleging improper accounting and all kinds of other problems.
                                      Was the legal department aware of that?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall if I was aware of that particular docu-
                                      ment. I was aware of circumstances, about allegations by an em-
                                      ployee of Enron, and the fact that Vincent & Elkins had conducted
                                      an investigation and concluded and reported positively to the board
                                      the week of October 8.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. So you are aware in August an employee had
                                      made these allegations, and then Vincent & Elkins had done an in-
                                      vestigation also in August; is that right?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Not exactly. Before October 12, I was aware that
                                      Vincent & Elkins had been engaged and completed and reported
                                      orally to the board that the results of their investigation were posi-
                                      tive. And the engagement team also assured the practice directors
                                      who were being consulted at that time and myself that they had
                                      reviewed the information about the allegations, and that the alle-
                                      gations were, to the extent that they had any information in them
                                      in reference to transactions, involved transactions that the audit
                                      team had carefully reviewed in its prior work.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. So you thought that because Vincent & Elkins had
                                      said there was no problem, that that did not trigger any kind of
                                      requirement; is that correct? Yes or no, please.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. No, that is not what I would think at the time.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Now, what caused you to send that memo on Octo-
                                      ber 12? Did you do that on a regular basis?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00129   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 130 ===
                                                                                      126

                                         Ms. TEMPLE. There were several factors that caused me to send
                                      the memo on October 12.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Let me back up for a minute. How many times in
                                      your 2 years, roughly, at Andersen did you send memos like this
                                      to remind people of the document retention and destruction policy?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall the number of times.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Had you done it before?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I believe I had referred people to the firm’s policies
                                      on document retention and destruction.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. How many times before?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall the number of times.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. One time? Five times? Ten times?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. To the best of my recollection, at least one other oc-
                                      casion.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Was that in relation to Enron, or was that in rela-
                                      tion to another client?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. No, that was not in relation to Enron.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. The gentlelady’s time has expired. I would
                                      ask that the gentlelady have 1 additional minute and would ask
                                      her to yield, if she will.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Before I do that, Mr. Chairman, I have many,
                                      many more questions. I would hope you would have a second round
                                      of questioning today. The chairman of the subcommittee is nod-
                                      ding, and I thank him.
                                         And with that, I’d be happy to yield.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I thank the gentlelady.
                                         I just want to clarify your testimony to the gentlelady’s ques-
                                      tions. You indicated that Vinson & Elkins issued a positive report.
                                      I want to quote from that report: ‘‘there is a serious risk of adverse
                                      publicity and litigation. It also appears because of the inquiries and
                                      issues raised by Ms. Watkins, Arthur Andersen will want addi-
                                      tional assurances that if anyone had no agreement with LJM, that
                                      LJM would not lose money,’’ et cetera. Is that a positive report?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. As I recall the outcome of the report as reported to
                                      me——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. You have a copy of this—I believe we’ve sub-
                                      mitted it. You have a copy of this letter, don’t you, from Vinson &
                                      Elkins? You saw it yourself, didn’t you?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. After the week of October 12, I did receive a copy.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Here’s the point, Ms. Temple. We’re trying to
                                      get the facts here, but if you will characterize a report that indi-
                                      cates a decline in the value of Enron stock and a serious risk of
                                      adverse publicity and litigation as a positive report from the attor-
                                      neys, we’re going to have trouble with your testimony today.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Later on, when I did receive a copy of the report
                                      and sent a copy to outside counsel, I did note the comments that
                                      you’re referencing, but I also noted that the law firm reported that
                                      there was nothing further to follow up on at that point in time; and
                                      the law firm was representing Enron Corporation, not Arthur An-
                                      dersen. And I understood and recall at the time thinking that there
                                      might be a challenge to the business judgment decisions of Enron
                                      to enter into certain trade——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Did you know at the time that Vinson & Elk-
                                      ins had signed off on these agreements as a counsel for the firm




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00130   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 131 ===
                                                                                      127

                                      that may have been a conflict of interest in them commenting on
                                      them now?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall the circumstances.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. You are not aware of that?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall at this time.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I thank the gentlelady.
                                         The Chair recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Stearns, for a round of
                                      questions, and the chairman of the subcommittee will be in the
                                      chair. Mr. Bilirakis is recognized for——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. That’s okay. Let Mr. Bilirakis go.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Well, we’re both from Florida.
                                         Either Mr. Baskin or Mr. Andrews, in your January 15 of this
                                      year press release, Tab 22, your firm stated that it did not believe
                                      that any work papers had been destroyed; and I ask you the ques-
                                      tion, how were you able to come to that conclusion, and are you
                                      still confident with that?
                                         That was just a few days ago, I might add. I guess we realize
                                      that.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Let me respond to that and why the press release
                                      says that, Congressman.
                                         Our investigation is extensive, and this is very complex and will
                                      take an extended period of time. We are not finished with our in-
                                      vestigation, what we are doing, Davis, Polk, our counsel, is con-
                                      ducting the investigation, and we actually have gone a second level
                                      and hired former Senator Danforth to come in and review the re-
                                      sults of our best investigation. So we are in process, and it is far
                                      from finished, as is your investigation, as well as the SEC’s.
                                         So what we did and what happened on January 15, at that point
                                      in time, that investigation being conducted by Davis, Polk had de-
                                      termined enough information that we believe warranted the action
                                      we took. The point that I want to make is, that is just an interim
                                      step, the interim step, because our investigation is far from com-
                                      plete and we intend to complete the investigation and take the ap-
                                      propriate action——
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Mr. Andrews, with all due respect, you’re talking
                                      about the action you took warranted the action you took. The ques-
                                      tion is, you had come to the conclusion that none of the work pa-
                                      pers had been destroyed at that point in time, as of January 15.
                                      Is that still your conclusion?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, at this point in time, there were—
                                      let me define for a moment ‘‘work paper.’’ Audit work papers are
                                      the permanent record of the audit. At the point in time that we
                                      took the action on January 15, we were not aware, and I am not
                                      aware today, of the destruction of any audit work papers. But my
                                      caution, my only caution, is that our investigation is in process,
                                      and until we complete the investigation, obviously I cannot say
                                      that that is the conclusion until the investigation is done.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. So even today you’re not acknowledging that any
                                      work papers were destroyed? So we’re going through this trying to
                                      determine why they were destroyed and whether they were de-
                                      stroyed legally and that sort of thing, but you’re not acknowledging
                                      that they have even been destroyed?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Let me clarify. There are different types of docu-
                                      ments that exist in an audit process. One is—one example would




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00131   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 132 ===
                                                                                      128

                                      be the permanent audit work papers, when you complete the audit.
                                      So, for instance, for fiscal 2000, we completed the fiscal 2000 audit,
                                      and there’s a permanent set of work papers that is developed and
                                      retained as a result of that.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. And those are permanent and they are never de-
                                      stroyed. Mr. Baskin stated that earlier.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. They are destroyed after a statute period, which
                                      is 6 years in the United States, but they would not be destroyed.
                                      So when we took the action on the 15th, it was not because audit
                                      work papers had been destroyed. What it was a result of is the ex-
                                      tensive destruction of other documents, e-mails and other papers
                                      that were not part of a permanent set of audit work papers, that
                                      we became aware of as a result of Mr. Duncan’s meeting and ac-
                                      tions subsequent to October 23. We think regardless of the policy,
                                      at best that was an extreme error in judgment that we as an orga-
                                      nization don’t support, don’t condone and don’t encourage and will
                                      not stand for.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Mr. Andrews, you said that earlier. Now, all right,
                                      so you do acknowledge, apparently from what I understand, the de-
                                      struction of e-mails, those sorts of documents, but not the perma-
                                      nent or the final audit documents.
                                         So can those be reproduced? Those that you have——
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. The items that have been destroyed?
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Yes.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Let me explain what we’re doing and this is one
                                      of the reasons I think that the investigation takes an extensive pe-
                                      riod of time.
                                         When we became aware of this, again we asked our legal counsel
                                      to begin the process to intensively investigate this, which means to
                                      interview any and everybody associated with it, to get an under-
                                      standing of what took place in terms of the destruction and, most
                                      importantly perhaps to do everything possible to reconstruct those
                                      records. And, for example, electronic communications, we have
                                      been able to recover a significant number of those, not all of those,
                                      and we’re continuing to work to do that. So we embarked on the
                                      process to try to recover everything that is destroyed.
                                         Now, obviously documents, hard-copy documents that are not in
                                      an electronic form, that have been shredded, we cannot recover
                                      those. Electronic documents, we’re taking every effort to recover
                                      those, and that process continues. Now, we have recovered many
                                      of them, but I don’t think we’ll be able to recover them all.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Mr. Andrews, what I’m trying to get at is, you
                                      heard my opening statement about lack of credibility and that sort
                                      of thing. The documents that were used by your firm to determine
                                      that—to basically—I’m going to use the word ‘‘hide’’ and not; I don’t
                                      mean that necessarily as bad as its sounds—to hide the truth re-
                                      garding Enron, et cetera, the misstatements, the voodoo account-
                                      ing, if you will, that I consider voodoo and the chairman referred
                                      to; those documents were a part of your audit, your work papers,
                                      right?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, documents that were part of a com-
                                      pleted audit process that were determined to be the necessary doc-
                                      uments that support the conclusions would be part of the perma-
                                      nent audit work papers.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00132   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 133 ===
                                                                                      129

                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. And those have not been destroyed?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Again, to the best of any knowledge at this point,
                                      we have not determined that any audit work papers, i.e., the per-
                                      manent audit documentation, we have not determined that they
                                      have been destroyed; but the investigation is in process and con-
                                      tinuing.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Well, my entire 5 minutes has been used up here,
                                      and I’m not sure that I’ve gotten an answer.
                                         All right, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman from Florida
                                      and recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. John, for his
                                      questions.
                                         Mr. JOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My comments revolve
                                      around where the chairman of the committee was going with his
                                      opening comments about the time lines and maybe even the com-
                                      pany policy of Andersen and how they structure their team. Your
                                      comment to the chairman’s question about when Mr. Duncan had
                                      this meeting on October 23, that neither you or legal counsel knew
                                      about this meeting or that he was ordering the destruction of all
                                      these documents. Is that correct?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. Yes, sir. I think that is what I said in my opening
                                      statement.
                                         Mr. JOHN. And obviously Arthur Andersen being a very large cor-
                                      poration has lots of clients worldwide. Is the model where Mr. Dun-
                                      can is the team leader, the engagement team leader, and whereby
                                      you put all your faith in an individual to handle a client, is that
                                      consistent with other clients in the way that you do business?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. Congressman, yes, I think that is. We place a great
                                      deal of responsibility in the hands of our audit partners, and it
                                      takes a long time to become an audit partner, and then that is why
                                      we have the high level of responsibility left in their hands.
                                         Mr. JOHN. Okay. So you have other members of your team and
                                      partners as you call them, that head other of your clients. Do they
                                      meet on a weekly or daily basis to talk about the way—not particu-
                                      larly about their clients, but the way that they have to go about
                                      following Arthur Andersen’s policies such as the retention and de-
                                      struction policy?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. Well, first of all, we have to understand that our en-
                                      gagements range in size from very small audits that need only per-
                                      haps a couple of hundred hours to complete to very, very large au-
                                      dits that involve hundreds of people and thousands and thousands
                                      of hours. So the extent of time the partner spends with the staff
                                      and what they do varies a great deal, depending upon how exten-
                                      sive the engagement is. On a large engagement like Enron, there
                                      are many partners who are involved with one as the engagement
                                      leadership responsibility.
                                         As far as communicating policies, we have many ways of doing
                                      that, and we rely a great deal on training. We have an internal
                                      Web site which provides access to our policies. We distribute our
                                      policies through CDs and DVD ROMs that people can put in their
                                      computers.
                                         Mr. JOHN. Well, I guess I’m not satisfied, and I don’t think the
                                      chairman was satisfied or any members have been satisfied with
                                      your answer to—from the 18 days, from October 23 of when this




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00133   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 134 ===
                                                                                      130

                                      meeting occurred and documents started to be destroyed, till—what
                                      is it?—November 9 when Ms. Temple sends Mr. Duncan a voice
                                      mail and told him to preserve all those documents. It is perplexing
                                      to me that no one in the highest management of Arthur Andersen
                                      had any indication of this meeting or what was going on and didn’t
                                      step up to the plate and say, we on October 20—I’m sorry, October
                                      22, the SEC has had an informal inquiry. This is not good. This
                                      is not consistent with any professional accounting practices, and I
                                      would like for you to comment on that, because I think there is an
                                      18-day problem that I’m not satisfied with, and we need to get
                                      down to who knew and why and why wasn’t it stopped until that
                                      point in time.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, in terms of that period of time and
                                      what transpired in that period of time, as I tried to indicate earlier,
                                      I agree that the action that took place on October 23 and the sub-
                                      sequent elimination of e-mails and destruction of documents is an
                                      action that is totally inappropriate, and I believe the responsibility,
                                      as our policy states, lies with the engagement partner to have the
                                      judgment to know how to exercise within that time period, given
                                      the things that were occurring. And that judgment may be the
                                      judgment to not destroy documents. It may be the judgment to seek
                                      consultation to determine what should be done. What took place
                                      was a conclusion to eliminate e-mails, to destroy significant
                                      amounts of documents without consultation, to the best of my
                                      knowledge, with others, and that activity is totally inappropriate,
                                      and we do not condone that, and we do not believe our personnel
                                      would do those sorts of things. That’s what we find was inappro-
                                      priate, and that’s why we’ve taken what action we’ve taken to date
                                      and we’ll continue to review the situation and take appropriate ac-
                                      tion against anyone else.
                                         Mr. JOHN. I’m out of time, but I need to end on this comment.
                                      And I respect and I understand—and that is the position you
                                      should take—but why 18 days? That is a long period of time. If
                                      there was a meeting about the destruction of documents taking
                                      place, it just seems to me that someone else knew that this meet-
                                      ing took place and someone higher up in management should have
                                      invoked that policy before November 9, 2001. That’s just me, and
                                      I’m out of time.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and recog-
                                      nizes for inquiry the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Stearns.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Temple, the ques-
                                      tions I’m going to ask you, I’d just like a yes or no answer. If you’d
                                      be so kind. On August 15 Sharon Watkins wrote a—she was vice
                                      president of Enron, a former employee of Arthur Andersen. She
                                      wrote a memo to the President Kenneth Lay of Enron, in which she
                                      said she was incredibly nervous that we will implode in a wave of
                                      accounting scandals. Did you know of this memo before October 23?
                                      Just yes or no.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. To the best of my recollection, I don’t——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Just yes or no.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. [continuing] recall seeing a letter from Ms. Wat-
                                      kins.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00134   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 135 ===
                                                                                      131

                                         Mr. STEARNS. So you’re saying no you did not know about Sharon
                                      Watkins’ letter on October 23? You knew nothing about it? Is that
                                      your answer, that, no——
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I was aware that she had made allegations. I don’t
                                      recall if I saw a document.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. So you’re saying yes you knew of her allegations.
                                      Is that correct?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I was informed that she had made allegations, yes.
                                      I don’t recall if I saw a document.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. So the answer to my question is, yes, you knew
                                      about it. Is that correct? Yes, you knew about——
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I was aware that she had made allegations. I don’t
                                      recall if I saw the document.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Okay. Now, on October 15, Vinson & Elkins was
                                      hired to look at this memo, and they indicated that there are seri-
                                      ous risks of adverse publicity and litigation. Did you know about
                                      the Vinson & Elkins final conclusions before October 23? Yes or no.
                                      Did you know about this study before October 23?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes. I believe I received a copy of that report before
                                      October 23.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. So you knew about Sharon Watkins. You knew
                                      about this one. Okay the questions I have I’d like you to answer
                                      just yes or no relative to October 23. Did you know that Enron had
                                      taken $1 billion charge due to an accounting error on the Raptor
                                      transaction? Yes or no. October 23. By October 23 did you know
                                      that Enron had taken a billion dollar charge due to an accounting
                                      error on the Raptor transaction?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. To the best of my recollection, no—I knew that they
                                      had taken charges, but I did not——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. That is a yes.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. [continuing] know about a billion dollar charge at
                                      that time.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. You knew that—okay. Second, that the SEC had
                                      begun an informal inquiry into Enron related to a party trans-
                                      action. Did you know that the SEC had begun an informal inquiry
                                      before October 23?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. By October 23, I knew that, yes.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Yes. Okay. That your own Houston and Chicago of-
                                      fices were disagreeing about the proper accounting and what in
                                      fact Andersen had signed off on with respect to one series of Enron
                                      transactions? Yes or no.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. That a class action lawsuit had been filed against
                                      Enron with respect to these transactions, as well as other share-
                                      holder suits? Yes or no.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. To the best of my recollection, I recall an announce-
                                      ment on the 23 of a class action shareholder lawsuit——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. So that is a yes?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. [continuing] against Enron. Yes.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. That Andersen was assisting Enron in its response
                                      to the SEC, did you know that?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes. On October 23, I have notes of a call with the
                                      engagement partner and senior management where the engage-
                                      ment partner reported to us that——




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00135   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 136 ===
                                                                                      132

                                         Mr. STEARNS. So that is a yes?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. [continuing] the team was assisting. Yes.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Okay. In light of your comments and your reten-
                                      tion policy statements earlier, why did you wait until the Novem-
                                      ber 9 to tell the Enron audit team to stop destroying documents,
                                      in light of all these yeses you said earlier?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. On October 23, according to my notes, Mr. Duncan
                                      reported to us the AA was trying to gather all documents
                                      regarding——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Can I interrupt you, Ms. Temple? The question is
                                      based upon all this prior information, Sherron Watkins, the Vinson
                                      & Elkins study, all of the previous things: You knew about the
                                      Raptor write-offs, you said, oh, I didn’t know a billion dollars, but
                                      I knew about the Raptor transaction. You knew that the SEC had
                                      started an inquiry. Based upon all of that, why did you wait till
                                      November 9 to tell the Enron audit team?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. According to my notes on October 23 Mr. Duncan
                                      assured us that the team was trying to gather all documents——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. I don’t think you’ve answered the question, in all
                                      due—what—let me ask you this. What did you believe that Mr.
                                      Duncan’s representation—no. Why did you believe that Mr. Dun-
                                      can’s representation that he was gathering the relevant docu-
                                      mentation on these transactions, which clearly for purposes of in-
                                      ternal review as to the substance and completeness of the audit
                                      trail meant that he was also gathering up everyone else’s notes, e-
                                      mails, voice mails, drafts and other nonwork paper documents for
                                      purposes of preservation for litigation? Was that your job, was that
                                      his job, or was that your job?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The engagement partner’s primary responsibility
                                      for document retention—and he assured us, according to my notes,
                                      that they were gathering all documents regarding transactions
                                      from around the world. That was the assurance that the documents
                                      were being gathered and preserved.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Don’t you think Mr. Duncan was gathering work
                                      papers?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. According to my notes, he said all documents.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Would the gentleman yield?
                                         Mr. STEARNS. I’d be glad to yield.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Do your notes indicate that the documents were
                                      gathered and preserved or simply gathered?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The notes state, AA trying to gather all docs, re
                                      transactions, from around the world. I understood that to be gath-
                                      ering the relevant documentation about all of the transactions from
                                      all around the world to have it in one place to have it available.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Now, do you recall discussing——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from Florida has ex-
                                      pired.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. I’d ask unanimous consent to grant the gentleman
                                      1 additional minute so I can ask a follow-up question. Thank you.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. We will be doing a second round. The
                                      gentlelady will be granted an additional minute.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to ask for
                                      an additional 1 minute, and it’s not just for me, but I think we are




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00136   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 137 ===
                                                                                      133

                                      on to a line of reasoning, that at this point if we leave it, we lose
                                      an opportunity for this committee—this subcommittee. So——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Fair enough. Without objection, the gentleman
                                      from Florida will be granted an additional 2 minutes, some of
                                      which he may yield to the gentlelady from Colorado if he so choos-
                                      es.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. I’ll yield to the gentlelady from Colorado, and also
                                      I understand the chairman here also has a question. So I yield part
                                      of my time to you.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you so much for your comity.
                                         Do you recall a conversation with Mr. Duncan in which he as-
                                      sured you he was gathering the documents to preserve them? Do
                                      you recall specifically having that conversation, according to your
                                      notes?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall the specific words, but I do recall that
                                      we had a group conference call on October 23, and I have these
                                      notes from that call.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. And the notes don’t say anything about preserva-
                                      tion, do they?
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. The notes——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Yes or no?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The notes do not have the word ‘‘preservation’’ in
                                      them.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. And on October 12 you had just sent a memo to
                                      Mr. Duncan and his group, advising them of the Arthur Andersen
                                      document retention and destruction policy which involved destroy-
                                      ing all of the notes and backup documents and so on, correct?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. No. Actually, I sent a reference to the policy to the
                                      practice director in Houston.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. So you never sent that to Mr. Duncan?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I did not send it personally to Mr. Duncan.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Mr. Odom had that, correct? Mr. Odom, did you
                                      have that?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The Houston practice director, based on several
                                      factors——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Just——
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. [continuing] at that time——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. In this October 23 phone call, you don’t recall spe-
                                      cifically and your notes do not reflect you telling Mr. Duncan to re-
                                      tain records, do they? Yes or no.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t see that——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Yes or no, ma’am.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. [continuing] in my notes, no.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you.
                                         I yield back.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Would the gentleman yield?
                                         Mr. STEARNS. I’ll be glad to yield to the chairman.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I’ll be real quick.
                                         Ms. Temple, if you received this e-mail from Mr. Duncan, indi-
                                      cating he was collecting all of these documents, and assumed that
                                      he was preserving them, why did you feel it necessary on Novem-
                                      ber 9 to leave a voice mail with Mr. Duncan, directing him to pre-
                                      serve those documents because of the receipt of the SEC subpoena?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00137   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 138 ===
                                                                                      134

                                      If he was preserving them already, why on Earth did you feel it
                                      necessary to advise him to preserve them on November 9?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. It is our firm practice to notify the engagement
                                      team when the legal group receives a subpoena. I believe it had
                                      been received in the general counsel’s office, and I promptly noti-
                                      fied the engagement partner and reminded about the need to—at
                                      this point in time, we’ll have to collect the documents for produc-
                                      tion.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Well, but you understand why common sense
                                      gets a little lost here. If you’re in a position where you know that
                                      the retention policy also means destruction, you knew that, didn’t
                                      you?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. There are aspects of the destruction guidelines in
                                      that policy, yes.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. So you know that the retention policy, as long
                                      as it’s operating, permits Mr. Duncan and however many people he
                                      has working for him to destroy documents? You get a memo from
                                      him saying, I’m gathering them all up; and you tell us today that
                                      you assumed that meant that he was gathering them up to pre-
                                      serve them for litigation, not to destroy them.
                                         Why would you even bother to say, by the way, on November 9,
                                      quit destroying documents? If you just got an SEC subpoena, why
                                      would you do that?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The legal group notifies the engagement partner
                                      and engagement team when subpoenas are served. It was received
                                      by the legal group, and I felt it was appropriate to follow the firm
                                      protocol to notify the engagement partner.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Now, but you see we also have the memo on
                                      November 10, and I’m going to read to you from it. It says, the first
                                      thing we must do in preparing to respond to these subpoenas and
                                      lawsuits is to take all necessary steps to preserve all of the docu-
                                      ments and other materials that we may have relating to claims
                                      that are being filed.
                                         Now, if that was already being done, if you had received a notice
                                      from Mr. Duncan that he’s gathering them all up to preserve them,
                                      that was your conclusion, why would you say that the first thing
                                      we have to do now, now that the subpoena has arrived, is start pre-
                                      serving these things?
                                         Do you see, common sense, Ms. Temple—common sense tells me
                                      that destruction was going on up until this time when the sub-
                                      poena arrived and that until you said ‘‘preserve them,’’ they may
                                      well have been gathered up for destruction, and that somebody
                                      should have known that. And was that somebody you?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I never counseled any destruction or shredding of
                                      documents. And I only wish that someone had raised the question
                                      so that we could have consulted and addressed the situation.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I thank the gentleman.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Chairman, I know my time is out. The ques-
                                      tion I had is for Mr. Baskin and Mr. Andrews.
                                         Did you ever call Mr. Duncan in and say, Mr. Duncan, we’re
                                      thinking about letting you go; we’re thinking about getting your
                                      version of the story first before we let you go? Did you give him
                                      that courtesy to say, Mr. Duncan, tell us your version before we
                                      make our version? And why didn’t you bring him in and just ask




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00138   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 139 ===
                                                                                      135

                                      him questions like that, so that we could better understand your
                                      actions?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, as we have our legal counsel Davis,
                                      Polk doing the investigation for us, it’s my understanding that they
                                      have had multiple interviews with Mr. Duncan on this subject,
                                      both prior to his being dismissed. So we did in fact do what you’re
                                      suggesting, and it was a very appropriate step in the process of in-
                                      vestigating it.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. And did he tell you he was ordered to destroy these
                                      documents?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. My understanding—repeat the question, please.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Did he tell you, he was told he was to destroy
                                      these documents?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. My understanding of his interview and responses
                                      he gave is that he acknowledged—or discussed, presented, if you
                                      will—what took place on October 23, the meeting and the subse-
                                      quent activity of destroying documents; and also indicated that he
                                      did not seek advice or counsel and was not instructed by someone
                                      to do so.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Did he admit to you that he told other people to
                                      destroy documents?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I did not do the interview, so I can’t respond spe-
                                      cifically. My understanding of what took place was, they held a
                                      team meeting. He was the senior partner in that——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Andrews, is a copy of that interview or any
                                      notes on that available?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. No, sir. I do not have copies of notes, and I don’t
                                      know if there was documentation from the meeting.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from Florida has ex-
                                      pired.
                                         Let me clarify your response, Mr. Andrews. You just testified
                                      that you are not aware as to the existence of any documentation
                                      of the interviews of this law firm with Mr. Duncan?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. What I’m saying is that our law firm is conducting
                                      the investigation, and the information I have is as a result of what
                                      they have, what they have told me from that investigation.
                                         To clarify, I do not have a written report on an investigation. The
                                      information is in process, and will be completed appropriately; and
                                      the appropriate results——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. In the course of that information, did anyone
                                      from Andersen come forward and say, while these interviews are
                                      going on, or subsequently, that they directed Mr. Duncan to de-
                                      stroy documents? Or that Duncan directed them? Excuse me.
                                         Did anyone indicate that Duncan directed them to destroy docu-
                                      ments?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, I’m not sure exactly what instruc-
                                      tions Mr. Duncan gave. What I have been told, and it’s my under-
                                      standing that a team—Mr. Duncan led a team meeting in which
                                      instructions were given to apply policy No. 760, which is the one
                                      in question; and that subsequent activity resulting from that meet-
                                      ing led to the destruction of documents, the documents we’re talk-
                                      ing about, not work papers, to the best of my knowledge at this
                                      time in the investigation, but e-mail and other forms of documenta-
                                      tion that existed.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00139   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 140 ===
                                                                                      136

                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. All right, Mr. Andrews, I’m going to ask you
                                      to make available to this committee today all of the documentation
                                      that may exist that documents the interviews with Mr. Duncan
                                      prior to leading up to his firing.
                                         Would you make those documents available for us?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, I’d have to consult with our counsel
                                      on that. It’s our intention to complete the investigation and com-
                                      pletely share the conclusions of that investigation.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Well, this committee will need these documents
                                      and will subpoena them if necessary.
                                         The time of the gentleman from Florida expired a long time ago,
                                      and the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush, is recognized.
                                         Mr. RUSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Ms. Temple, according to the notes that we have, you—and ac-
                                      cording to the Martindale-Hubbell Legal Directory, you graduated
                                      from Harvard Law School with honors. Is that right?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. RUSH. And you were a partner at the law firm of Sidley &
                                      Austin before joining Arthur Andersen’s legal department; is that
                                      right?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. RUSH. Can you explain to us, give us some kind of an idea
                                      what you were—what type of work you were doing at Sidley &
                                      Austin? I know you were—your specialty is civil litigation, profes-
                                      sional malpractice and securities litigation, but can you give us a
                                      further indication of the type of work that you were performing at
                                      Sidley & Austin?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes. I worked primarily on litigation, commercial
                                      litigation, did some accountants liability litigation, represented a
                                      law firm in another professional circumstance, and did other gen-
                                      eral commercial litigation for both plaintiffs and defendants.
                                         Mr. RUSH. So it would be correct for us to assume that you were
                                      well versed on ethical considerations as it relates to document re-
                                      tention?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I was aware of document retention issues in a liti-
                                      gation context, yes.
                                         Mr. RUSH. Okay. And when did you start at Arthur Andersen?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. In July of 2000.
                                         Mr. RUSH. July of 2000. And what was your work at Arthur An-
                                      dersen? Prior to being assigned to the Enron clientele and cases,
                                      what was your work?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. My work was on a variety of matters and in addi-
                                      tion to the Enron matter, continues to follow up a variety of mat-
                                      ters. Members in the legal group, we work on managing with out-
                                      side counsel litigation against the firm. We counsel business people
                                      from time to time on various contracts, other legal issues, practice
                                      issues. And we also help the firm comply with subpoenas.
                                         Mr. RUSH. So you consider yourself a top-notch lawyer; is that
                                      correct?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t know. I probably like others to think so.
                                         Mr. RUSH. Okay. All right.
                                         Let me ask you, you were assigned on September 28, 2001, to
                                      Enron on the Enron-related matters. Is that correct?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00140   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 141 ===
                                                                                      137

                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I was asked to participate in a conference call with
                                      some of the business people, including the engagement team, short-
                                      ly before the call occurred on September 28.
                                         Mr. RUSH. Okay. So were you actually assigned to—from your
                                      superiors at Arthur Andersen to Enron-related matters?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. At the time that’s not how it was described to me.
                                      I was just asked to participate on this conference call with my su-
                                      pervisor, and as time progressed, I continued to consult with the
                                      business people on this matter relating to Enron.
                                         Mr. RUSH. Okay.
                                         So did you transition into being the No. 1 person as it relates to
                                      the document retention matters and the policies and that type
                                      thing? Did Arthur Andersen rely on you as a part of its legal de-
                                      partment to inform others about retention matters as it related to
                                      Enron and other—any other kind of corporation?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The way I perceived my role, advising as a legal ad-
                                      viser relating to Enron, was to be able to participate in conference
                                      calls as the engagement team and other business people discussed
                                      the accounting issue, and to answer questions that arose. I con-
                                      sulted—my supervisor participated at times in some of those con-
                                      ference calls, and I consulted with him and, later on, with outside
                                      counsel.
                                         Mr. RUSH. On October 12, you informed Mr. Duncan of—in a way
                                      that was—that raised some eyebrows and some questions. You sent
                                      an e-mail—no—to Mr. Odom, stating that it might be useful for
                                      him to remind the Enron engagement team about—about Ander-
                                      sen’s document retention and destruction policy to ensure compli-
                                      ance with the policy.
                                         Now, what drove you? What motivated you to inform Mr.—or
                                      send this e-mail to Mr. Odom?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. There were several factors. Leading up to October
                                      12, a few questions had been raised in the conference calls I par-
                                      ticipated in about how to appropriately document several different
                                      matters: one, a current draft of a memo describing the firm’s con-
                                      clusion about the right accounting method, how to date that docu-
                                      ment; two, whether we should acknowledge in writing in the cur-
                                      rent document the fact that the firm had now concluded that the
                                      prior accounting advice in the first quarter was correct; three, it
                                      also came to our attention that the memos, until the first quarter
                                      2001, it did not fully reflect and accurately reflect the nature of the
                                      consultation that the engagement team had had at that time with
                                      some of the national accounting experts, and so gave advice to doc-
                                      ument the current memos dated currently, make sure they are
                                      complete and accurate and include all facts and conclusions, and
                                      also make sure that no prior papers or any prior reporting period
                                      is changed or deleted and that the national experts should create
                                      a document dated today that made very clear the nature of the
                                      facts that they recalled about their consultation for the prior period
                                      so there would be a clear written record of their version of the
                                      facts.
                                         Given these questions that had arisen—and I had consulted with
                                      my supervisor about providing advice, and others. In part of that
                                      consultation we referred to the documentation, retention and de-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00141   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 142 ===
                                                                                      138

                                      struction policy for guidance in giving our advice; and I thought it
                                      was useful——
                                         Mr. RUSH. Ms. Temple——
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. [continuing] given the confusion, to make sure that
                                      we were compliant.
                                         Mr. RUSH. What I’m trying to home in on, focus on, is your stat-
                                      ing that—your words stating that it might be useful for him on Oc-
                                      tober 12, it might be useful for him to remind.
                                         Why weren’t you more direct? Why weren’t you more forceful on
                                      October 12?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The way our system works in our firm is that the
                                      engagement partner has primary responsibility for the engagement
                                      and documentation, retention and compliance with policies; they
                                      can consult with the practice directors. And I did not have the de-
                                      tailed information about potential other issues that were being ad-
                                      dressed by the engagement team. I thought perhaps the local prac-
                                      tice director who’s available for consultation with the audit team
                                      might have a better idea as to whether it would be useful.
                                         Mr. RUSH. What changed as of November 9?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I’m sorry, sir?
                                         Mr. RUSH. Where you were more forceful, what changed?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. November 9—if you’re referring to the November 10
                                      e-mail and that timeframe, the firm had received the subpoena
                                      from the Securities and Exchange Commission asking to produce
                                      all documents, so we sent that——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from Illinois has ex-
                                      pired.
                                         The Chair recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
                                      Burr.
                                         Mr. BURR. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. Odom, I feel like you’ve been neglected, and I’ll try to——
                                         Mr. ODOM. My feelings are not hurt.
                                         Mr. BURR. I didn’t think they would be.
                                         Mr. Odom, you play a crucial role in this, if for no other reason
                                      than there are many meetings that individuals have speculated on
                                      what the content was that you were involved in; and you were
                                      aware of Sherron Watkins’ September—or excuse me, August con-
                                      cerns that she raised not only to Andersen, but also to Ken Lay di-
                                      rectly, weren’t you?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. BURR. And those were conveyed to you, if not directly,
                                      through a memo from Mr. Hecker, James Hecker from Andersen,
                                      through a memo to you and to the file?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I was copied on Mr. Hecker’s memo, yes, sir.
                                         Mr. BURR. Is it usual that concerns like that might not be shared
                                      within the legal team in Andersen?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Concerns like?
                                         Mr. BURR. The concerns that Ms. Watkins raised, should they or
                                      were they shared with anybody within the legal team at Andersen?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Once Mr. Hecker got the call, the next morning we
                                      contacted firm-wide legal to inform them of the nature of the call
                                      Mr. Hecker had gotten the night before.
                                         Mr. BURR. Now, Ms. Temple, are you in firm-wide legal?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes, I am.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00142   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 143 ===
                                                                                      139

                                         Mr. BURR. And for some reason you’re not aware of the accusa-
                                      tions at that time when you got involved in the Enron—I think you
                                      said on September 28?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I believe another lawyer was consulted at that time,
                                      but it did come to my attention, general allegations, before October
                                      12.
                                         Mr. BURR. But on September 28 when you became a part of the
                                      Enron team for Andersen, you didn’t know any of these accusations
                                      as part of the firm-wide legal team that Ms. Watkins had raised?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I did not know about those allegations on Sep-
                                      tember 28. About 5 minutes before the conference call occurred, I
                                      was asked to participate by my supervisor, who also participated,
                                      and the topic of discussion was a specific accounting issue that did
                                      not——
                                         Mr. BURR. When did you become aware of the investigation that
                                      Vinson & Elkins was currently engaged in by Enron to look at
                                      these questions?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. To the best of my recollection, I believe it was dur-
                                      ing the week of October 8.
                                         Mr. BURR. Mr. Odom, is there anything that you’ve read that has
                                      been credited to Mr. Duncan, either in his formal statements that
                                      he’s made or in his answers to questions by this committee that
                                      you find to be false?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I have no knowledge of any false statements.
                                         Mr. BURR. Is there any point that you thought David Duncan
                                      had diverted from, anything other than what he was instructed by
                                      individuals within Andersen, as it related to document retention?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I don’t know what Mr. Duncan did with respect to
                                      document retention. So I really can’t answer that question.
                                         Mr. BURR. Was there any point where Mr. Duncan asked you, or
                                      anybody that you might have been knowledgeable of, to destroy
                                      documents that were pertinent and should have been protected?
                                         Mr. ODOM. No, sir.
                                         Mr. BURR. Ms. Temple, what was your understanding of why An-
                                      dersen hired Davis, Polk?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. To the best of my recollection, I understood that
                                      Davis, Polk was hired as an additional resource for the legal group
                                      to consult with on ongoing issues.
                                         Mr. BURR. Was the legal group consulted on the hiring of Davis,
                                      Polk?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I did not participate in that decision. I was in-
                                      formed by my supervisor——
                                         Mr. BURR. How many other representatives from the legal team
                                      were involved intricately in the Enron team at that time, and
                                      which ones were consulted about the hiring of Davis, Polk?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t know who was consulted about the hiring.
                                      I do know that my supervisor told me that the decision had been
                                      made to retain Davis, Polk.
                                         Mr. BURR. And when was your first contact with individuals at
                                      Davis, Polk?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. To the best of my recollection, October 16.
                                         Mr. BURR. Did Davis, Polk have any input into your October 12
                                      memo as it related to document retention?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. As far as I recall, no.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00143   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 144 ===
                                                                                      140

                                         Mr. BURR. Were there any individuals other than you that had
                                      input into your October 12 e-mail on document retention?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall reviewing a draft of the e-mail, but I
                                      do recall discussing the document retention issues.
                                         Mr. BURR. Was there an initiative that you started on your own
                                      or was it suggested to you to put out this e-mail?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. No one suggested to me to put out the e-mail.
                                         Mr. BURR. Did you ever have a conversation relative to that e-
                                      mail, prior to its distribution, with your direct supervisor?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall discussing the particular e-mail. I re-
                                      call discussing the document retention policy and the legal advice
                                      we should give on documentation and retention.
                                         Mr. BURR. On 10/12 when you distributed that e-mail on docu-
                                      ment retention, were you aware at that time of the preliminary
                                      findings that would be reported on 10/15 from Vinson & Elkins as
                                      it related to their investigation on a—stimulated by Enron?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The facts that had been reported to me by the en-
                                      gagement team were that Vinson & Elkins had given an oral report
                                      to the board that there was nothing further that Enron needed to
                                      do as a result of their investigation.
                                         Mr. BURR. So you were aware of what the conclusion of their in-
                                      vestigation was?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. That was what was reported to me, yes.
                                         Mr. BURR. Did that in any way, shape or form shape your deci-
                                      sion about the fact to send an e-mail about document retention on
                                      October 12?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall all the things going on in my mind at
                                      that particular time. I do recall that I was motivated by the fact
                                      that questions had been raised about appropriate documentation
                                      and retention of prior period papers——
                                         Mr. BURR. Were there any meetings within the legal team that
                                      talked about the Vinson & Elkins findings that would be reported
                                      publicly, prior to their report publicly?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I recall generally keeping my supervisor up to date
                                      on events as they occurred. I don’t recall any specific discussion of
                                      the Vinson & Elkins report.
                                         Mr. BURR. On October 16 you made a request for—from Mr.
                                      Odom, Gorgal & Golsby, to delete your name from a press state-
                                      ment. What was the reason for that?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Actually, it was a request to delete a reference to
                                      my name and legal advice that had been provided in an internal
                                      Arthur Andersen memo that was to go into the audit work paper
                                      file; and the reasons for that were to avoid potential argument
                                      later on that the attorney-client privilege had been waived, and I
                                      made that recommendation after consulting with our outside coun-
                                      sel on that point.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from North Carolina
                                      has expired.
                                         Mr. BURR. If the chairman would indulge me for one additional
                                      question.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Without objection, the gentleman from North
                                      Carolina will be granted an additional minute.
                                         Mr. BURR. Can you share with us the exchange with your outside
                                      counsel and specifically the date that that took place?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00144   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 145 ===
                                                                                      141

                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I believe I had a discussion on October 16 about ap-
                                      propriate documentation and how it would be good practice not to
                                      disclose in writing legal advice obtained from the legal group so
                                      that one cannot argue later that there was a waiver of the attor-
                                      ney-client privilege.
                                         Mr. BURR. Did you counsel with him because you suspected that
                                      there would be litigation in this case?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. No. I sought counsel about appropriate documenta-
                                      tion. The firm receives hundreds of subpoenas a year, and if there’s
                                      documentation that’s going in the work paper file, we, as a stand-
                                      ard practice, don’t like to have the auditors document and describe
                                      the legal advice, because it might be waived.
                                         Mr. BURR. I would take for granted that the decision to hire out-
                                      side counsel is not something that happens weekly at Andersen or
                                      many other companies. Clearly, somebody believed that a litigation
                                      team was needed. That decision was made on October 9, which
                                      makes at least this committee very interested in the meetings that
                                      took place, the decisions that one arrived at.
                                         Clearly, after that October 9 date, decisions were made by you
                                      and you alone as you have stated, to remind individuals of the—
                                      of the document retention policy. Decisions were made to delete the
                                      legal staff’s names from documents for fear that attorney-client
                                      privilege would be breached. It leads one to believe that there was
                                      a great understanding that some type of litigation was, if not immi-
                                      nent, certainly in the future.
                                         You’re a lawyer. You’re a seasoned person. At what point did you
                                      feel that litigation was in fact a reality?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. To the best of my memory, I don’t recall making a
                                      definite decision that, yes, we’re definitely going to be sued
                                      here——
                                         Mr. BURR. You got a pretty good sign when they hired outside
                                      counsel, didn’t you?
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has long expired.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I knew there was a possibility, yes.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Ken-
                                      tucky for 5 minutes.
                                         Mr. WHITFIELD. Ms. Temple, you indicated to a number of people
                                      that your memo of October 12 regarding the retention policy was
                                      precipitated by the fact that there had been some incorrect ac-
                                      counting advice given regarding the first quarter of Enron’s finan-
                                      cial statements; and in fact, that they were not adequately re-
                                      flected and so forth. Is that correct?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. There had not been a conclusion that the first quar-
                                      ter financial statements were accurate. It was incorrect accounting
                                      advice, and to my understanding, the firm was working diligently
                                      to determine what the appropriate accounting advice should be.
                                         Mr. WHITFIELD. But there was incorrect accounting advice given,
                                      correct?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. That was my understanding.
                                         Mr. WHITFIELD. Okay. Now, prior to October 12, did you have
                                      any conference calls relating to that issue with Mr. Odom or Mr.
                                      Duncan prior to issuing that October 12 memo?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. As I recall, I believe there were a couple group con-
                                      ference calls where the engagement team was consulting with




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00145   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 146 ===
                                                                                      142

                                      other practice directors within their organization about this ac-
                                      counting issue, and I believe—I don’t recall all of the participants,
                                      but I believe Mr. Duncan and Mr. Odom participated.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Is that right, Mr. Odom? Did you participate in
                                      some conference calls with her prior to October 12 about that
                                      issue?
                                        Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. And is it true that you recall someone in those
                                      calls asking the engagement team how they were with respect to
                                      compliance with the retention policy?
                                        Mr. ODOM. I believe I recall the question of—I don’t think we
                                      called it necessarily the ‘‘retention policy.’’ We called it our ‘‘docu-
                                      ment policy,’’ whatever the——
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Our document—yeah. So that was mentioned.
                                      And did you take any action as a result of that?
                                        Mr. ODOM. I may in fact have gone through and seen if I had
                                      old drafts in my office that were not part of the current work, and
                                      I may have also looked at some old e-mails that I’d been delinquent
                                      in deleting. I do not maintain Enron files.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. So you may have, or you did?
                                        Mr. ODOM. I believe I did, but I couldn’t swear to it.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Okay. So even prior to that, you at least went
                                      through some of your files and deleted some of them?
                                        Mr. ODOM. I believe I did, yes, sir.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. So her e-mail on the 12th, how did you interpret
                                      that e-mail? Did you interpret that she was suggesting that docu-
                                      ments be destroyed or removed?
                                        Mr. ODOM. I took it that she was reminding—we needed to re-
                                      mind the engagement team as to what our policies were.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Okay. Now, on October 15, Mr. Duncan wrote in
                                      his file that he was quite concerned that a press release from
                                      Enron talking about their financial statement was going to include
                                      nonrecurring charges; and he was quite concerned about non-
                                      recurring, using that terminology, because he said he felt like that
                                      was misleading—that that would be misleading to the public.
                                        And he also said that he was going to talk to Mr. Rick Causey.
                                      Who is Rick Causey?
                                        Mr. ODOM. You’re asking me?
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Yeah.
                                        Mr. ODOM. Mr. Causey is the chief accounting officer at Enron.
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. So, trying to read Mr. Duncan’s mind here, it
                                      seems to me that since you all were having conference calls about
                                      inadequate advice given on the Enron account in the first quarter,
                                      and now in a press release they’re saying we have these losses be-
                                      cause of nonrecurring charges, and he thinks that that is not accu-
                                      rate.
                                        And then he goes on to say that Mr. Causey basically came back
                                      and said, well, don’t be concerned about it or don’t worry about it
                                      or something to that effect. Are you aware of that?
                                        Mr. ODOM. What tab are you in, sir, so I can read it?
                                        Mr. WHITFIELD. Tab—I think it’s 7. He says that—the release
                                      was issued early Tuesday, October 16, which essentially was the
                                      original—anyway, Rick said, I’ve raised the issue internally and
                                      that the press release had been thoroughly reviewed by our legal




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00146   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 147 ===
                                                                                      143

                                      team, and so despite Mr. Duncan’s concern that it was misleading,
                                      the internal legal team review decided evidently to let it go. Is that
                                      your——
                                         Mr. ODOM. I believe that’s correct.
                                         Mr. WHITFIELD. Then Nancy Temple wrote a memo to Mr. Dun-
                                      can on the 16th, which is 1 day after his memo in which he’s con-
                                      cerned about this misleading recurring charges statement, and she
                                      says, Dave, ‘‘Here are a few suggested comments.’’ I recommend de-
                                      leting reference to consultation with the legal group and deleting
                                      my name on the memo. I also suggest deleting language that might
                                      suggest we have concluded the release is misleading.
                                         Why did you write that memo, Ms. Temple?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I wrote that after reviewing the draft and con-
                                      sulting with our outside legal counsel. First——
                                         Mr. WHITFIELD. Outside. Which outside?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Davis, Polk, the comment regarding referencing
                                      legal advice. Again, it’s standard practice and consistent with the
                                      advice from outside counsel that the auditors should not describe
                                      the nature of the legal advice in their audit documentation, be-
                                      cause it might be arguably a waiver of attorney-client privilege
                                      later on; and Davis, Polk agreed with that, and——
                                         Mr. WHITFIELD. If Mr. Duncan was concerned about misleading
                                      the public with this nonrecurring charge, why did you suggest de-
                                      leting that? Because it might suggest we have concluded the re-
                                      lease is a mistake?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. There’s only one sentence they suggested deleting
                                      for two reasons, because it was inaccurate factually and——
                                         Mr. WHITFIELD. It was inaccurate factually? How was it inac-
                                      curate?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The sentence refers to enforcement actions under-
                                      taken against companies by the SEC in a case where they believe
                                      the presentation was materially misleading. I have been aware of
                                      only one enforcement action, and the circumstances were different
                                      than the case involving Enron. I had not reviewed an entire draft
                                      press release of Enron, but I knew that Mr. Duncan and others
                                      within Andersen had, and provided comments, but under the pro-
                                      fessional standards, the press release is the responsibility of the
                                      company, not of the auditor. The auditor was trying to be helpful,
                                      and it was my understanding, based on the discussions with people
                                      within Andersen, that Andersen had not concluded that the press
                                      release was misleading.
                                         Mr. WHITFIELD. But the person in charge of the Enron account
                                      was quite concerned about it. And yet subsequently, as it turns out,
                                      he probably was correct. It was misleading.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired.
                                         Mr. WHITFIELD. Very last question.
                                         In this memo you went further to say, ‘‘I would consult further
                                      within the legal group as to whether we should do anything more
                                      to protect ourselves from potential Section 10A issues.’’ What are
                                      10A issues?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. That is a reference to a provision in the Federal se-
                                      curities laws that imposes certain obligations on auditors in certain
                                      circumstances. And as an extra precaution, I sent these documents
                                      to Davis, Polk and asked them to review them to see if they had




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00147   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 148 ===
                                                                                      144

                                      any suggested advice for additional steps that Arthur Andersen
                                      should take in these circumstances. And the advice was, no, we
                                      were doing the right thing.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from Kentucky has
                                      expired.
                                         The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate the
                                      courtesy of the Chair in allowing me—obviously this is not the first
                                      time I have asked to be waited on with the oversight and investiga-
                                      tion on other issues. I appreciate the courtesies in the past and
                                      particularly today.
                                         Representing a district in Houston, you can imagine the nation-
                                      wide publicity when you see this current week’s Newsweek about
                                      burned and greedy execs, and clueless accountants left Enron
                                      bankrupt and little guys in the lurch, how it affected investors
                                      around the country.
                                         But when you are from Houston and you have a district that not
                                      only had employees but also people who placed their trust in Enron
                                      for 16 years, and also in Arthur Andersen who is an 88-year-old
                                      company or partnership, in that trust.
                                         Enron was such an integral part of our community, obviously
                                      employing, you know, thousands of people and individuals invest-
                                      ing in it, but our arts community, our medical community, even our
                                      baseball stadium has their name currently. And you can see the
                                      frustration.
                                         And that is why I guess there are 11 committees in Congress
                                      looking at it. And the Justice Department.
                                         Of course, I am mildly disappointed. It seemed like this week not
                                      only Arthur Andersen’s shredding of documents, but Enron doing
                                      it up until the civil lawyers found out, and hopefully the Justice
                                      Department would be more aggressive as the criminal prosecution
                                      I think it would be—much more than the civil lawyers who are fil-
                                      ing the lawsuits. But maybe that has gotten their attention.
                                         Let me ask some questions, though, and follow up on all of my
                                      colleagues who have done really good in trying to bring out some
                                      of the facts of what happened leading up to Ms. Temple’s memo.
                                         October 9 was when the firm decided to retain outside counsel.
                                      Mr. Baskin, would that——
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. That is correct.
                                         Mr. GREEN. How long did it take? Did you interview other firms,
                                      or were there—was the decision made to retain outside counsel
                                      prior to October 9?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, I wasn’t directly involved in hiring
                                      outside counsel. My understanding is we—we engaged them on Oc-
                                      tober 9, and that they commenced work around October 1.
                                         Mr. GREEN. But, the decision was made to retain outside counsel
                                      prior to October 9. Do you have any idea of the timeframe on the
                                      decision looking at Arthur Andersen for that?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. My understanding is we made the decision and
                                      engaged them on October 9.
                                         Mr. GREEN. So it was a decision and so you hired them. So there
                                      weren’t any other firms that were considered?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I don’t know.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00148   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 149 ===
                                                                                      145

                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. And you have no idea when the search began
                                      for another outside counsel? I assume that Arthur Andersen has a
                                      lot of outside counsel that they have the opportunities to retain.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, that is right. We do have any num-
                                      ber of other firms engaged on various other matters.
                                         Mr. GREEN. And I guess, to sum up all of the questions, people
                                      are wondering, and I am glad that the testimony brought out today
                                      that Ms. Watkins, who is a former Arthur Andersen—was she a
                                      partner in Arthur Andersen before she moved to Enron?
                                         Mr. ODOM. No, sir, she was not.
                                         Mr. GREEN. But she was an employee of Arthur Andersen and
                                      then moved to Enron?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I believe that is correct. Well, actually she left Arthur
                                      Andersen some years ago and went somewhere else before she
                                      went to Enron, is my understanding.
                                         Mr. GREEN. And she sent—not only in her current job, but she
                                      talked to Mr. Hecker. On testimony you just said that you were
                                      aware of Mr. Hecker’s memo to file around the time that he did it
                                      in August 21?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Did that make it up just past the Gulf Coast Region
                                      of Arthur Andersen?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. GREEN. So I guess, as a lawyer, then Arthur Andersen had
                                      somewhat constructive notice, even though the subpoena didn’t get
                                      there until November, that there was possible litigation and maybe
                                      even criminal activity?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I am not a lawyer, Mr. Green.
                                         Mr. GREEN. That is why you have legal counsel from—with Ar-
                                      thur Andersen, but also the ability to hire outside counsel.
                                         But on August 21, the memo to the—to the Arthur Andersen-
                                      Enron audit team, to the file and to you, and so the partnership
                                      was aware of the concerns of Ms. Watkins in late August—August
                                      21, 22?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. GREEN. And so the decision then from August 21 to October
                                      9, was—you know, 7 weeks to do that—to decide on hiring outside
                                      counsel, but the constructive notice on that was there was potential
                                      litigation; and I also—as a lawyer, I understand that there is al-
                                      ways potential litigation, particularly when are you dealing with a
                                      company like this.
                                         And why would there be the necessity for sending a memo on Oc-
                                      tober 12, reiterating Arthur Andersen’s policies, when constructive
                                      notice may have been given in August, but actually you didn’t re-
                                      spond until the subpoena, on not destroying possible evidence?
                                         Ms. Temple, was there some other reason for the October 12—
                                      because, granted, you may not have had knowledge, but Arthur An-
                                      dersen as a partnership had knowledge in late August, and yet in
                                      October, after the stock continued to go down, and the company
                                      was imploding, there was notice to the local office.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I can tell you, sir, the facts, as best I recall them,
                                      leading up to October 12.
                                         I did learn that this employee had made allegations. I also
                                      learned that the legal group within Arthur Andersen had been con-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00149   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 150 ===
                                                                                      146

                                      sulted. I consulted and conferred with that lawyer. I learned that
                                      Arthur Andersen encouraged this employee to raise the allegations
                                      within the highest levels of the Enron organization, and that the
                                      Arthur Andersen engagement team had assured the legal group
                                      and others that they had followed up on the allegations by address-
                                      ing them with the general counsel of Enron and learned that Enron
                                      had engaged an outside law firm to conduct an independent inves-
                                      tigation.
                                         I learned that the auditors had obtained information about the
                                      nature of the allegations, reviewed that information, and reported
                                      to senior people within the firm and the legal group that they had
                                      reviewed carefully during their audit work the accounting for
                                      transactions referenced in the allegations, and that they followed
                                      up and learned that the law firm had reported that the company
                                      did not need to take any further action.
                                         So those were the circumstances.
                                         Mr. GREEN. That was the middle of October?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. That I knew of by October 12.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. So before October 12 you were aware of Ms.
                                      Watkin’s memo?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall if I saw the memo that Ms. Watkin’s
                                      wrote. I do recall knowing that she had made allegations.
                                         Mr. GREEN. And you don’t have a timeframe before you sent the
                                      memorandum on the—reiterating Arthur Andersen’s policy on the
                                      destruction of documents?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. To the best of my recollection, I learned about all
                                      of the facts that I just described during the week of October 8.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from Texas has ex-
                                      pired.
                                         The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Wax-
                                      man for 5 minutes.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
                                         One of the great mysteries surrounding the collapse of Enron is
                                      the identity of the secret partners with whom Enron engaged in
                                      various complicated and undisclosed financial transactions. These
                                      partnerships allowed Enron to move debt off its balance sheet. No
                                      one knows for sure how many partnerships there were, but some
                                      press reports have said there could have been hundreds or even
                                      thousands of them. These secret partnerships appeared to be ex-
                                      traordinarily lucrative for the partners.
                                         As the Washington Post recently reported, the secret partner-
                                      ships were set up in a way that guaranteed that the secret part-
                                      ners would not be at risk if the ventures failed. Andrew Fastow,
                                      the former Enron official who participated in some of the partner-
                                      ships, reportedly made $30 million from his role in these partner-
                                      ships.
                                         I am concerned that the document destruction that went on at
                                      Arthur Andersen and at Enron may affect our ability to learn who
                                      these secret partners were. In fact, it is possible that the document
                                      destruction may be intended to cover up the details of these part-
                                      nerships, including the identity of these secret partners.
                                         We know from the press accounts that some of the documents
                                      shredded by Enron have the names of the secret partnerships such
                                      as Jedi clearly visible on them. I would like to ask whether any one




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00150   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 151 ===
                                                                                      147

                                      of you at the table knew that Arthur Andersen knew of the identity
                                      of the secret partners.
                                         Mr. Andrews? Mr. Odom?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I will try. On the LJM 2 transactions, which are the
                                      large funds that Mr. Fastow raised, there exists a private place-
                                      ment memorandum, I think it is 144A—is that—am I saying that
                                      right?
                                         144A. It is a private placement memorandum, which I think ex-
                                      ists, that I believe has the names of the people who subscribed to
                                      that partnership.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Is that document intact or has it been shredded?
                                         Mr. ODOM. That is an Enron document.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Do you know if any of the documents destroyed at
                                      Andersen related to these secret partnerships?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I have no knowledge.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Do you know whether any of the documents de-
                                      stroyed at Enron related to those secret partnerships at Enron?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I have no knowledge.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. I am assuming that if anybody else at the
                                      table——
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. No, I have no knowledge of the Enron activities.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. How about of the Arthur Andersen activities?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. As the documents that I have discussed, Con-
                                      gressman, that we believe were destroyed were not permanent
                                      audit work papers, but memos and documents, paper documents
                                      and e-mails, in this—that were destroyed in that late October pe-
                                      riod, the ones that we can recover, which were some of the elec-
                                      tronic documents, we will obviously, when the investigation is
                                      done, know the content of those and be able to obviously answer
                                      that question.
                                         Documents that were shredded or destroyed, we cannot address
                                      what was in those items or in those papers, as they were shredded.
                                      But we are making every effort to recover every document that was
                                      destroyed in our organization. As we said, we certainly do not con-
                                      done that and will make every attempt to recover it so that the
                                      record is there to investigate for us, for you, for the SEC, and for
                                      the Department of Justice.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Well, there are many Members of Congress who
                                      would like to know about who those secret partners were. Can any
                                      of you give us information or direction about how to get this infor-
                                      mation, aside from what you have already indicated? Whom should
                                      we call before the committee? What documents should we subpoena
                                      to learn the identity?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Well, Congressman, I think the investigations are
                                      pursuing, whether it be the SEC, the Department of Justice, or
                                      Congress or ourselves, looking at all information that is available.
                                         Now, most of the documentation, the original documentation
                                      around partnerships or any other source documentation like that
                                      would first and foremost be the documentation of the company. We,
                                      as auditors, do not create the documentation. We review those
                                      records. So the best source of the information that you are referring
                                      to, of course, would be at the company itself.
                                         Now, when we do our audit, we do review items within that
                                      audit. To the extent we need documentation to support the audit,




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00151   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 152 ===
                                                                                      148

                                      we do retain those in our audit work papers. We are and will con-
                                      tinue to make our documentation that we have, including every-
                                      thing we recover, available to all appropriate investigating bodies.
                                      So anything that we have will be available appropriately for the in-
                                      vestigation, including anything we can recover from the e-mails
                                      that were destroyed in that—or eliminated in that late October pe-
                                      riod.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from California has
                                      expired.
                                        Mr. WAXMAN. If I can ask this one point: Will you be submitting
                                      to this committee that information when you have it?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, we will cooperate fully with this
                                      committee, as I think we have to date. When we complete our in-
                                      vestigation, we will certainly share with you the conclusions of our
                                      investigation, including the subsequent oversight of that by former
                                      Senator Danforth.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Mas-
                                      sachusetts, Mr. Markey.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Before the Chair does that, can I clarify some-
                                      thing? Just 30 seconds.
                                        I want to inform the gentleman and all members that our origi-
                                      nal request for documents from Enron covers the requests for
                                      knowledge about the partnerships. And that document request is
                                      in the process of being complied with. So we don’t have it all yet,
                                      but we obviously are going to share it with all members and staff
                                      when we have it.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair yields 5 minutes to the gentleman
                                      from Massachusetts, Mr. Markey.
                                        Mr. MARKEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
                                        Ms. Temple, when you sent the October 12 memo, you were real-
                                      ly sending it because you were concerned that Andersen might be
                                      sued, either by the SEC or by Enron investors, weren’t you?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. No, I don’t recall that being in my mind at the time.
                                      I was concerned about making sure that we had accurate and com-
                                      plete documentation.
                                        Mr. MARKEY. Mr. Joseph Berardino on Meet the Press on Sunday
                                      said the policy of Andersen is not to shred documents, not to elimi-
                                      nate documents, if you have a reasonable basis to anticipate an in-
                                      vestigation. By October 12 you already know there is a reasonable
                                      expectation that there will be litigation.
                                        Now, Mr. Odom, I see that on October 12 you forwarded Ms.
                                      Temple’s e-mail on to David Duncan, the Andersen partner in
                                      charge of the Enron account, with the notation, ‘‘more help.’’
                                        Now, can you tell us just what did you mean when you referred
                                      to this memorandum as ‘‘more help’’? How is an order to start
                                      shredding helpful to you, especially on October 12?
                                        Mr. ODOM. I was actually being facetious, Congressman Markey.
                                      What I was referring to is the fact that all of us knew where our
                                      document retention policy was, yet we had gotten a note attached
                                      to it, with a doc link attached to it. So it was really just a re-
                                      minder. But it was not something that was——
                                        Mr. MARKEY. On October 12, ‘‘more help’’ is just being facetious?
                                        Mr. ODOM. Yes.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00152   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 153 ===
                                                                                      149

                                         Mr. MARKEY. Now, Ms. Temple, now just 4 days after you sent
                                      the ‘‘12, 2001, start shredding the documents’’ memorandum to Mr.
                                      Odom, I see that you sent an October 16 e-mail to David Duncan
                                      commenting on a draft memo he had prepared, expressing concerns
                                      about a press release that Enron had put out regarding third quar-
                                      ter 2001 results. In this e-mail you recommended deleting any ref-
                                      erence to consultation with the legal group and deleting your name
                                      from the memo.
                                         You have acknowledged that you were concerned that being men-
                                      tioned in this memo could result in your being named as a witness
                                      in future litigation. If so, following Mr. Berardino’s statement, why
                                      didn’t you direct Mr. Duncan to stop the shredding?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Congressman Markey, I did not instruct Mr. Dun-
                                      can to shred documents. In my October 16 e-mail, I did not antici-
                                      pate being a witness in any particular proceeding with respect to
                                      Enron.
                                         This is standard advice provided by the legal group.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. You said there is no ‘‘particular,’’ but Mr. Berardino
                                      is saying if there is a ‘‘reasonable’’ basis to anticipate an investiga-
                                      tion. At this point, don’t you have a reasonable expectation?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. As I recall, it was a possibility. But I don’t recall
                                      any discussion of any reasonable anticipation of litigation or mak-
                                      ing that conclusion.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. So you were also concerned that Mr. Duncan’s draft
                                      would be read as a suggestion that Andersen viewed the Enron
                                      press release as being misleading to investors, weren’t you? And if
                                      so, why didn’t you order the shredding to stop if that was your con-
                                      cern?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Congressman, I was not aware of any shredding ac-
                                      tivities. Based on my discussions with Mr. Duncan and others and
                                      our outside counsel——
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Your memo was interpreted, as you know, as a
                                      shredding order. That is what began immediately at Andersen in
                                      Houston.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t know what actually happened, what the
                                      facts are.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. So you were also worried that Andersen would be
                                      required to comply with the financial fraud reporting requirements
                                      of Section 10A of the Securities Exchange Act, the Wyden-Dingell-
                                      Markey amendment that requires accountants to immediately re-
                                      port evidence of financial fraud to senior management, the board;
                                      and if they take no action within 5 days, to report the fraud to the
                                      SEC. You make that clear.
                                         If so, why didn’t you order the shredding to stop?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Congressman, there was no conclusion that there
                                      was any financial fraud. In fact, there was a conclusion that there
                                      was no misleading statement. After consultation with others in the
                                      firm and Davis, Polk, I was being careful in asking Davis, Polk to
                                      look at all angles and all issues and advise us. And the conclusion
                                      was there were no further steps to take.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Well, let’s move to October 17. On October 17, the
                                      SEC opens an informal inquiry into Enron’s dealings, and over the
                                      next several days numerous lawsuits are filed against Enron. The




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00153   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 154 ===
                                                                                      150

                                      document shredding continues all through this period to November
                                      9.
                                         Why didn’t you order the shredding to stop then?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I was not aware of any shredding activity.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. You had sent a memo on October 12. You knew
                                      that that was something that could reasonably be interpreted as a
                                      shredding order.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I intended by October 12 reference to the firm’s doc-
                                      umentation retention policy to focus on the documentation issues
                                      that had arisen in the retention counseling advice I had provided
                                      leading up to the 12. I specifically told the engagement team to re-
                                      tain the relevant documents.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from Massachusetts
                                      has expired. Without objection, the gentleman will be granted an
                                      additional minute.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Is it your legal opinion that Andersen is free to
                                      shred documents relating to its work with Enron until such time
                                      as it actually receives a subpoena from the SEC or is formally
                                      named as a defendant in a class action lawsuit by Enron’s employ-
                                      ees or other investors?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I have not reached that legal opinion.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Was that your view at that time? That is the im-
                                      portant thing.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I was not asked to reach a legal opinion at any par-
                                      ticular time. And I was unaware of any shredding activity.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from Massachusetts
                                      has expired.
                                         The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel,
                                      for 5 minutes.
                                         Mr. ENGEL. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
                                         I am very concerned about the conflicts of interest that have to
                                      exist when an auditor also serves as a consultant. To be blunt, a
                                      lucrative consulting contract depends on a company’s financial
                                      health. And in this case I am forced to wonder if Andersen was
                                      willing to turn a blind eye to questionable accounting practices and
                                      partnerships so as to maintain its other contracts with Enron.
                                         Some of the financial transactions that Andersen blessed in its
                                      role as auditor are, at face value, reckless and unwarranted. Obvi-
                                      ously, Andersen failed in its role as auditor to provide investors
                                      with proper information. This all brings to mind the question of
                                      ethics.
                                         According to the American Institute of Certified Public Account-
                                      ant’s Code of Professional Conduct, ‘‘Integrity requires a member to
                                      be, among other things, honest and candid within the constraints
                                      of client confidentiality. Service and the public trust should not be
                                      subordinated to personal gain and advantage. Integrity can accom-
                                      modate the inadvertent error and the honest difference of opinion;
                                      it cannot accommodate deceit or subordination of principle.’’
                                         What we now find before us indicates to me that many, many
                                      people at Enron and Andersen failed to uphold basic principles of
                                      honesty and integrity, and with so many unprincipled choices, far
                                      many more people were hurt as a result.
                                         It is evident to everyone now that Enron’s become one of the
                                      greatest business scandals in our Nation’s history, and obviously,




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00154   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 155 ===
                                                                                      151

                                      if the scandal is as dark, portions—billions of dollars of investment
                                      retirement have been lost due to the dirty dealings of a few greedy
                                      people. And as a Congressman, I look forward to changing our Na-
                                      tion’s laws so as to prevent this type of abuse from ever happening
                                      again.
                                         A lot of my colleagues have asked specific questions. I wanted to
                                      ask some general ones. I would like—let me start with Mr. Baskin
                                      and say, does providing consulting and auditing services set one on
                                      a path that will cause professional ethics to be challenged? Is it not
                                      a conflict of interest to provide consulting and auditing services at
                                      the same time?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. Congressman, I do not believe that that is inher-
                                      ently an ethical problem for auditors.
                                         Mr. ENGEL. Well, let me ask you, as managing director of the
                                      professional standards group of Andersen—you can be considered
                                      the conscience of the company—what is the Andersen code of pro-
                                      fessional standards, and has it lived up to these standards based
                                      on everything we now know?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. Our code of professional standards in the United
                                      States is the AICPA standards that you read from.
                                         Mr. ENGEL. Does Andersen require its members to be—its ac-
                                      countants to be members of the American Institute of Certified
                                      Public Accountants?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. I believe we require our audit partners and others
                                      who need to be members to be members, yes.
                                         Mr. ENGEL. Okay. So you are obviously aware that the AICPA
                                      has an extensive code of professional ethics?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. ENGEL. Then obviously it had to have been obvious to you
                                      that that code was being violated; was it not?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. I was not directly involved in the Enron engage-
                                      ment, and so it was not obvious to me, no. I was not aware of it.
                                         Mr. ENGEL. Are you aware that violating these standards and
                                      subsequent expulsion is cause for a company to fire an employee?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. I am sorry. Could you repeat the question?
                                         Mr. ENGEL. Well, violating these American Institute of Certified
                                      Public Accountant Standards would be reason to fire an employee?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. I think that certainly would be something that we
                                      would have to consider, yes.
                                         Mr. ENGEL. Would you not logically say that the destruction of
                                      financial documents after a Federal investigation has been
                                      launched would be a violation of that code?
                                         That is not even grey; it is certainly, to me, black and white.
                                         Mr. BASKIN. Congressman, I would want to know the facts about
                                      who was investigating, what part of the SEC was doing the inves-
                                      tigating, what were they looking into. Was it financial statements
                                      or was it some other aspect of their reporting? But before I would
                                      conclude that we had crossed some threshold—I don’t think that
                                      simply because someone in the SEC is investigating is sufficient.
                                         They communicate with our clients quite often, and on a contin-
                                      uous basis.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, could I address your question?
                                         First, with regard to your reference to the AICPA Professional
                                      Code of Conduct, we as an organization fully subscribe to that, as




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00155   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 156 ===
                                                                                      152

                                      well as to any of the other SEC-related independence guidelines
                                      that we as an organization have to comply with. We totally concur
                                      with that. We believe in this engagement we have complied with
                                      those rules.
                                         The issue related to document destruction, we didn’t look at that
                                      from an AICPA Code of Conduct standpoint, we looked at it as an
                                      incredible, gross error in judgment at a minimum, and certainly
                                      probably a violation of our policy; and that is why we would take
                                      that action.
                                         But we fully subscribe to the requirements of the AICPA Code
                                      of Conduct, as well as the SEC rules and regulations around those
                                      subjects, as well.
                                         Mr. ENGEL. Well, let me ask you——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from New York has
                                      expired. The Chair will do his usual granting of 1 additional
                                      minute.
                                         Mr. ENGEL. Can an accountant be personally sued for mal-
                                      practice as doctors and lawyers can be? And should not accountants
                                      be held legally responsible for negligence?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, accountants can be and are sued,
                                      as the firm is. So both individually and as a firm we are account-
                                      able.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from New York has
                                      expired.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Would the gentleman—he had a little time. I
                                      want to clarify something for the record if the gentleman will allow
                                      me. Will the gentleman yield?
                                         Mr. ENGEL. Certainly.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Let me make something clear on the record
                                      for all of those attending these sessions, either in person or by tele-
                                      vision.
                                         Someone made a statement earlier that we had passed a law in
                                      1995 relieving the accounting profession of litigation liability. That
                                      is not correct. Under that act accountants are responsible propor-
                                      tionately for nonknowledgeable violations. And when they are in
                                      knowledge of something negligent, they are liable fully, in joint and
                                      several liability with their client. That is current law. That has
                                      never been repealed. It has not been repealed in the 1995 act.
                                         Second, the 1995 act did not relieve accountants of liability for
                                      making intentionally wrong statements. All the act did was codify
                                      a court decision, a Federal appellate court decision, relative to for-
                                      ward-looking information, we think the company is going to do
                                      well, but here are the things that could hurt it if it doesn’t do well,
                                      that kind of stuff.
                                         Third, the act that was discussed earlier did not change, nor
                                      touch nor repeal nor alter the Supreme Court decision on aiding
                                      and abetting; it had nothing to do with it. It retained accountant’s
                                      liability when they are negligent knowingly, fully and completely,
                                      and when they are not knowingly, they are proportionately liable
                                      with their clients. That is the current state of the law.
                                         I thank the gentleman for yielding.
                                         Mr. ENGEL. Thank you for clarifying that. I think it is an impor-
                                      tant clarification.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00156   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 157 ===
                                                                                      153

                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman. And the
                                      Chair will recognize himself, and we will begin a second round of
                                      questions for those members who wish to participate.
                                         It has been the position of Arthur Andersen all along that the
                                      buck basically began and stopped with Mr. Duncan, that he was
                                      not directed by superiors to destroy documents or to command oth-
                                      ers to destroy documents. Now, is that correct?
                                         That is your position that is—I understand Mr. Berardino has
                                      testified to. That is what your press releases have said. That is
                                      what you have all said today in your testimony.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, I would like to clarify that.
                                         What I have said and what I believe the firm has said at this
                                      point is that we are engaged in an extensive investigation of what
                                      happened. We are part of the way through that. At this point in
                                      time, we had enough information to take the action we took on Mr.
                                      Duncan, based on the gross errors in judgment.
                                         That investigation continues. And I assure you that wherever
                                      that investigation leads, to whomever it leads, we will take appro-
                                      priate action.
                                         So our investigation is in process and certainly far from finished.
                                      We don’t mean to suggest that should it lead elsewhere, we in any
                                      way would resist taking it in that direction.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Very well. Early on, I think perhaps Sep-
                                      tember, Arthur Andersen created the Core Consultation Team. I
                                      believe many of you, Mr. Andrews served on that, Ms. Temple
                                      served on that, Mr. Odom served on that; is that correct?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, no, I was not part of the Core Con-
                                      sultation Team.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. You invited—for instance, the memo of October
                                      23 that came out from Mina M. Trujillo, regarding a conference call
                                      from the Core Consultation Team, was copied to you, Mr. Andrews.
                                      Did you participate in that conference call?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, I did not participate in that con-
                                      ference call.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. You did not participate in the consultation of
                                      the consultation group? You were not a party to the discussion?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I am familiar with the Consultation Team. Yes,
                                      I did have conversations at times with the Consultation Team. I
                                      was not party to that call.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Why was the Consultation Team created?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. The Consultation Team was created because, as
                                      we said, had indicated, during the third quarter there were a num-
                                      ber of activities going on in terms of transactions and other things
                                      that have been discussed.
                                         And that Consultation Team—there was a—there was, because
                                      of the nature of the activities, the degree of things being consid-
                                      ered, the complexity of the things being considered, that was cre-
                                      ated. And it is our policy and our culture to encourage consultation.
                                      And so that would be appropriate.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. You had senior members, you had people from
                                      Chicago on this team, Rich Corgel was on this team, he was Prac-
                                      tice Risk Management Group Director, a superior position to Mr.
                                      Duncan certainly and to Mr. Odom; is that correct?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00157   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 158 ===
                                                                                      154

                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Mr. Corgel is what we call U.S.—he is in charge
                                      of our U.S. Practice Director role. Mr. Odom is a Practice Director
                                      as part of the Corgel team.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Let me get to this. What I want to know is,
                                      when you had these discussions and there was a conference call
                                      that was scheduled for 4 on October 23, on the agenda was ‘‘status
                                      of documentation,’’ and that is Tab 13.
                                         This document that I am referring to, Tab 13, I would like you
                                      to take a look at that. And there is a long list of agenda: ‘‘SEC,
                                      third-party actions, legal representation, status of documentation,
                                      response to SEC.’’
                                         Mr. Odom, are you looking at this document?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Now, in this conference call, I have included
                                      Mr. Duncan, but also included senior management from both Hous-
                                      ton and Chicago.
                                         Was there discussion at all about the document retention issues?
                                      Because, what Ms.—’’status of documentation’’ is listed in this as
                                      an agenda item. And Ms. Temple is saying that was there to talk
                                      about the need to collect data from around the world to analyze
                                      Enron’s decisionmaking, and this was not about a discussion of doc-
                                      umentation that ought to be retained or destroyed. Is that your tes-
                                      timony?
                                         You are saying—you have testified, Ms. Temple, that that was
                                      the—that the ‘‘status of documentation’’ is on that list for the pur-
                                      pose of—that was there so you could discuss the need to retain doc-
                                      uments. Is that your recollection? That is why that was on there?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. My recollection was that—an inquiry as to the sta-
                                      tus of the ongoing current work by the engagement team in the
                                      third quarter and the issues that the team was trying to deal with
                                      as they arose.
                                         And my notes from that conference call indicate that the engage-
                                      ment partner reported that Arthur Andersen was trying to gather
                                      all of the documents regarding the transactions from around the
                                      world.
                                         But I believe——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. And was that for purposes of litigation or for
                                      purposes of preservation?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I believe that was for purposes of getting all of the
                                      relevant information together, to understand the facts and to pre-
                                      serve the facts.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. Is that your recollection, as well, Mr.
                                      Odom?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir. I believe it is my recollection.
                                         I would also like to clarify that the initial core team of the people
                                      to whom the memo was sent to, and the cc’s were people who were
                                      invited to participate in this first call, and I did participate in this
                                      call. I did not participate in all of the core calls after that, although
                                      I did in some.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Let me ask you this question.
                                         Mr. Berardino in his press release gave the reasons why Mr.
                                      Duncan was fired. He said he was fired because he ordered the de-
                                      struction of documents.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00158   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 159 ===
                                                                                      155

                                        Who told you, who told your team, who told your attorneys that
                                      Mr. Duncan ordered the destruction of documents? Did Mr. Duncan
                                      tell you that?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. Mr. Chairman, that information related to that
                                      conclusion, and that is in Mr. Berardino’s memo or press release
                                      of January 15 as the result of the investigation work we had done
                                      to that point in time.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Who said Mr. Duncan ordered the destruction
                                      of documents? Was it Mr. Duncan or was it someone who was de-
                                      stroying documents at Mr. Duncan’s command?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. My understanding is that it was a result of infor-
                                      mation from all of those interviews, including interviews with Mr.
                                      Duncan, review of the information that we had on that, as well as
                                      others.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Duncan acknowledged that he destroyed
                                      documents contrary to Andersen’s policy or that he ordered others
                                      to destroy documents contrary to Andersen’s policy?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. I did not directly interview Mr. Duncan. I don’t
                                      want to suggest that he made the statement that it was contrary
                                      to Andersen’s policy.
                                        What Mr. Duncan did was conduct the meeting on October 23
                                      and give instructions—and provide instructions to comply with the
                                      policy.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. How do you know that? Did he say that he did
                                      that? Did others in the firm say that he did that?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. Mr. Chairman, my information is as a result of
                                      the information shared with me as a result of the investigation
                                      that we have going on, which included interviews with Mr. Duncan
                                      and others, as well as review of documents that have been recov-
                                      ered.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Did Mr. Duncan create this initiative to comply
                                      with policy or in opposition to the policy?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Duncan would have to answer
                                      that question.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. So no one in Arthur Andersen has ever said,
                                      Mr. Duncan told me to destroy documents?
                                        Are you aware of any employee who said, Mr. Duncan told me
                                      to destroy documents?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. I do not know the answer to that. Again, once the
                                      investigation is completed——
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. But you have said—the Arthur Andersen press
                                      release asserts that Mr. Duncan conducted himself in, using poor
                                      judgment, violation of policy.
                                        My question is, how did Arthur Andersen come to that conclusion
                                      when you have not indicated that either he admitted it, he came
                                      forth and said, You know what I did? I broke the rules. I don’t
                                      know what got into me. I started telling people to destroy docu-
                                      ments. And you have not said, and by the way, these are the em-
                                      ployees who destroyed the documents pursuant to Mr. Duncan’s di-
                                      rections, and that is why we fired the guy.
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. Let me clarify. Mr. Duncan conducted a meeting
                                      that——
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Let me just clarify before you clarify.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00159   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 160 ===
                                                                                      156

                                         The Andersen press release says, ‘‘Although the firm is still
                                      working to collect all of the facts, it has learned that at the direc-
                                      tion of the lead partner, an expedited effort to destroy documents
                                      in Houston was undertaken.’’
                                         So how did you learn that?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. We have learned that as a result of interviews
                                      with Mr. Duncan and others.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. So Mr. Duncan said, I led an expedited effort
                                      to destroy documents?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. No, that is not what I am saying, Mr. Chairman.
                                         What I am saying is that he conducted a meeting with a group
                                      of the engagement team with the policy——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. How do you know that? How do you know that
                                      he did that?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Through the interviews that we have conducted.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. With whom?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. With our investigators.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. No. Whom did the investigators query?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Mr. Duncan, as well as others.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. And who are the others?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I don’t have the information on the others.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. We will need to know who those others are.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. But what I want to make clear is, as a result of
                                      that meeting, after that meeting, an extensive document destruc-
                                      tion and e-mail removal process resulted. So clearly, to us, the re-
                                      sults of that meeting led to that activity, and Mr. Duncan was
                                      engaged——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. We know that that expedited effort didn’t occur
                                      because of telepathy. So therefore either Mr. Duncan said, It is
                                      time to expeditiously, and contrary to our policy, start destroying
                                      documents; or he didn’t.
                                         And he doesn’t admit that apparently. He has not said I—he
                                      didn’t come to your investigations and say, you know what? Mea
                                      culpa, I told these people to destroy documents contrary to our pol-
                                      icy. It was a rush. It was expedited.
                                         Nor have you indicated to us at any time that his underlings
                                      came and said, Boy, this is what we were told. We were told to
                                      hurry up and rush and destroy documents.
                                         He didn’t tell our investigators that he did this.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I am not here to defend a policy. What I have said
                                      is that the activity that resulted from that meeting, large quan-
                                      tities of destruction of documents, is at best an incredible error in
                                      judgment and totally inappropriate and not consistent with what
                                      we would intend to take place or what this firm stands for.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Why do you think Mr. Duncan went about
                                      this?
                                         You fired him. Pretty strong action. What does the company
                                      think motivated Mr. Duncan to go forward with this expedited rush
                                      to destroy documents, putting his job on the line, I would assume
                                      putting at risk all of those under him who were engaged in destroy-
                                      ing documents in an expedited, rushed fashion, contrary to your
                                      policy. Why would he do that?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Mr. Chairman, I don’t know. And I hope by the
                                      time the investigation is done——




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00160   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 161 ===
                                                                                      157

                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Nobody asked him why he did that? Before you
                                      fired him, nobody said, Why did you do this? What got into your
                                      head?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I am sure our investigators had inquired along
                                      many different lines. But what——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. You are sure of that?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I am clear they interviewed him, yes. They have
                                      interviewed him on multiple times.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Before you came to testify about all of this, did
                                      you ask your investigators what the heck he said?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. My understanding is that he said that he con-
                                      ducted the meeting, he shared the policy, or discussed the policy,
                                      with the people at the meeting, and the resulting actions——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. He passed out the policy and said, Here is the
                                      policy?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I don’t know exactly how he passed it out or if he
                                      passed it out. But he discussed the policy.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. They just took the policy that had been sitting
                                      around for years and said, We’d better get to work here?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how he conducted
                                      himself at the meeting because I wasn’t present.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. My time has expired.
                                         The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Deutsch.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I think we actu-
                                      ally, absolutely know more than we did before the meeting started,
                                      not as much as I think any of us want to know.
                                         I want to shift focus a little bit, because I think this is going to
                                      probably be the last round, and at least give each of you an oppor-
                                      tunity to touch on this. And it goes back to my original opening
                                      statement of the sort of big-picture issue, which is really regulatory
                                      safeguards.
                                         The whole premise of what we believe happened is that Enron
                                      was gaming the public accounting system. At least that is a very
                                      likely sort of scenario, that they, through these partnerships and
                                      through offshore issues, were putting losses in those areas that, ef-
                                      fectively, their balance sheets did not reflect; and analysts, Wall
                                      Street analysts or for that matter any investor trying to under-
                                      stand what was going on with Enron, was not able to do.
                                         From any of your perspectives, from the public accounting side—
                                      you know, again this is sort of more the big-picture issue as op-
                                      posed to some of the details that we have dealt with. But from that
                                      perspective, can you offer suggestions to us that—is the system
                                      broken?
                                         If you recall, most of—I think all of you were here for my open-
                                      ing statement. Are there other Enrons out there? Are there other
                                      companies that are doing effectively exactly the same thing that
                                      Enron is doing? And for that matter, all of them have big five ac-
                                      counting firms, and the big five accounting firms—again, not the
                                      issue of destruction of documents, but the issue of reporting under
                                      present, you know, accounting rules, clearly is a skirting of the
                                      rules, clearly is a gaming of the system.
                                         Now, again I am not ready to say that that gaming was illegal.
                                      It was awful. It was terrible. I was about to say when my colleague
                                      was talking about maximum security prison, that might be too




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00161   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 162 ===
                                                                                      158

                                      good a condition for some of those people. But the reality is, in
                                      terms of that issue, which was really the big issue, do any of you
                                      have any comments that you would like to make on that?
                                        I know it is not why you were asked to come here, but you have
                                      a lot more experience in the public accounting world than I do.
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. Well, Congressman, let me comment on it.
                                        I think the intent and objective of financial statements and other
                                      disclosures should be to inform users of those statements in a way
                                      that there is clarity to that information, so they can make informed
                                      decisions, whether for investment reasons or for others. So I totally
                                      concur with that.
                                        And I believe we do need to improve that process for that clarity
                                      to be at the level it should be. Because the investor, or whoever
                                      uses financial statements, needs to be able to understand them for
                                      their purpose.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. Is it a fair thing to say that no one could really
                                      look at your reports, Andersen’s reports, about Enron and really
                                      understand what was going on in Enron?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, our responsibility with Enron as—
                                      they are Enron’s financial——
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. I am not saying you did anything wrong. Because
                                      there are some very, very smart people—this is also a company
                                      that didn’t pay taxes for 6 years at the same time people are mak-
                                      ing billions of dollars off of tax, so gaming the system.
                                        And again the whole thing we have talked about, you know, even
                                      to the last day of gaming the system, of changing the pension man-
                                      ager to lock people in for an additional 60 days.
                                        In a sense, it is our job to prevent this. And I don’t know how—
                                      you know, we can’t stop all crooks, especially white collar crooks.
                                      But our job is to do the best we possible can.
                                        You can respond.
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. Well, Enron was a very complex company. There
                                      is no question that their financial statements and related disclo-
                                      sures are complicated. Many have said that they are difficult to un-
                                      derstand.
                                        So, again, to the test of do you have the clarity that some are
                                      requesting in those financial statements, from that vantage point
                                      can an investor understand everything?
                                        But very sophisticated investors had those financial statements.
                                      They have a responsibility to understand them as well. The com-
                                      pany and ourselves have a responsibility to make sure those finan-
                                      cials are materially presented—fairly presented in conforming with
                                      generally accepted accounting principles.
                                        But as you observed, many have commented on the perplexity.
                                      But this is a very complex company.
                                        Mr. DEUTSCH. But again we kind of look at the other sides. But
                                      at this point we have no one—I am not aware—for instance, the
                                      bond rating companies basically didn’t downgrade on a continuous
                                      basis. The company imploded.
                                        At the same time—and, you know, you talk about people being
                                      able to read it. These are the most sophisticated people in the
                                      world trying to look at the statements that you provide them, and
                                      they don’t know what is going on. It is not the employee with the




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00162   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 163 ===
                                                                                      159

                                      $500,000 401(k); it is literally the best analysts in the world
                                      couldn’t understand what was going on with your statements.
                                         And again I am not ready to say you did anything wrong. But
                                      the other issue is, if Enron did it, how do I know that there are
                                      not other companies out there that are doing the same sort of
                                      things, and that from a financial market basis—I mean, one of the
                                      incredible success stories is the transparency that you as an insti-
                                      tution, Arthur Andersen, along with your colleagues in the account-
                                      ing profession, provide.
                                         I mean, the system works. I mean, we have had unprecedented
                                      strength in our economy for one of these reasons. We have access
                                      to capital unprecedented in the history of the world for your suc-
                                      cesses. And what I am saying is that, you know, it failed incredibly
                                      here.
                                         And, you know, is it going to happen again? Is it going to happen
                                      this week? Is it going to happen next week? Next month? For one
                                      company? For two companies? For three companies? Because obvi-
                                      ously there were individuals who made a lot of money gaming the
                                      system.
                                         I mean, who walked home, as Congressman Rush pointed out—
                                      I mean, there are a lot of people who are sitting on tens, hundreds
                                      of millions of dollars because of their involvement with Enron.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, I can’t comment on the other com-
                                      panies obviously.
                                         But, first of all, as to financial statements, Enron was a business
                                      failure. I don’t think the financial statements caused the business
                                      failure.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Right. And I agree, businesses do fail. But people
                                      in public markets, let me just say—my time has expired, but just
                                      a last question.
                                         In the case of the efforts that Enron used, the partnerships and
                                      the offshore partnerships and the offshore investments, in terms of
                                      shifting the debt that we are now aware of, that have now been
                                      disclosed, if Arthur Andersen was in another company today and
                                      those same things were going on—this has nothing to do with the
                                      destruction of documents—what would your statement be?
                                         What would you be saying in your public accounting report about
                                      that company today, knowing what we know about Enron? Would
                                      it be the same? Would you be issuing the same report?
                                         And again, this is really the heart of the issue. I mean, you
                                      know, if that same situation is going on today, is Andersen saying
                                      everything is fine with the company?
                                         And you have these internal debates, but ultimately, hey, they
                                      are really sharp, they really know the rules, we are not supposed
                                      to report those partnerships because they are off book. I mean,
                                      let’s—we don’t have to. And everyone sort of winks at each other
                                      knowing what is going on.
                                         Again, I have to be—you know, you have very, very smart people
                                      involved. And you know the people at Andersen, the partners who
                                      are in charge of Enron, knew exactly what they were doing. They
                                      knew exactly what Enron was doing in terms of this shifting. I am
                                      100 percent convinced of that.
                                         Now, did they violate the law? Probably not. Did they violate ac-
                                      counting practices? I don’t know. Did they, you know, did they en-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00163   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 164 ===
                                                                                      160

                                      gage in something which created a disaster for untold people in so
                                      many ways? Absolutely.
                                         And I guess my question is, you know, are you reevaluating it
                                      now? Are the other—you know, four firms reevaluating it? Because
                                      what would you do now? What would you do today with Enron in
                                      terms of your transparency, to tell the market, to tell the world
                                      what is going on in that company? Would it be the same report?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Well, the financial statements need to have appro-
                                      priate application of the principles and the appropriate disclosure.
                                      And I think the Enron situation has certainly heightened attention
                                      to that. And actually the SEC and others have already taken some
                                      actions to recommend enhanced disclosures, particularly in the
                                      management discussion and analysis around risk factors and other
                                      items. That reaction, I believe, is in direct reaction to the situation
                                      with the Enron engagement.
                                         So there is strong encouragement to make sure that the risks are
                                      appropriately presented and disclosed, either in the financial state-
                                      ments or other parts of the 10-K or annual report of the company.
                                         So, to your question, I think many of us, and we have said this,
                                      that the financial reporting model can be improved so that it is bet-
                                      ter; disclosure can be improved in many ways.
                                         And so I think we definitely would subscribe to that, yes. And
                                      I think progress has already started. I think the profession is look-
                                      ing at that. The SEC is looking at that, as is Congress. So I think
                                      there will be improvements. I think out of any situation like this,
                                      let’s hope that we all learn and changes occur to improve in what-
                                      ever direction is appropriate. I would agree that financial disclo-
                                      sures would be one.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from Florida has ex-
                                      pired. The Chair recognizes the chairman of the full committee, Mr.
                                      Tauzin.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Before I begin this line of questions, I want to go back, Ms. Tem-
                                      ple, to a question Mr. Markey asked about your interpretation of
                                      obstruction of justice and the requirements of retention of docu-
                                      ments when, in fact, a proceeding is started. And I want to put you
                                      all on notice about that point, because I don’t want to lead you into
                                      answers that might put any of you at risk unless want to be there.
                                         But my understanding, Ms. Temple, is that obstruction of justice
                                      can apply even before a proceeding is commenced when documents
                                      are destroyed with the intent to make them unavailable to a pro-
                                      ceeding that is likely to be commenced, in order to make sure that
                                      those documents are not available for that proceeding and that
                                      those documents would, in fact, be relevant to that proceeding.
                                         Now, I don’t know if I’ve got it exactly right, but that is pretty
                                      much my understanding of obstruction of justice. And I wanted to
                                      say that before I ask you all of these questions.
                                         I want you all to respond yes or no if you can. I want to take
                                      you through a timetable now of SEC activities in this matter.
                                         Beginning with October 17, SEC sends its first letter to Enron
                                      requesting information regarding third quarter losses.
                                         Please answer, each of you, whether you are aware of that letter
                                      at that time.
                                         Mr. ODOM. No, sir, I was not.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00164   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 165 ===
                                                                                      161

                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I was not aware of that letter on October 17.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. When did you become aware of it?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. To the best of my recollection, I received a copy of
                                      the letter on October 25. No later than October 23, perhaps a day
                                      or two before, I learned that the SEC had written a letter to Enron
                                      asking for documents about related party transactions.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Odom, did you learn of that letter at any
                                      time?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir, about the same time Ms. Temple did.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. How about you, Mr. Baskin?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. No, sir. I was not aware of the letter at that time.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Have you ever been aware of it?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. Yesterday I became aware of it.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. How about you, Mr. Andrews?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. No, sir. I definitely was not aware of it on October
                                      17.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. When did you become aware of it?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I am not sure. But sometime in the latter part of
                                      October.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Now, Mr. Duncan did give us an extensive
                                      interview prior to his taking the Fifth Amendment, as you know.
                                      In that interview, he says that he learned of the SEC inquiry of
                                      Enron on October 19-20, and that he informed others at Andersen,
                                      including Odom and Temple, on that date.
                                         Do either of you deny that?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I was not in Houston. He may have called me at
                                      home, but I do not recall the call.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Ms. Temple?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall at this time. To the best of my recol-
                                      lection, I recall focusing on the requests or learning about the re-
                                      quests on the October 23 call.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. On October 22, Enron publicly acknowledged
                                      an informal inquiry had been started by the SEC—publicly ac-
                                      knowledged. That is when I learned about it, when America
                                      learned about it.
                                         Did any of you learn about it with us on that date?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, I believe that is the date.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. So on the 22nd you learned publicly that
                                      Enron acknowledged an informal inquiry by the SEC?
                                         Ms. Temple?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes, I believe that is correct.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Baskin?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. I honestly don’t recollect knowing about it, no, sir.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Andrews?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. That is probably the time that I became aware of
                                      it as well, so I said, sometime subsequent to the 17th.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Baskin, you really don’t think you knew
                                      about it when Enron announced that there was a public announce-
                                      ment that the SEC has started an informal inquiry?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. I try to read the Wall Street Journal most every
                                      day. And I probably read about it, but I don’t recall.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. So you probably were aware of it.
                                         That is not the end of the SEC activities. On October 31, the
                                      SEC upgraded its informal inquiry into a formal investigation. Did




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00165   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 166 ===
                                                                                      162

                                      any of you know about that decision by the SEC to formally up-
                                      grade it to a formal investigation?
                                         Mr. Odom.
                                         Mr. ODOM. I certainly knew about it the day that Enron an-
                                      nounced it.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. How about you, Ms. Temple?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Yes. I learned when Enron announced it, yes.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. How about you, Mr. Baskin?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. What I read in the newspaper.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. How about you, Mr. Andrews?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Somewhere around that time, yes.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you.
                                         It wasn’t until November 8 that the subpoenas were issued. Now,
                                      November 8 the subpoenas were issued. On November 9, Ms. Tem-
                                      ple, you leave the voice mail.
                                         On November 10 you write this extraordinary memo. It is a good
                                      one. This really is a good one. It says, we don’t want anybody to
                                      falsely accuse Arthur Andersen of destroying documents. That is
                                      what it says. So we are not only going to preserve current docu-
                                      ments, I want you to preserve all of your new documents. Save ev-
                                      erything. And I want to read to you from that memo.
                                         On the second page this is what you told everybody to do—every-
                                      body now. No. 1, existing documents. ‘‘effective immediately, all ex-
                                      isting Enron-related documents and materials must be preserved
                                      and nothing should be destroyed or discarded.’’
                                         Now, I have got a very simple question to ask you. If that was
                                      the policy that was announced on November 10, effective imme-
                                      diately, what policy was in effect on November 9?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The firm’s written documentation retention and de-
                                      struction policy.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Right. Which permitted destruction?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Right. Only in certain circumstances. And the firm’s
                                      policy continued to be in place.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Well, let me make sure I’ve got this on the
                                      record.
                                         On November 9, the day before this policy was issued, ‘‘effective
                                      immediately,’’ the policy of Arthur Andersen was that it is okay to
                                      destroy documents that might be related to the Enron investigation
                                      by the SEC and this committee. Is that correct?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The policy states that if there is threatened litiga-
                                      tion, no related material shall be destroyed. It also states that in
                                      any circumstance, all materials relevant to the opinions and find-
                                      ings of the auditors shall be maintained.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. But, you see, you felt it necessary, not on the
                                      date that the SEC announced an informal inquiry but on the date
                                      Enron announced it. You didn’t find it necessary to write this
                                      memo the date that the SEC upgraded its investigation from infor-
                                      mal to a formal investigation; you only found it necessary to write
                                      this memo saying, keep everything, don’t destroy anything, the day
                                      a subpoena was issued.
                                         And up until that time, the policy of Arthur Andersen was, it is
                                      okay to destroy documents if you think that it fits our policy of doc-
                                      ument destruction; is that right?
                                         Mr. Andrews, you are itching to answer. Go ahead and answer.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00166   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 167 ===
                                                                                      163

                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I think the reason the memo is written at that
                                      point, once a subpoena is received, there is no question there
                                      should be no destruction of documents.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. You don’t think there was any question docu-
                                      ments shouldn’t be destroyed when you learned that a formal in-
                                      quiry had been instituted by the SEC?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Well, prior to the receipt of a subpoena what I
                                      would expect, and we expect, our people to do is understand the
                                      facts and circumstances when a situation——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. How about when the SEC starts a proceeding
                                      against you? Is it not the responsibility of all of the folks at Arthur
                                      Andersen, every accounting firm, to not destroy documents that
                                      might be relative to that proceeding?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Whenever there is a proceeding against us, abso-
                                      lutely we wouldn’t destroy documents.
                                         If I may, may I——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Well, please tell me when in the time line I
                                      described to you, in your opinion, any one of you, please tell me,
                                      on behalf of Arthur Andersen, when you thought it was wrong to
                                      destroy any more documents? What date was that? Was it the date
                                      that you found out the letter had been written? Was it the date
                                      that you found out publicly, when we all found out that Enron an-
                                      nounced an informal inquiry by the SEC? Was it the date that the
                                      SEC announced a formal inquiry? Or was it only the day you got
                                      a subpoena saying, turn over the documents.
                                         When in that time line was it the responsibility of Arthur Ander-
                                      sen to stop destroying documents? Please tell me. Any one of you.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I believe the responsibility existed prior to the re-
                                      ceipt of the subpoena.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I think it did, too. When did it?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. The events around October 17, 18, 20, all of the
                                      things that were happening, the receipt of the SEC letter, the an-
                                      nouncement of the quarterly results and the resulting litigation,
                                      that those were factors that the engagement partners——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I think so, too. And I want to ask you, Ms.
                                      Temple, if you agree with Mr. Andrews—tell me if you don’t agree
                                      with him, first of all. You don’t agree with him?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I agree that the policy requires retention of related
                                      materials——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. If you agree that the destruction should have
                                      stopped back in October when Mr. Andrews said it should have
                                      stopped, why didn’t you write this memo then, saying retain every-
                                      thing, don’t destroy anything anymore, and all of your new prod-
                                      ucts, save it too, because we’re under investigation and there’s liti-
                                      gation coming and you better make sure that nothing is destroyed
                                      for the sake of the reputation of our company and for the sake of
                                      the integrity of the investigation? Why didn’t you issue it then?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The issue was not raised with the legal group——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Nobody raised it.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. [continuing] at that point in time. The policy was
                                      in existence to require detention——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Does it have to be raised, Ms. Temple, when
                                      you are the counsel representing this company internally on litiga-
                                      tion? Does anybody have to raise it, or is it somebody’s responsi-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00167   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 168 ===
                                                                                      164

                                      bility in the company to say, stop destroying documents, we’re
                                      under investigation? Whose responsibility was it if it was not
                                      yours? Did somebody have to raise it? Whose responsibility, Mr.
                                      Andrews? Was it the president? Was it you? Who was it?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. In our policy, that responsibility—the policy that
                                      we’re revising, and I acknowledge we’re revising—in that policy,
                                      that responsibility is with the engagement party.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. With an accountant, not a lawyer? You give
                                      the responsibility to an accountant to decide whether it’s legally
                                      permissible to destroy documents relative to a proceeding? Let me
                                      just tell you, I don’t know what’s going to happen out of all of this,
                                      I really don’t. I hope you’re all okay. I don’t know. But I’ll tell you
                                      this. Every accounting firm that is listening to this had better lis-
                                      ten very carefully. If all of your policies are to let accountants de-
                                      cide when it’s legal to destroy documents in a pending investiga-
                                      tion, an awful lot of people are going to be in trouble down the
                                      road, not just in this case. I hope you think seriously about what
                                      kind of policies you have on the retention of documents and wheth-
                                      er those policies are clear, are vague, or whether you just send
                                      memos out for somebody else to interpret or whether you eventu-
                                      ally recognize, as you did, Ms. Temple, at some point, that they
                                      needed guidance on what not to do and what to do. And they
                                      should have gotten that guidance a long time sooner.
                                         We wouldn’t be here. We’d be scheduling the Enron hearing right
                                      now. But we’re here discussing what happened at your company,
                                      because this guidance never went out when it should have gone out
                                      and because your company did not have a clear policy on making
                                      sure the documents were not destroyed once a notice was given by
                                      the SEC that it was checking into your business. That has got to
                                      change. If you don’t change it, I promise you we will. Thank you
                                      very much.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. May I respond?
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I’ll comment on what I think should have taken
                                      place and I’ll comment on the policy. What I believe should have
                                      taken place—I don’t expect our audit personnel, as you say, the ac-
                                      countants, to understand the law. That’s why we have other ex-
                                      perts involved.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Indeed.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. What we do expect, a person in a responsible posi-
                                      tion, an audit partner, to have an understanding of the policy as
                                      well as the judgment to consult, and we encourage consultation. So
                                      we do not expect an engagement partner or audit partner or any-
                                      one else to make these decisions alone, but we do expect them to
                                      understand the policy and to have enough knowledge to raise the
                                      question and seek advice in this situation——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Except, Mr. Andrews, except—and I’ll con-
                                      clude, Mr. Chairman—except once a legal proceeding is com-
                                      mencing or about to commence, all of that changes, and if you rely
                                      upon your accountants to seek advice instead of giving them advice
                                      at that time, all of you are going to be in deep trouble as we go
                                      forward.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. My comment on the policy, I am not here defend-
                                      ing our policy in the sense that it was complete and robust and an-




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00168   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 169 ===
                                                                                      165

                                      ticipated all of the guidance that it should. That’s exactly when we
                                      realized this situation had occurred, which was in early January,
                                      we suspended the policy we have. We put in place an interim policy
                                      that essentially required retention of everything and engaged a
                                      reputable firm to come in——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Chairman, I want to make a request upon
                                      Arthur Andersen, if you don’t mind, Mr. Chairman. The chairman
                                      has asked you to find out who the others were who destroyed docu-
                                      ments. I think you ought to do a thorough survey within the com-
                                      pany of everybody who destroyed documents, No. 1. I know you
                                      didn’t keep logs of what was destroyed. Now, I asked about that.
                                      Is there a log kept under your policy of what was destroyed and
                                      what was kept? And the answer was, of course not. Then you’d
                                      know what we destroyed. So there are no logs kept.
                                         I’m going to ask Arthur Andersen to do that, to go back and re-
                                      construct as much as you can about what was destroyed that we
                                      can’t recover from hard drives. I want you to be clean with us
                                      about what was destroyed and what was not destroyed to the ex-
                                      tent you can. And if you’re as clean as you can be about it, then
                                      we’re not going to have as many problems as we’ve had at this
                                      hearing. But the clear picture we’re getting at this hearing is that
                                      somebody felt it was a good idea to get rid of an awful lot of docu-
                                      ments before our investigators got busy and other investigators got
                                      busy. That is the clear message I’m getting and it’s not a pretty
                                      one.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Can I respond to your points?
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. First of all, in terms of the investigation and other
                                      people, our investigation will be complete and comprehensive, and
                                      we will take whatever action based upon that investigation that’s
                                      appropriate.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. You have my request. I hope you fill it.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I do. Trust me, we will do it and we’re in the proc-
                                      ess of doing it, and when it’s completed we will take those actions.
                                      And on top of our investigation being led by Davis, Polk, we have
                                      in addition to that engaged former Senator Danforth to come in
                                      and look at what we found, to see did we do it thoroughly, was it
                                      completely. We, the firm, are not placing any restrictions on the
                                      scope of that review at all, and it will be thorough and it will in-
                                      volve everyone that was involved in this process.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Just be aware that we too will be examining
                                      the work you do to see that it was thorough and complete, not just
                                      Senator Danforth.
                                         Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from Louisiana has
                                      just expired. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. So I’ll have a commensurate amount of time?
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. When you’re chairman you will, yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Mr. Odom, I believe that you got the October 12
                                      e-mail from Ms. Temple about the document destruction and reten-
                                      tion policy. Is that correct?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, ma’am.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. And I believe you told our staff that to get a memo
                                      like that was very unusual. Correct?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00169   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 170 ===
                                                                                      166

                                        Mr. ODOM. I don’t recall—I mean, I don’t remember using those
                                      exact words.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. Well, you had never gotten a memo like
                                      that reminding you of the policy, had you, sir?
                                        Mr. ODOM. I have never gotten one with a doc. link on it like
                                      that, no, ma’am.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. One with a doc. link linking you back to the docu-
                                      ment retention policy. Is that correct?
                                        Mr. ODOM. That’s right.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And how long have you been with the company?
                                        Mr. ODOM. Since 1969.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you.
                                        Now, Ms. Temple, I wanted to ask you about something. This Oc-
                                      tober 12 memo that you sent out to everybody, was that your deci-
                                      sion to send that memo out?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. This e-mail?
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Yeah.
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. The particular e-mail in the Web site reference——
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. No, no. I want to know who decided to send this—
                                      that it would be a good idea to send this e-mail out to everybody.
                                      Was that you?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. I believe I thought of that based on the discussions
                                      about the legal advice and the reference to the policy I had with
                                      others.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. Now, who did you have those discussions
                                      with?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. I discussed the legal advice about appropriate docu-
                                      mentation with my supervisor and others——
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And your supervisor was Don Dreyfus?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. And who else was involved in those discus-
                                      sions?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. I believe a senior risk management or practice di-
                                      rector by the name of Jim Freidlief.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And Jim Freidlief also?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. Yes.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. And you decided to send that e-mail out to remind
                                      people of the document policy because there were concerns about
                                      the growing thunderclouds over Enron?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. No. Because of the questions that had arisen about
                                      appropriate documentation and retention——
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. People were wondering what documents they
                                      should retain or destroy. Right?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. I testified earlier about the specific questions——
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. No. Just—you know, just yes or no I think would
                                      be good.
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. No. It was about questions about specific docu-
                                      mentation issues that had arisen.
                                        Ms. DEGETTE. Uh-huh, about what should be kept or destroyed?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. About how to date current period documents, about
                                      whether to acknowledge in writing—how to acknowledge in writing
                                      currently the fact that the firm had concluded that the prior
                                      accounting——




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00170   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 171 ===
                                                                                      167

                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Those questions that you testified to or that you’re
                                      delineating right now, does this policy that you linked in your e-
                                      mail answer those questions?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. It was used as a reference in providing advice to
                                      answer the questions.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. But you gave the link to the entire policy,
                                      correct, not just one section?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Correct.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Now, at that time, Arthur Andersen had not been
                                      served with a subpoena as of October 12. Correct?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Correct.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. And there is some sense, I think everybody here
                                      will agree, that there was probably some concern about pending
                                      litigation as of that time. Right?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. To the best of my recollection, I don’t recall——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Well, you knew that there were probably—that
                                      there was a sense there might be lawsuits; I mean, really, didn’t
                                      you?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I don’t recall that being a focus of discussion or——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. I don’t want to talk about a focus of discussion.
                                      I mean, you’re a Harvard-trained lawyer. You’re a litigator. You’re
                                      an SEC expert, all of the things we’ve been talking to. You knew
                                      there might be a risk of litigation didn’t you?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I knew there was a possibility of litigation——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. [continuing] but we did not discuss it.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Now, Arthur Andersen’s policy does not require
                                      retention of all documents when there is simply a risk of litigation
                                      but, rather, when Arthur Andersen is served with a subpoena,
                                      doesn’t it?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. The policy has several different provisions requiring
                                      retention——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. I know, uh-huh.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. [continuing] and it requires retention if there’s
                                      threatened litigation——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. Stop for a second. Why did you not send out
                                      an e-mail on October 12 telling people to retain all documents?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. At that point in time, there was no litigation
                                      against Enron that I was aware of. There was no litigation against
                                      Arthur Andersen——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Right.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. [continuing] that I was aware of——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. In truth—and I don’t want to mislead you, okay?
                                      I only got this document this morning. So it’s taken me a few hours
                                      to look through it, but luckily I’ve had a few hours to look through
                                      it. And here’s what I think the document says. The thing that says
                                      retain the documents in case of threatened litigation is in the exec-
                                      utive summary. Right? And it’s on page 2, paragraph 9 of the exec-
                                      utive summary. That refers you to paragraph 3.5.3, which I think
                                      is a typo and really means paragraph 4.5.4, because 3.5.3 talks
                                      about the kinds of information to be destroyed. 4.5.4 says in the
                                      event Arthur Andersen BU is advised of litigation or subpoenas re-
                                      garding a particular engagement, the related information should




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00171   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 172 ===
                                                                                      168

                                      not be destroyed. See policy statement 780. Right? Your adviser be-
                                      hind you is nodding his head yes.
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I see where that is, yes. Thank you.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. And policy statement 780 says that you are only
                                      to retain documents other than the—other than the documents
                                      you’re supposed to destroy if you’re served with a subpoena. Right?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. Well, I think you have to read the retention policy,
                                      which also provides that all information relevant to the findings
                                      and opinions should be retained in 3.5.3.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Well, that’s your work papers. Right?
                                         Ms. TEMPLE. It says information having relevance to our opinions
                                      or findings to be a part of the central client engagement files.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Right. Except for 3.5.3 talks about all of the dif-
                                      ferent things that should be destroyed. That’s what we’re talking
                                      about here today.
                                         Mr. Andrews, you don’t know of any essential documents being
                                      destroyed by Mr. Duncan, do you?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. What I know is that a large amount of documents
                                      were destroyed. At this time I’m not aware that any of those were
                                      what I call the permanent audit work papers.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Right. What we’re really talking about is the
                                      backup papers, which you had said then, later on in November,
                                      should be retained.
                                         What I’m getting at here, Mr. Chairman, is I think the problem
                                      is with Arthur Andersen’s policy, because Arthur Andersen’s policy
                                      says if you’re threatened with litigation, then you are to notify, and
                                      then it has the whole notification procedure of who you’re to notify,
                                      but it does not say that you are to retain these backup papers. And
                                      the only time you are legally required, or under Arthur Andersen’s
                                      policy—which it applies, I assume, to all of its clients—the only
                                      time you’re required to retain those is if a subpoena is served,
                                      which is exactly what Ms. Temple did.
                                         And so my opinion, after looking at this, is that Mr. Duncan
                                      probably interpreted this e-mail on October 12 saying, oh, okay, I’m
                                      supposed to destroy all these documents, like drafts and prelimi-
                                      nary versions, et cetera. That’s what she’s telling me. And then in
                                      November when they get the subpoena, they say, loop, we’re not
                                      doing it. And I think the problem is that this policy allows reckless
                                      destruction of documents, and I think that that’s what the problem
                                      is. And with that, I’ll yield back any time I might have.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Could I comment on that?
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Yeah. You may certainly, Mr. Andrews.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. First, with respect to the policy, again, I think we
                                      have acknowledged that we do not think the policy is as robust and
                                      well written as we would like, after we discovered this, and that’s
                                      why we suspended it and introduced an interim policy. And we’ll
                                      have, I would imagine, as sound of a policy as possible to cover all
                                      of these circumstances.
                                         Now, having said that, no policy can anticipate every situation
                                      that you can imagine. What I have said and what we have said is
                                      that what took place at the end of October, the volume of e-mail
                                      elimination, the volume of document destruction, is completely out
                                      of character with this policy, in my opinion. And even if it’s not out
                                      of character with this policy, it is in fact a gross error in judgment




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00172   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 173 ===
                                                                                      169

                                      and totally inappropriate and totally different than anything I’ve
                                      ever experienced in my career.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Let me just say something to you, Mr. Andrews.
                                      I was a litigator for 15 years, and I advised a lot of businesses. I
                                      didn’t do SEC work, and I didn’t work with ‘‘Big 5’’ accounting
                                      firms. My clients were small businesses. But I will tell you that
                                      when I knew of threatened litigation against a client, I called them
                                      up, and I said, don’t destroy a thing. And sometimes I had to go
                                      over and physically take possession of papers.
                                         And that’s I think the ethical obligation of every attorney who
                                      represents a client, and it’s the ethical obligation of every account-
                                      ing firm or auditor who represents a client. I don’t think that that
                                      is so unreasonable, that that should have been in your policy for
                                      all of these years, and I hope to God it’s in the interim policy that
                                      you have adopted.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentlelady has expired. My
                                      mother, I think, would say that your policy was dumb like a fox.
                                         The chairman recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bili-
                                      rakis.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Odom, does An-
                                      dersen rate all of its clients on the basis of risk management—on
                                      a risk management scale?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes. Yes, sir, we do.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. What is—has been the rating for Enron?
                                         Mr. ODOM. It’s always been at least maximum.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. At least maximum?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Now, is maximum the highest?
                                         Mr. ODOM. There’s a max star.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. There’s a max star. Has it also been a max star?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. When was it at a max star? And max star is the
                                      highest?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. When was it a max star?
                                         Mr. ODOM. It was a max star in 2000 and I think in the year—
                                      I don’t know prior to 2000, but in 2000 it was a max star. In 2001
                                      it was rated max, but we update that rating as the year goes on,
                                      and I’m sure it would have hit max star again before we did an
                                      audit—had we done an audit.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. All right. Now, the criteria that you use in order
                                      to establish these ratings—there is a criteria, apparently, that you
                                      use. Right?
                                         Mr. ODOM. That’s correct.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. All right. Is that criteria reflected in the work pa-
                                      pers?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir, it is.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. It is. And those work papers are available?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I believe they are, yes, sir.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Boy, this better be more than a belief. I sure hope
                                      that’s more than a belief. Mr. Andrews?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Yes. As consistent with what we have done, we
                                      said we’ll provide the information that this committee or the SEC
                                      or the Department of Justice has requested.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00173   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 174 ===
                                                                                      170

                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Okay. And when we get into that portion of this
                                      set of hearings, those work papers—those work papers will be
                                      available? They’re not—they’re available now—you’re saying
                                      they’re available now because they have not been destroyed, and
                                      there is no criteria for having destroyed them, right, in your reten-
                                      tion policy as I read it?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Right. The actual audit work papers themselves,
                                      certainly nothing will be destroyed now, and as I—I’d like to just
                                      make sure I clarify one thing, because I may have not been as clear
                                      as I could have when you were questioning me earlier. I just want
                                      to make sure that we understand what an audit work paper is. An
                                      audit work paper is the permanent record, if you will, of the audit
                                      itself. That’s where once you’ve done all of your work, reviewed all
                                      of the documents, it’s where you reduced your documentation that
                                      becomes the permanent support for that audit conclusion. As I said
                                      earlier——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Would the gentleman yield?
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Yes.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Again, that may not be the most important
                                      papers, however. The most important papers might be the Ander-
                                      sen consulting documents.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. The initial papers.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I’m understanding that Enron would contact
                                      Andersen for consulting services, we want to set up this partner-
                                      ship, we want to set up this financing arrangement and we want
                                      to know if it will pass audit later on, so comment on the structure
                                      and the financing of this situation so that it will pass audit later
                                      on. And then Andersen issues a consulting report to its client, like
                                      Enron, saying it’s okay to set up Raptor. It’s okay to set up Jedi
                                      the way you propose it; or no, it’s not, and here’s how you should
                                      change it if it’s going to pass audit standards later on.
                                         Those consulting documents are probably much more important,
                                      Mr. Bilirakis, than the audit work papers. Is it possible that con-
                                      sulting documents were destroyed in this period when there was
                                      document destruction going on so massively, Mr. Andrews?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Well, let me comment. First of all, a client in a
                                      situation you have a complex transaction or they need to request,
                                      if you will, accounting advice regarding how a transaction might be
                                      accounted for, that would be a normal dialog that would occur with
                                      a client.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. But answer my question. Is it possible that
                                      those documents were destroyed?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. In that documentation, to the extent that that
                                      documentation is important to an accounting and audit conclusion,
                                      they would become part of the audit work paper files. Your ques-
                                      tion about documents that were destroyed, as I said, at this point
                                      in time in your investigation, what I know was destroyed was a
                                      large quantity of e-mails and then other hard documents that were
                                      shredded. Now, the documents that were shredded, I do not know
                                      what was——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Let me——
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. [continuing] the e-mail——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Any of you know whether consulting service
                                      document reports were destroyed? Any of you know? Ms. Temple?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00174   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 175 ===
                                                                                      171

                                         Ms. TEMPLE. I have no facts about——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Odom?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I do not know what was destroyed.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Mr. Baskin, you have no knowledge?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. I have no knowledge.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Bilirakis.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Well, so getting back into the risk management
                                      analysis, Mr. Odom and Mr. Andrews, whoever it might be more
                                      apropos, the original documentation, the original work sheets
                                      where you set out the criteria and your analysis and everything of
                                      that nature, and then that led to this final conclusion, I guess it
                                      is, which would be the document that Mr. Andrews is telling us
                                      would remain in the file. Would that original document be avail-
                                      able, not the conclusion, if you will, but the original documentation
                                      that led to that conclusion? I mean, that’s a work paper any way
                                      you look at it.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. If your question is related to the work paper that
                                      led to that conclusion and that risk assessment——
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Yes.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. [continuing] there would be documentation in the
                                      audit file related to that.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. And that would not have been destroyed? There’s
                                      no way that the retention—the retention policy would have encour-
                                      aged or required that to be destroyed?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Obviously the documents are shredded. I don’t
                                      know what was in that, but to the extent that it’s part of the per-
                                      manent core audit files, the core materials, it would——
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. I think you can see where I’m leading here. A
                                      point was raised, that you’re an auditor on one hand, but then
                                      you’re also the consultant, and so you can see where the potential
                                      problem might rise. So your analyses are so darn important in
                                      terms of the risk management analysis, and why you graded them
                                      so high, in fact the top risk at one point, and then why you dropped
                                      it down the prior—the next year to just plain max. That’s awfully
                                      important.
                                         Now, Mr. Andrews, hopefully that’s all available in terms of the
                                      risk analysis area, as well as what led—disappointingly—I would
                                      say, to Andersen basically blessing the Enron documentation, the
                                      financial statements and everything of that nature. This hearing is
                                      focusing obviously on the destruction of documentation, and I’m not
                                      belittling that.
                                         But I am really concerned with the thought process that has
                                      gone into—resulting in all of this having taken place, and hopefully
                                      whatever it is that we can do to keep it from happening again. I
                                      know that people are aware now and whatnot, but it’s just terrible,
                                      and can anyone—I don’t know whether I have any time left. The
                                      red light is on. I was told they had——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. We’re keeping very strict rules today. The gen-
                                      tleman from Florida has an additional minute. If he would like, he
                                      will get the same indulgence.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Can anyone explain, very briefly, in 1 minute,
                                      why the risk analysis dropped from max plus to max?
                                         Mr. BASKIN. I don’t know the answer to that.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00175   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 176 ===
                                                                                      172

                                        Mr. BILIRAKIS. Does anyone have the answer to that? Who does
                                      that? Who makes the ultimate decision?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. The way the process works, the engagement part-
                                      ner, the engagement team makes the initial assessment, and to the
                                      extent that the risk ratings are at certain levels—and in this case
                                      a maximum risk rating requires, then, the consultation with others
                                      in the firm, and that in fact is what occurred in this situation. As
                                      to why it changed from max star to max, I don’t know.
                                        Mr. BILIRAKIS. So it goes back to Mr. Duncan again?
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. That’s where the process begins, but then once he
                                      goes through the process, the engagement team completes its anal-
                                      ysis. If it results in a risk rating at a maximum risk, it then re-
                                      quires further consultation. And that’s in fact what occurred.
                                        Mr. BILIRAKIS. Ms. Temple, very quickly—I haven’t gone into you
                                      at all—you’re house counsel. Were you aware of this risk manage-
                                      ment rating? Have you been aware of it all along?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. To the best of my recollection, I learned about the
                                      level of risk management rating much later. I don’t recall the exact
                                      time, but much later.
                                        Mr. BILIRAKIS. Much later after all the problems——
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. After I——
                                        Mr. BILIRAKIS. You became aware of?
                                        Ms. TEMPLE. [continuing] was initially consulted on September
                                      28, and I don’t recall exactly when I exactly learned about the risk
                                      rating. Probably sometime in November is my best recollection
                                      now.
                                        Mr. BILIRAKIS. Well, see, that’s what looks bad, is you yourselves
                                      in your own minds, you’ve established a risk management rating,
                                      and you rate them as really bad—rated them as really bad guys;
                                      but then you continued on, and obviously it was for the money, I
                                      don’t know. If there wasn’t millions of dollars at stake, I guess we
                                      could sort of understand that.
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. Can I respond——
                                        Mr. BILIRAKIS. Well, very briefly, sir. I don’t mean to tie up——
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. [continuing] very briefly?
                                        The risk process is designed so we assess the risk environment
                                      within a client, and as Mr. Odom said, we do this on all of our cli-
                                      ents. And depending on what that risk rating is, it will influence
                                      various actions that we take on our audit; including, for example,
                                      because this was maximum risk, it required Mr. Duncan to consult
                                      with others in the acceptance of that client. It also drives certain
                                      other procedures we do in the course of the audit. So the risk rat-
                                      ing is a very important part of helping us determine the scope of
                                      the audit, the consultation that occurs on an audit, and it has a
                                      very meaningful purpose in our audit process. And each year we
                                      go through a process of reassessing the risk of each of our clients
                                      in that regard, and it drives certain processes and audit procedures
                                      as a result of that. I mean, so it is a very important component of
                                      the audit process.
                                        Mr. BILIRAKIS. If you hadn’t been a consultant also earning what-
                                      ever the fee was for that, would you have—would you have contin-
                                      ued on as an auditor, taking into consideration that very—the
                                      highest risk rating that existed?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00176   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 177 ===
                                                                                      173

                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, I do not believe our role as con-
                                      sulting played any part of our decision in reaching that conclusion.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Time of the gentleman from Florida has ex-
                                      pired. The Chair recognizes the other gentleman from Florida, Mr.
                                      Stearns.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Odom, I just—as
                                      I understand it, you have been relieved of your duties. Is that true?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I am no longer the practice director for the Gulf Coast
                                      market, sir.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Say that again slower, sir.
                                         Mr. ODOM. I am no longer the audit practice director——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Perhaps you could bring your microphone a lit-
                                      tle closer, Mr. Odom, please.
                                         Mr. ODOM. I am no longer the audit practice director for the Gulf
                                      Coast market circle.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. And when did that change occur with your job de-
                                      scription, or when were you relieved of that duty?
                                         Mr. ODOM. It was announced in the same press release where
                                      Mr. Duncan was discharged.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Okay. And did they call you in and say to you, Mr.
                                      Odom, we are going to relieve you of your duties; you’ve been with
                                      the company since 1969?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I did get a telephone call, yes, sir.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. And who did the telephone call come from?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Rich Corgill.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. And who is Rich Corgill?
                                         Mr. ODOM. He is the head of the U.S. Practice directors.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. And what did he say to you?
                                         Mr. ODOM. He told me that the firm had decided that they need-
                                      ed to make management changes in the Houston office and that I
                                      was one of the management changes.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. And were you surprised?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I was not surprised that the firm had decided to do
                                      something to demonstrate that they were being active in dealing
                                      with, obviously, the perception problems. I was disappointed.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Do you feel that you’re a part of the problem and
                                      that’s why you were let go and that’s why you sort of did not pro-
                                      test or indicate that they were wrong and that you wanted to be
                                      a part of the proactive program to clean this up? Why did you just
                                      acquiesce so easily?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I’ve been with the firm a long time, Congressman
                                      Stearns, and sometimes you have to trust other people’s judgment.
                                      And you don’t always have to agree with them, but you can trust
                                      their judgment.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. In your position which they relieved you of, how
                                      many people worked—responded or worked for you?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Actually, I didn’t have any employees.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Oh, you just had a title?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I just had a title.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Okay. So they just——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Would the gentleman yield? I’ll give you plenty
                                      of time. You know that.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Okay. Sure.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00177   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 178 ===
                                                                                      174

                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Odom, did you say that they changed your
                                      responsibilities to demonstrate that they were making changes. Did
                                      they tell you what you did wrong?
                                         Mr. ODOM. No, sir they did not.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Chairman, that’s what I was going to ask.
                                      Well, if someone called me up and said they wanted to relieve me
                                      of a position, even if it was just a title position with no people
                                      working for me, I’d ask them why. And you never asked why?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I asked what the reason was, and I was told the firm
                                      felt they needed to make some bold moves to regain confidence in
                                      the Houston community.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Is it true that you told our committee staff that
                                      some clients in the past had been upset that old or extraneous doc-
                                      uments had been unnecessarily maintained and discovered during
                                      IRS and SEC inquiries? I mean, our staff indicated that you told
                                      them that.
                                         Mr. ODOM. That’s correct.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Is it also true you told the committee staff that
                                      with a high-profile client about to take a big charge, people will
                                      want to look at Andersen’s files, people with, in your words, ‘‘ad-
                                      verse interests to Enron and Andersen.’’ Is that true?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I think I said that was a possibility, yes, sir.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Now, based upon those two statements that you
                                      just admitted that you told the committee staff, and when they
                                      called you up, I find it implausible that you wouldn’t say to them
                                      in a candid discussion, why—ask why you were being relieved and
                                      what the story was, and they were explaining it to you in certain
                                      code words, saying, hey, we’re trying to—I’m not going to use the
                                      word ‘‘cover-up,’’ but there seems to be something going on here to
                                      see a man of your stature to be let go, you accept it mightily and
                                      to step forward for the company’s benefit, and you step down, and
                                      now you’re in a different—total different title, and you just acqui-
                                      esce to it. It seems to me, based on what you said to the staff, that
                                      there seems to be something else out of mind, out of sight, going
                                      on here. Am I wrong?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Okay. Tell me how I’m wrong.
                                         Mr. ODOM. I don’t know of anything out of mind, out of sight.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, could I——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Yes.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Since I obviously was involved in those decisions,
                                      I’m probably more appropriate to answer it, if you will allow me
                                      to. The actions that we took, that’s announced in that press re-
                                      lease, were really two separate actions. One related specifically to
                                      the document destruction issue and the action we took at that
                                      point in our investigation, which is incomplete as I’ve said, was to
                                      relieve Mr. Duncan of his responsibilities, dismiss him from the
                                      firm. Three other engagement partners were relieved of their re-
                                      sponsibility but are still with the firm, certainly pending the rest
                                      of our investigation.
                                         The second action that we took was really not directly related to
                                      the document destruction. It was in fact an action we believed, as
                                      an organization, we needed to do to begin the process of rebuilding
                                      the trust in the Houston community, as well as a statement beyond




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00178   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 179 ===
                                                                                      175

                                      Houston, externally and internally, that we are serious about get-
                                      ting this issue behind us and doing the things that we need to do.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Andrews, couldn’t Mr. Odom have done it in
                                      his position? Why did his position have to be changed? Couldn’t he
                                      have done this? He’s a loyal employee.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Again, this was a judgment, we made that collec-
                                      tively; the management changes we made, we believed as an orga-
                                      nization, were changes we needed to make to rebuild the con-
                                      fidence.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Mr. Odom, it looks like to us that the reason you
                                      were let go, and based upon the comments you told the staff, is
                                      these folks were out to work on the files, and here it is mid-Octo-
                                      ber, and they’ve got all of this possibility of the SEC and the Jus-
                                      tice Department and our committee and others coming down, that
                                      they wanted to make this adjustment, as you say, because of ad-
                                      verse interests to Enron and Andersen. It wasn’t a salubrious ef-
                                      fect. It was basically that they were trying to get rid of these files
                                      and to instigate a process to do it.
                                         And based upon what you say, wouldn’t you agree that adverse
                                      interests were coming at Enron and Andersen and that that’s
                                      why—using you sort of not as a scapegoat but somebody to say,
                                      well, we’re changing things?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I don’t believe that to be true, Congressman Stearns.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Well, you also indicated that they’re upset some
                                      old extraneous information was still being kept, dealing—discov-
                                      ered during some SEC inquiries in the past, and they wanted to
                                      make sure that that information wasn’t there either. So——
                                         Mr. ODOM. That had nothing to do with Enron.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Yeah, no. But I’m just saying that we have here
                                      you being let go in early to mid-October when Andersen was trying
                                      to clean up their files, and it appears that it was less than ingen-
                                      uous. That’s my point.
                                         Mr. ODOM. It wasn’t early to mid-October.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, I was involved in that decision.
                                      First, January 15 was the date of the action. The management ac-
                                      tions we took have nothing directly to do with the audit engage-
                                      ment itself. And so I’m not privy and I haven’t seen the comments
                                      that you have there regarding Mr. Odom’s testimony, but nonethe-
                                      less, it has no core connection to that whatsoever.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from Florida has ex-
                                      pired. Mr. Odom, have the firm’s investigators who were doing the
                                      investigation, Davis, Polk, have they interviewed you?
                                         Mr. ODOM. No, sir, they have not.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Andrews, have they interviewed Mr.
                                      Bauer, Tom Bauer, the engagement partner?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Also put on administrative leave?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Again, I don’t know all they have and all they
                                      have not——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. We understand they haven’t. It just seems a
                                      little odd that you’ve taken this administrative action. You tell us
                                      today that you’re busily engaged in getting to the bottom of this,




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00179   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 180 ===
                                                                                      176

                                      and you’ve got a couple of big guys that you’ve laid off that you
                                      haven’t even talked to yet.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Mr. Chairman, I do not know if our investigators
                                      have interviewed Mr. Bauer or not.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Well, you know they haven’t interviewed Mr.
                                      Odom. He just told you that.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Yes, he did.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. What are you waiting for?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Again, our counsel is performing the investigation.
                                      We commit to you that that will be a full, complete investigation.
                                      And we, Andersen——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. They’re charging you by the hour and they
                                      haven’t gotten Mr. Odom yet——
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. But we are not restricting in any way the scope
                                      of that investigation. We want it to be full and——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Andrews, will you give us a list of all of
                                      the members of the firm who have been interviewed in this inter-
                                      nal investigation by Davis, Polk and who you expect to have inter-
                                      viewed during the course of this investigation?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Well, we certainly will fully cooperate and provide
                                      a full reporting and accounting of our investigation, yes.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Mr. Chairman?
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. I’m asking you a straightforward question. We
                                      would like a list of the people within the firm, for that matter out-
                                      side the firm, who have been interviewed as part of this internal
                                      investigation that we thought you were going to tell us about
                                      today. And we would like a list of the individuals you anticipate
                                      interviewing in the course of your investigation, because it’s obvi-
                                      ously critical to everything we’ve spent the last 6 hours here doing.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. May I have a moment?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Mr. Chairman, may I clarify one thing?
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Odom, you wanted to say something?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Yes. I did have an appointment to meet with Davis,
                                      Polk in New York a couple of weeks ago, and actually flew up
                                      there, and they were unable to meet with me. But I don’t know
                                      whether that was their investigators or whatever.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. When was that?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I think it was about 2 weeks ago.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Andrews, have you completed your con-
                                      sultation?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Uh-huh.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Do you want to say something?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Yes, yes. What I will do is, since Davis, Polk is
                                      conducting the investigation, I will talk with them as soon as we
                                      complete the hearing, and I will put them appropriately in touch
                                      with whoever from the committee to——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. And you’ll direct—you’re the client, you’re pay-
                                      ing them—so you’ll direct them to provide us the information we’re
                                      asking for?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I will direct them to immediately talk with you,
                                      and you request the information of them, and we’ll make sure that
                                      that happens immediately.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you. Thank you.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00180   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 181 ===
                                                                                      177

                                         The Chair recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
                                      Pardon me, just yield for a moment.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. May I have 30 seconds out of order?
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Sure.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. I just wanted to follow up, Mr. Andrews, very
                                      quickly, on the work paper thing. You can see it’s sort of sticking
                                      with me. Now, these papers are—you’ve requested that they be
                                      submitted from whatever your—the various offices are regarding
                                      the Enron situation. And they’re filed in one central location; is
                                      that correct? Are they—is there a central location for all of this
                                      documentation in Houston?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Well, Enron was a very complex company in many
                                      geographical areas, and the work papers themselves, to the extent
                                      work is done in other offices, the work papers themselves would be
                                      maintained in the other offices.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. In the other offices. They haven’t been pulled
                                      into—all to one central location yet. Is that right?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Well, at this point in time, I believe they have,
                                      but normally—I thought your question was related to how do audit
                                      work papers typically get created and where are they——
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. Now, are they numbered? Are they lettered, num-
                                      bered? Is there some sort of identification?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Well, an audit engagement file does have an in-
                                      dexing scheme and an order to it, yes.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. They’re numbered, Mr. Odom?
                                         Mr. ODOM. Mr. Andrews and I are both old auditors. He can an-
                                      swer the question just as well as I can.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. They are indexed, and there’s a filing order to
                                      them and all that sort of thing; yes, we certainly capture the infor-
                                      mation of what files exist and what the descriptions are of those
                                      files.
                                         Mr. BILIRAKIS. All right. Thank you.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from Florida has ex-
                                      pired. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green,
                                      for 5 minutes.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you again for
                                      the courtesies. Let me follow up on both Mr. Bilirakis—Chairman
                                      Bilirakis’s—the high-risk rating or higher rating for risk, I would
                                      assume, equates that Andersen has to spend more time with a cli-
                                      ent, then the higher the fees. Is that correct? Mr. Odom, Mr. An-
                                      drews? The higher the risk, the more time, if you’re going to con-
                                      tinue with a client, the more it’s going to cost that client?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, as I said before, the higher the risk
                                      rating, it will require you or lead you to do additional procedures
                                      and consultation, which would be more time, yes.
                                         Mr. GREEN. So the higher—okay. So what Chairman Bilirakis
                                      said, that it obviously—if—even if it’s in Enron, which is the sev-
                                      enth largest company, you know, it would be a substantial fee, be-
                                      cause those fees have been talked about, you know, $52 million, a
                                      million dollars a week. Now, I know auditing was a small percent-
                                      age of that, so to speak, compared to the consulting, but it was
                                      rated as higher. When was that done? When was that decision
                                      made on the higher—that Enron made—that it needed a higher
                                      risk rating?




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00181   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 182 ===
                                                                                      178

                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Well, the risk rating process occurs annually, and
                                      the last——
                                         Mr. GREEN. Do you have it in a month—what month did it occur
                                      last year?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. The 2001—which, of course, we never completed
                                      the audit—the documentation that at least I think you have been
                                      provided information—early February.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Oh, early February of last year. So that was also the
                                      discussion at one time—and I know this has been publicized—
                                      about a memo about whether continuing Enron as a client. So——
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I think that’s the right timeframe, yes, sir.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Let me go to some—and I’m sorry——
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. If I could clarify one point, though, in terms of the
                                      fees. Actually, the audit-related fees on Enron were $25 million, es-
                                      sentially half of the total fee.
                                         Mr. GREEN. And then 27 for the consulting. Okay.
                                         Mr. ODOM. Excuse me, Congressman Green—of that consulting,
                                      a lot of it is work that is typically done by the auditor, you know.
                                      So, I mean, correct me on this, Dorsey, but the SEC requires when
                                      you report fees in the matter that you’re looking at them, that the
                                      top fee, the audit fee, be only the fee for the annual audit. So if
                                      the auditor, for example, does a statutory audit in the United King-
                                      dom that is not part of the annual audit, that gets plopped down
                                      into consulting.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. As do tax fees and comfort letter and registration
                                      statements.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Mr. Andrews, let me go back to—and again, like a
                                      lot of members, we have a lot of things we have to do, and then
                                      come back when it’s our turn. I apologize for having been gone, but
                                      during—while I was gone, you mentioned something about the clar-
                                      ity of Enron’s financial statements and that—I was told that—
                                      we’ve talked in our office to numerous Wall Street analysts who
                                      could not tell what was going on at Enron by looking at the finan-
                                      cial disclosure statements signed off by Arthur Andersen. And is it
                                      Arthur Andersen’s opinion or your opinion, and maybe you gave it
                                      earlier, that Enron’s quarterly financial statements accurately re-
                                      flected Enron’s financial position? Is that what was said earlier in
                                      questioning, that——
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, your question referred to quarterly
                                      financial statements?
                                         Mr. GREEN. Did their quarterly financial statements accurately
                                      reflect Enron’s true financial position?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. We don’t audit the quarterly financial statements.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. The annual financial statements, you know,
                                      the annual financial statements, all those partnerships that were—
                                      and I know partner—those—to take out liability is something that
                                      is not unusual in the industry, but yet Enron took what is not un-
                                      usual and then shot the moon with it. In the annual financial
                                      statements, are you saying that those were—that someone—even
                                      Wall Street analysts could tell the true financial position of Enron?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. In terms of the Wall Street analysts, you know,
                                      obviously we would have to address that question to them. I don’t
                                      know what they did or didn’t understand. I would hope if they




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00182   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 183 ===
                                                                                      179

                                      didn’t understand them, then they wouldn’t recommend investing
                                      in the stock——
                                         Mr. GREEN. That will be subject to another hearing that we——
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Right. So I can’t comment on what they would.
                                      The company’s responsibility and ours is to make sure that those
                                      financials are presented and conforming with generally accepted
                                      accounting principles, which includes the basic financials and the
                                      disclosures as well. And at this point in time those financial state-
                                      ments made by the company have been restated and our opinions
                                      have been withdrawn. So that has since changed.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Starting in 2000, October of 2000, some folks on
                                      Wall Street actually started to figure out that there was something
                                      going on. And are you familiar with the story in the Wall Street
                                      Journal, ‘‘Heard on the Street,’’ in October of 2000 from a James
                                      Chanos? Are you familiar with that?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, I don’t recognize it, no.
                                         Mr. GREEN. The story cited this short seller named Mr. Chanos
                                      who began saying that in October of 2000, Enron’s books were not
                                      clear. His position, obviously, has been borne out, as we know, from
                                      October of 2001. Maybe all of us should have read the Wall Street
                                      Journal closer in October of 2000. In his—I have never heard of
                                      any financial analysts I’ve spoken with with Enron that said they
                                      were—that their financial disclosures are easily understood. And
                                      that’s—and I guess that’s been reported widely, too, and I—that it
                                      was so difficult to understand Enron’s true financial picture.
                                         Do you feel like, again, those annual statements reflected the
                                      true financial picture at Enron?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, again, our reports have been with-
                                      drawn now, so we don’t have an opinion on those statements. But
                                      the point I would make is that Enron is an extremely complex com-
                                      pany, and I think any complex company of that magnitude, the fi-
                                      nancial statements are going to be complex. It’s hard to simplify
                                      complex issues and those disclosures can be improved. Can the ac-
                                      counting model be improved? Absolutely.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Again, those partnerships were signed off on at the
                                      time, and I know you’ve retracted that, but at some time in the
                                      past they were the typical way that Enron was doing business, I
                                      guess, and they were signed off. But I know that’s been retracted.
                                         But let me go on to Mr. Odom and go back to the October 12 e-
                                      mail that you received from Ms. Temple and——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. This will be your final question, Mr. Green.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. And was it your testi-
                                      mony you had never received a memo in your 32 years with Arthur
                                      Andersen—because you said you started work in 1969—that ex-
                                      plained or denoted what Enron’s destruction of documents policy
                                      was?
                                         Mr. ODOM. This had nothing to do with Enron’s destruction
                                      policy——
                                         Mr. GREEN. Well, no. With Arthur Andersen’s policies.
                                         Mr. ODOM. I do not recall someone sending me a memo saying,
                                      you know, here is a doc. link to our policies. Clearly, on many en-
                                      gagements and many training sessions, we’ve talked about what
                                      Arthur Andersen’s policy was, because we try to teach our people
                                      to comply with our policy.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00183   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 184 ===
                                                                                      180

                                         Mr. GREEN. But you never received anything like that from the
                                      legal side of Arthur Andersen?
                                         Mr. ODOM. No, sir.
                                         Mr. GREEN. And so you looked at it as advice, I would assume,
                                      from legal counsel?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I looked at it. I didn’t view this really as advice from
                                      legal counsel, no, sir. Somebody had sent me a doc. link. I knew
                                      Nancy was a lawyer, but I didn’t take it as being legal advice.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Well, normally when a lawyer sends you——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from Texas has ex-
                                      pired. I see that the gentleman from California has arrived. Does
                                      the gentleman wish to inquire?
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. I do, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Before my colleague has his time, it seems like—I’m
                                      glad our committee is going to continue this, because, you know,
                                      there are so many questions that are still—haven’t been answered,
                                      and I just appreciate the time today of this subcommittee and, Mr.
                                      Chairman, of the full committee, because obviously there’s a lot
                                      that needs to be discussed.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. We’ll be back. The gentleman from California,
                                      5 minutes.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. I want to follow up on the questions I asked in the
                                      last round. Mr. Odom, you indicated that with regard to the part-
                                      nership LJM 2, there’s a, ‘‘private placement memorandum’’ that
                                      details the names and identities of the secret partners. Mr. Odom,
                                      some press reports have said there could have been hundreds or
                                      thousands of secret partnerships. Can you tell us approximately
                                      how many secret partnerships Enron had?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I do not know the number of partnerships.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. And do any of the other witnesses have any an-
                                      swer?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I do not know the number.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Is it fair to say it’s hundreds?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I’m not sure what you mean by secret.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Partnerships.
                                         Mr. ODOM. Partnerships weren’t necessarily secret, but they did
                                      use a number of partnerships. Hundreds would be a fair statement.
                                      Perhaps more.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Perhaps more. Do you know, would it be as much
                                      as a thousand?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I don’t know.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Are there private placement memoranda for each
                                      of the partnerships that Enron had created?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I don’t believe so.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Okay. And I’d like to ask the chairman a question.
                                      Mr. Chairman, obviously this is a very important issue. We have
                                      a situation where I believe secret partners may have made a lot of
                                      money without being exposed to any risk. At the same time, share-
                                      holders and employees lost millions. And I understand that cur-
                                      rently the committee subpoena may cover documents that identify
                                      some of the partners but not necessarily all of them, and I want
                                      to ask the chairman of the subcommittee and the chairman of the
                                      committee if they will subpoena the necessary documents to reveal




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00184   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 185 ===
                                                                                      181

                                      the identity of all of the secret partners and make them available
                                      to all of the members of the committee.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. We certainly will, Mr. Waxman, and we’ll be
                                      happy to work with you in that regard.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Thank you.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Would the gentleman yield? Among other
                                      things, let me read you what we have already requested from
                                      Enron. A list of all Enron’s SPEs, partnerships, other subsidiaries,
                                      a list of all the Enron officers, individuals, entities who hold or held
                                      equity interest in any Enron SPE, subsidiary or partnership——
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. If I could reclaim my time, my point is that we
                                      could look at the precise language of the subpoena better, but it
                                      will certainly be—if I understand Mr. Greenwood’s statement, it
                                      would be the intent of the Republican leadership on this committee
                                      to get by subpoena all the necessary documents to reveal the iden-
                                      tity of all the secret partners and make them available to the mem-
                                      bers of the committee.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. It’s not only our intent. It’s the working
                                      agreement I have with Mr. Dingell to make sure we get all of that
                                      information. We’ve requested it. We expect Enron to deliver it to
                                      us. They’re in compliance right now. If it is not delivered, we will
                                      all have something serious to say about it.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Thank you. Do any of the witnesses know or have
                                      you heard discussions of the identities of any of the secret part-
                                      ners? Mr. Odom?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I’ve seen a listing of some of the investors in some
                                      of the partnerships. I don’t know that they’re secret. There is a list-
                                      ing of some of the investors and some of the partnerships.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. And from your recollection, would you give us, for
                                      the record, some of the names that you’ve heard of as partners?
                                         Mr. ODOM. I don’t recall the names, but many of them are names
                                      you will recognize in terms of retirement systems and things like
                                      that.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Andrew Fastow, a former Enron official, reportedly
                                      made $30 million from his role in these partnerships. Did other
                                      Enron or Andersen executives participate in or profit from these se-
                                      cret partnerships, and what can any of you tell us about the iden-
                                      tity of these secret partners?
                                         Mr. ODOM. It’s already been disclosed, I believe, that in the
                                      Chewco partnership, an Enron employee named Michael Koppers
                                      had an interest, I believe in the LJM 2 prospectus. There are two
                                      other Enron employees who are mentioned as being part of LJM
                                      2, ex-Enron employees, Mr. Glisan is one of them, and I don’t know
                                      who the other one was. It could have been Mr. Koppers again. I’m
                                      certainly not aware of any Arthur Andersen people.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. When you ask the question, you may not have in-
                                      tended it this way, but you mentioned Andersen investors. We’re
                                      not allowed, obviously, to invest in our clients.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. I understand. I said Andersen executives.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Oh, Andersen executives, as investors in——
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. Well, did any of the Andersen executives partici-
                                      pate in or profit from these partnerships?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Congressman, no; we’re not allowed to invest in
                                      our clients.




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00185   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 186 ===
                                                                                      182

                                         Mr. WAXMAN. And do you have any information about those part-
                                      ners that were involved with Enron?
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I’m not part of the audit engagement team, so I’m
                                      not familiar with the audit itself. It’s my understanding that on the
                                      related party transactions, I think that is what you’re referring to,
                                      that those particular investments, that the board took specific ac-
                                      tion, took exception to its policy and put in special oversight proce-
                                      dures related to that and to deal with related party transactions.
                                         I’m not familiar with the individual names and the individuals
                                      involved, but that’s my understanding of what was done. And, of
                                      course, Andersen in no way would be an investor or anybody at An-
                                      dersen would not be an investor in anything. We’re not allowed to
                                      do that from an independent standpoint.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman from California has
                                      expired. We thank the witnesses.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Would the gentleman yield first?
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair yields a minute to the chairman.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I want to tell Mr. Waxman also that our staff
                                      is attempting to interview the partners that we are aware of that
                                      had been mentioned here by the witness, and we’re in the process
                                      of attempting to do that. We’ve written letters to them; investiga-
                                      tors on both of our staffs are doing their work as we speak. So the
                                      gentleman should be aware of that as well.
                                         Mr. WAXMAN. And so you are involving the Democratic staff.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Yes, sir. I think I made the announcement at
                                      the beginning of the hearing. Mr. Waxman, you should know that
                                      Mr. Dingell and I reached an agreement at the onset of this inves-
                                      tigation that we would share investigative staff and consult with
                                      each other as we go through the process.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Andrews, will you provide the committee
                                      with the interim policy that you’ve—we have that.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. Do you have that?
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. All right. Thank you. I want to thank wit-
                                      nesses. It’s been a long day. You’ve been here for 5 hours. I’m
                                      afraid you might have to consider this practice, because we may
                                      have to have you back, because at the end of the day here, we still
                                      don’t have evidence that suggests that Mr. Duncan, who did not
                                      testify, is a rogue employee of Andersen. We still don’t have infor-
                                      mation from you that suggests that Mr. Duncan admitted to errors.
                                      We still don’t have information that you’ve interviewed individuals
                                      who have implicated Mr. Duncan in ordering them to violate the
                                      policies of the company, and we still don’t have any information as
                                      to what documents were actually destroyed at Mr. Duncan’s orders.
                                      So we have a lot of information we need to gather from you, and
                                      we may need to call you back.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. May I say something?
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Yes.
                                         Mr. ANDREWS. I just want to reiterate, as we are here today, our
                                      commitment to cooperate fully as your investigation is in process.
                                      When we have completed with that, we intend to share it with you.
                                      We will continue to share documents, we will continue to cooperate.
                                      And so I just want to make that clear; and we’re working to recover
                                      any of these destroyed documents we can to provide for our own




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00186   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569

=== PAGE 187 ===
                                                                                      183

                                      investigation, as well as to make available to you, the SEC, and
                                      other parties.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you, Mr. Andrews.
                                        Mr. ANDREWS. We intend to fully cooperate.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. And we’ll need to cooperate with you not only
                                      when you’ve completed your investigation, but in the course of your
                                      investigation.
                                        All of that said, this hearing is now adjourned.
                                        [Whereupon, at 2:36 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]




VerDate 11-MAY-2000   13:38 Apr 25, 2002   Jkt 078319   PO 00000   Frm 00187   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   E:\HEARINGS\77569   pfrm09   PsN: 77569
