
=== PAGE 1 ===
                                                                                                                            S. HRG. 107–830

                                            ACCOUNTABILITY ISSUES: LESSONS LEARNED
                                                     FROM ENRON’S FALL




                                                                             HEARING
                                                                                   BEFORE THE



                                                 COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
                                                    UNITED STATES SENATE
                                                         ONE HUNDRED SEVENTH CONGRESS
                                                                               SECOND SESSION


                                                                              FEBRUARY 6, 2002


                                                                          Serial No. J–107–56


                                                        Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary




                                                                                      (

                                                                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                           84–416 PDF                           WASHINGTON : 2003

                                                      For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
                                                   Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800
                                                           Fax: (202) 512–2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402–0001




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000001     Fmt 05011    Sfmt 05011    C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT        SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 2 ===
                                                                   COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
                                                           PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont, Chairman
                                     EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts         ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah
                                     JOSEPH R. BIDEN, JR., Delaware           STROM THURMOND, South Carolina
                                     HERBERT KOHL, Wisconsin                  CHARLES E. GRASSLEY, Iowa
                                     DIANNE FEINSTEIN, California             ARLEN SPECTER, Pennsylvania
                                     RUSSELL D. FEINGOLD, Wisconsin           JON KYL, Arizona
                                     CHARLES E. SCHUMER, New York             MIKE DEWINE, Ohio
                                     RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois              JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama
                                     MARIA CANTWELL, Washington               SAM BROWNBACK, Kansas
                                     JOHN EDWARDS, North Carolina             MITCH MCCONNELL, Kentucky
                                                  BRUCE A. COHEN, Majority Chief Counsel and Staff Director
                                                             SHARON PROST, Minority Chief Counsel
                                                           MAKAN DELRAHIM, Minority Staff Director




                                                                                      (II)




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000002   Fmt 05904     Sfmt 05904   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 3 ===
                                                                                   CONTENTS

                                                                 STATEMENTS OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS
                                                                                                                                                                Page
                                     Cantwell, Hon. Maria, a U.S. Senator from the State of California ...................                                       64
                                     Feingold, Hon. Russell D., a U.S. Senator from the State of Wisconsin .............                                         65
                                     Feinstein, Hon. Dianne, a U.S. Senator from the State of California .................                                       57
                                     Grassley, Hon. Charles E., a U.S. Senator from the State of Iowa .....................                                      66
                                     Hatch, Hon. Orrin G., a U.S. Senator from the State of Utah ............................                                     7
                                     Kohl, Hon. Herb, a U.S. Senator from the State of Wisconsin ............................                                    67
                                     Kyl, Hon. Jon, a U.S. Senator from the State of Arizona ....................................                                68
                                     Leahy, Hon. Patrick J., a U.S. Senator from the State of Vermont ....................                                        1
                                     Sessions, Hon. Jeff, a U.S. Senator from the State of Alabama ..........................                                    72
                                     Thurmond, Hon. Strom, a U.S. Senator from the State of South Carolina ........                                              73

                                                                                           WITNESSES
                                     Gregoire, Hon. Christine, Attorney General, State of Washington, Olympia,
                                       Washington ...........................................................................................................    13
                                     Koniak, Susan P., Professor of Law, Boston University School of Law, Boston,
                                       Massachusetts ......................................................................................................      35
                                     Lund, Nelson, Professor of Law, George Mason University School of Law,
                                       Arlington, Virginia ...............................................................................................       30
                                     Raynor, Bruce, President, Union of Needletrades, Industrial and Textile Em-
                                       ployees, American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organi-
                                       zations, New York, New York .............................................................................                 17
                                     Schatz, Steven M., Esq., Senior Partner, Wilson, Sonsini, Goodrich and Rosati
                                       Professional Corporation, Palo Alto, California .................................................                         24

                                                                        SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD
                                     Department of Justice, Lauren Pfeifle, Washington, D.C., statement ................                                         65
                                     Retirement Systems of Alabama, David G. Bronner, Chief Executive Officer,
                                       Montgomery, Alabama, letter .............................................................................                 69
                                     Schwarcz, Steven L., Professor of Law, Duke University School of Law, Dur-
                                       ham, North Carolina, letter and attachment .....................................................                          70




                                                                                                  (III)




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416    PO 00000       Frm 000003       Fmt 05904      Sfmt 05904      C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT             SJUD4     PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 4 ===
VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000004   Fmt 05904   Sfmt 05904   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 5 ===
                                      ACCOUNTABILITY ISSUES: LESSONS LEARNED
                                               FROM ENRON’S FALL

                                                              WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 2002

                                                                              U.S. SENATE,
                                                                 COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,
                                                                                   Washington, DC.
                                       The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in room
                                     SD–226, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Patrick Leahy,
                                     Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
                                       Present: Senators Leahy, Kennedy, Kohl, Feinstein, Feingold,
                                     Schumer, Durbin, Cantwell, Edwards, Hatch, Specter, and
                                     Brownback.
                                           OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PATRICK J. LEAHY, A U.S.
                                                 SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF VERMONT
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Good morning. I have been advised that Sen-
                                     ator Hatch is on his way and he has no objection if we begin, as
                                     we will be having votes this morning and I thought we should. We
                                     have a distinguished panel here and I do not want to hold them
                                     longer than necessary.
                                        On November 8, as we all know, Enron announced that it had
                                     overstated earnings over the past 4 years by $586 million and they
                                     were responsible for $3 billion in obligations that were never re-
                                     ported to the public of a dollar here and a dollar there. Upon these
                                     disclosures, Enron stock fell to $8.41 a share from a figure many
                                     times that before. Then a month later, they filed for bankruptcy.
                                     It is the largest corporate bankruptcy in our nation’s history.
                                        The worst part is it left thousands of Enron investors holding vir-
                                     tually worthless stock and most Enron employees lost out—most.
                                     Some did not. Those who profited seem to be the senior officers and
                                     directors who cashed out while assuring others that Enron was a
                                     solid investment, as well as the professionals from accounting
                                     firms, law firms, and business consulting firms who were paid mil-
                                     lions of dollars to advise Enron on the practices that bankrupted
                                     their company.
                                        Now, how did this happen? It appears that Enron, with the ap-
                                     proval and advice of its accountants, auditors, and lawyers, used
                                     thousands of off-the-book entities to overstate corporate profits, un-
                                     derstate corporate debts, and inflate Enron’s stock prices. Some
                                     Enron executives ran these entities and they reaped millions of dol-
                                     lars in salaries and stock options and we see conflict of interest
                                     waivers from a quiescent Enron Board of Directors.
                                        With the help of these professionals, both inside and outside of
                                     Enron, the company wove an elaborate web of corporate deceit. I
                                                                                      (1)




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000005   Fmt 06633    Sfmt 06633   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 6 ===
                                                                                       2

                                     want to just show you on this chart. These are just a few of the
                                     secret Enron entities used to hide debt, to fake profits, and to in-
                                     flate stocks. Actually, being fanciful was not limited just to their
                                     bookkeeping. Some of the same corporate imagination was un-
                                     leashed in naming these hidden Enron entities.
                                        Look at some of the names—Kenobi, Mojave, Chewco, Condor,
                                     Jedi. Whoever was naming them has probably been to a few too
                                     many movies. And, of course, some are named, perhaps the most
                                     aptly of all, after the Wild West—Rawhide, Ponderosa, Cactus, Mo-
                                     jave, Sundance.
                                        Now, they had different names in all of these but they all had
                                     one thing in common. They were never honestly disclosed to the in-
                                     vesting public, and much about these partnerships is still secret,
                                     including who participated in them and who benefited from these
                                     corporate manipulations.
                                        Enron’s web of deceit caught more than just its employees. In ad-
                                     dition to thousands of Enron employees losing their life savings in
                                     the company’s 401(k) pension plan, many other investors suffered
                                     losses because of the sudden collapse. Across the nation, pension
                                     funds for union members, teachers, government employees, police-
                                     men, firemen, and others lost more than $1.5 billion from invest-
                                     ments in Enron stock. State attorneys general, individual investors,
                                     and Enron employees have filed private class action lawsuits
                                     against Enron executives, Arthur Andersen, and others for security
                                     fraud. The Department of Justice and the FCC are also inves-
                                     tigating.
                                        Enron’s web ensnared our financial market. Last week and again
                                     this week, the Dow Jones index fell hundreds of points. Why?
                                     Among other reasons, doubts emerged about the trustworthiness of
                                     balance sheets for other public companies. With more than half of
                                     Americans’ households invested in the stock market today, the in-
                                     tegrity of our financial markets is critical to our nation’s economy.
                                        During his State of the Union Address, President Bush declared
                                     that ‘‘corporate America must be made more accountable to em-
                                     ployees and shareholders and held to the highest standards of con-
                                     duct.’’ I agree with the President and I hope that this hearing and
                                     our work in the committee and the Senate will help bring about
                                     that accountability.
                                        Enron Chairman Kenneth Lay was questioned about the use of
                                     off-the-book arrangements during a company e-mail chat on Sep-
                                     tember 26 of last year. He assured Enron employees that he and
                                     Enron’s Board of Directors ‘‘were convinced both by all of our inter-
                                     nal officers as well as our external auditor and counsel that these
                                     off-the-book arrangements were legal and totally appropriate.’’
                                        Mr. Lay’s accountability remains to be seen. Having said for
                                     weeks that he would testify before the Senate, of course, he abrupt-
                                     ly canceled his appearance before he did testify before the Senate.
                                     Except for his part in a carefully orchestrated media campaign, he
                                     is not talking. No one has been able to get him to answer questions
                                     that test the accuracy of his statements from last fall, just before
                                     the fall of Enron. Nor have Mr. Skilling or Mr. Fastow or several
                                     others testified. And one who might have tragically committed sui-
                                     cide.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000006   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06633   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 7 ===
                                                                                       3

                                        What we do know is that the actions of Enron’s professional advi-
                                     sors raise serious ethical questions for the legal and accounting
                                     professions. They also raise questions of professional account-
                                     ability. The actions of Enron and its advisors raise serious ques-
                                     tions about the current legal environment, where auditors and out-
                                     side counsel enjoy special legal protections passed by the Congress
                                     in the 1990’s. and we have to ask whether this legal environment
                                     serves to encourage lax corporate governance and questionable ac-
                                     counting and undisciplined legal practice.
                                        Then we had a five-to-four majority decision of the U.S. Supreme
                                     Court that gave accountants and lawyers a really big break from
                                     liability and private securities fraud actions. Chief Justice
                                     Rehnquist and Justices Scalia, Thomas, Kennedy, and O’Connor
                                     overturned what had been decades of well-settled law that allowed
                                     private fraud suits against a person, such as an auditor or attor-
                                     ney, who aids and abets the principal in accomplishing the fraud.
                                        Aiding and abetting liability is especially important in securities
                                     cases. It provides incentives for accountants and lawyers to police
                                     corporate fraud. It helps overcome the profit incentive that can oth-
                                     erwise motivate complicity in questionable conduct.
                                        Second, as the Enron experience shows all too well, securities
                                     fraud schemes are often very complex. They need experts, they
                                     need professionals to carry out these schemes. Instead of setting up
                                     huge financial incentives for these experts to assist in structuring
                                     corporate fraud, our laws should enlist the assistance of these pro-
                                     fessionals as guardians of the honesty of our corporate financial
                                     disclosures. Those who invest expect them to be honest in what
                                     they do. They should be helping stop fraud before it causes harm
                                     to the public and also before it undercuts the public confidence in
                                     the transparency and honesty of the market.
                                        The Supreme Court was not alone in chipping away legal protec-
                                     tion for investors and creating an environment in which creative
                                     accounting can morph into off-the-books maneuvering. In 1995,
                                     Congress passed the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act.
                                     President Clinton vetoed it. We overrode the veto. This version of
                                     reform contributed to the loss of professional discipline and enacted
                                     restrictions making it more difficult for victims to recover.
                                        I recall that Senator Specter and I, along with some other mem-
                                     bers of the committee, voted against the Private Securities Litiga-
                                     tion Reform Act when it was on the floor. We warned that its spe-
                                     cial legal protections might lead to future financial scandals. Well,
                                     beginning with Enron, the chickens have come home to roost.
                                        No matter whether a Member of Congress voted for or against
                                     the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act, no Member of Con-
                                     gress, Republican or Democratic, intended for it to be used to pro-
                                     mote corporate greed. We cannot legislate against greed, but we
                                     can and should do what is possible to prevent greed from pre-
                                     vailing.
                                        In fact, the accounting industry liked the special legal protections
                                     in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act so much that Ar-
                                     thur Andersen Worldwide made a trophy out of this conference re-
                                     port that they apparently have used in this. They shrunk it and
                                     encased it in plastic. Well, the law also shrunk the rights and pro-
                                     tections of American investors. I could not help but think in looking




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000007   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06633   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 8 ===
                                                                                       4

                                     at it, there is one thing that you cannot do with it. You cannot
                                     shred it.
                                        [Laughter.]
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Now, there were contributions to this disaster,
                                     they are large, they are small, from the corporate officers and di-
                                     rectors whose actions led to Enron’s failure, from the well-paid pro-
                                     fessionals who helped create and carry out the corporate ruse, the
                                     regulators who did not protect the public, from the courts, from
                                     Congress, and others. So we have to make sure it does not happen
                                     again.
                                        The worst part about this travesty would be if we do not learn
                                     from it and if we walk away. We were reminded during the savings
                                     and loan failures of the 1980’s, if you do not have discipline and
                                     professionalism and an effective legal structure and accountability,
                                     greed does run rampant. Unfortunately, business failures during a
                                     permissive era rarely happen in isolation.
                                        So Congress can do more and we should. When we forced
                                     through special exemptions for securities fraud, accountants and
                                     others made Congress a contributor to the Wild West mentality
                                     that came to be reflected in Enron’s hidden partnerships. That was
                                     not what was intended and Congress should rethink and reform
                                     our laws in the other direction, so we prevent corporate deceit, we
                                     protect investors, get confidence back in our capital markets.
                                        I will comment briefly on the relevance of the Enron bankruptcy
                                     to bankruptcy reform legislation that is now in conference between
                                     the House and the Senate. I recently received a letter from 35 law
                                     school professors regarding Section 912 of both the House-passed
                                     and Senate-passed bankruptcy reform bills. It amends the Bank-
                                     ruptcy Code to provide a safe harbor from bankruptcy court review
                                     for certain asset-backed securities. It is sort of a type of off-the-
                                     books financial transaction. Well, the experts tell me that the pro-
                                     vision would encourage more companies to recast liability so they
                                     no longer appear on balance sheets. They said that would be to the
                                     detriment of the investing public and other creditors of the busi-
                                     ness. So I have asked the Department of Justice for its views on
                                     this controversial provision in light of the Enron matter so that we
                                     can get it right before the bill comes out of conference.
                                        I am also concerned that Enron executives who made millions of
                                     dollars in sweetheart corporate deals could abuse Texas’s unlimited
                                     bankruptcy homestead exemption by shielding unjust enrichment
                                     from defrauded investors by just putting it in multi-million-dollar
                                     estates. Last week on national television, the wife of Enron’s
                                     former chairman disclosed that her husband is considering filing
                                     for bankruptcy protection. Under Texas law, there is no limit to the
                                     amount of money they could plow into a personal residence. I think
                                     that we have to enact a nationwide cap on homestead exemptions
                                     like the one that Senator Kohl and Senator Feinstein authored in
                                     the Senate-passed bankruptcy reform bill.
                                        This is on our doorsteps. Our job is to make sure there are ade-
                                     quate doses of accountability in our legal system to stop this from
                                     happening in the future.
                                        I look forward to the panel after we have heard from our distin-
                                     guished ranking Republican member, Senator Hatch.
                                        [The prepared statement of Senator Leahy follows.]




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000008   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06633   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 9 ===
                                                                                       5
                                           STATEMENT OF HON. PATRICK J. LEAHY, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF
                                                                         VERMONT
                                        On November 8, Enron announced that it had overstated earnings over the past
                                     four years by $586 million and was responsible for $3 billion in obligations that
                                     were never reported to the public. Upon these disclosures, Enron stock fell to $8.41
                                     a share. Less than a month later Enron filed for bankruptcy—the largest corporate
                                     bankruptcy ever. Enron’s sudden collapse left thousands of Enron investors holding
                                     virtually worthless stock, and most Enron employees lost out. Those who profited
                                     appear to be the senior officers and directors who cashed out while assuring others
                                     that Enron was a solid investment, as well as the professionals from accounting
                                     firms, law firms and business consulting firms, who were paid millions to advise
                                     Enron on these practices.
                                        How did this happen?
                                        It appears that Enron, with the approval and advice of its accountants, auditors
                                     and lawyers, used thousands of off-the-book entities to overstate corporate profits,
                                     understate corporate debts and inflate Enron’s stock price. Some Enron executives
                                     ran these entities, reaped millions of dollars in salary and stock options, and re-
                                     ceived conflict-of-interest waivers from Enron’s Board of Directors.
                                        With the help of these professionals, both inside and outside of Enron, the com-
                                     pany wove an elaborate web of corporate deceit. This chart shows just a few of the
                                     secret Enron entities used to hide debt, to fake profits and to inflate stocks. Being
                                     fanciful was not limited to bookkeeping. Some of this same corporate imagination
                                     was unleashed in naming these hidden Enron entities. Some were named after Star
                                     Wars films characters—Jedi, Obi-One, Kenobi and Chewco (as in Chewbacca). Some
                                     were named after birds and fish—Condor, Egret, Peregrine, Blue Heron, Osprey,
                                     Dolphin and Marlin. And some were named, perhaps the most aptly of all, after the
                                     Wild West—Rawhide, Ponderosa, Cactus, Mojave and Sundance.
                                        Despite their different names, all these Enron-related entities had one thing in
                                     common: They were never honestly disclosed to the investing public. Much about
                                     these partnerships is still secret, including who participated in them and who bene-
                                     fitted from these corporate manipulations.
                                        Enron’s web of deceit caught more than just its employees. In addition to thou-
                                     sands of Enron employees losing their life savings in the company’s 401(k) pension
                                     plan, many other investors suffered losses because of sudden collapse of Enron’s
                                     stock price. Across the nation, pension funds for union members, teachers, govern-
                                     ment employees and other workers lost more than $1.5 billion from investments in
                                     Enron stock. State attorneys general, individual investors and Enron employees
                                     have filed private class action lawsuits against Enron executives, Arthur Andersen
                                     and others for securities fraud to recover their losses. The Department of Justice
                                     and the SEC are also investigating.
                                        Enron’s web has also ensnared our financial markets. Last week and again this
                                     week, the Dow Jones index fell hundreds of points as doubts emerged about the
                                     trustworthiness of balance sheets for other public companies that may have dabbled
                                     in creative financing similar to Enron’s. With more than half of Americans’ house-
                                     holds invested in the stock market today, the integrity of our financial markets is
                                     critical to the nation’s economy.
                                        During his State of the Union Address, President Bush declared that ‘‘corporate
                                     America must be made more accountable to employees and shareholders and held
                                     to the highest standards of conduct.’’ I agree with the President and hope that this
                                     hearing and our work in this Committee and in the Senate can contribute to in-
                                     creasing accountability.
                                        Enron Chairman Kenneth Lay was questioned about the use of off-the-book ar-
                                     rangements during a company e-mail chat on September 26, 2001, and he assured
                                     Enron employees that he and Enron’s Board of Directors ‘‘were convinced both by
                                     all of our internal officers as well as our external auditor and counsel that they [the
                                     off-the-book arrangements] were legal and totally appropriate.’’
                                        Mr. Lay’s accountability remains to be seen. Having said for weeks that he would
                                     testify before the Senate, he abruptly cancelled his appearance on Monday. Except
                                     for his part in a carefully orchestrated media campaign, he is not talking. No one
                                     has been able to get him to answer questions that test the accuracy of his state-
                                     ments from last fall, just before the fall of Enron. Nor have Mr. Skilling or Mr.
                                     Fastow, or several others, yet testified. Tragically, one senior Enron executive has
                                     apparently taken his own life.
                                        What we do know is that the actions of Enron’s professional advisors raise serious
                                     ethical questions for the legal and accounting professions and questions of profes-
                                     sional accountability.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000009   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 10 ===
                                                                                       6
                                        The actions of Enron and its advisors also raise serious questions about the cur-
                                     rent legal environment—where auditors and outside counsel enjoy special legal pro-
                                     tections forced through Congress in the 1990s. Whether this legal environment
                                     serves to encourage lax corporate governance, questionable accounting and undisci-
                                     plined legal practices is among the questions we explore today.
                                        A 5 to 4 majority decision of the United States Supreme Court gave accountants
                                     and lawyers a big break from liability in private securities fraud actions in 1994.
                                     Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Scalia, Thomas, Kennedy and O’Connor over-
                                     turned decades of well-settled law that allowed private fraud suits against a person,
                                     such as an auditor or attorney, who aids and abets the principal in accomplishing
                                     the fraud.
                                        Aiding and abetting liability is especially important in securities fraud cases.
                                     First, it provides incentives for accountants and lawyers to police corporate fraud
                                     and helps overcome the profit incentive that can otherwise motivate complicity in
                                     questionable conduct. Second, as the Enron experience shows all too well, securities
                                     fraud schemes are often very complex. The assistance of experts and professionals
                                     is necessary to carry out fraud in complicated schemes. Instead of setting up huge
                                     financial incentives for these experts to assist in structuring corporate fraud, our
                                     laws must enlist the assistance of these professionals as guardians of the honesty
                                     of our corporate financial disclosures. They should be helping stop fraud before it
                                     causes harm to the public and undercuts public confidence in the transparency and
                                     honesty of our markets.
                                        The Supreme Court was not alone in chipping away at legal protection for inves-
                                     tors and creating an environment in which creative accounting can morph into off-
                                     the-books maneuvering that is destroying pensions and savings and threatens to cut
                                     the heart out of investor confidence. In 1995, Congress passed the Private Securities
                                     Litigation Reform Act—over President Clinton’s veto. This version of ‘‘reform’’ con-
                                     tributed to the loss of professional discipline and enacted restrictions making it
                                     more difficult for the victims of securities fraud to bring civil actions and recover
                                     their losses.
                                        This legislation prevents a defrauded investor from using the Racketeer-Influ-
                                     enced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) and its remedies in almost all securi-
                                     ties fraud cases. Securities fraud is the only exemption to our civil RICO laws. I
                                     recall that Senator Specter and I, along with other members of the committee, voted
                                     against the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act when it was on the floor of the
                                     Senate and warned that its special legal protections might lead to future financial
                                     scandals. Beginning with Enron, the chickens have come home to roost.
                                        In fact, the accounting industry liked the special legal protections in the Private
                                     Securities Litigation Reform Act so much that Andersen Worldwide made a trophy
                                     out of the conference report by shrinking it and encasing it in plastic. What the law
                                     did was shrink the rights and protections of American investors. Well, at least you
                                     can’t shred it.
                                        There were contributions to this disaster, large and small, from the corporate offi-
                                     cers and directors whose actions led to Enron’s failure, from the well-paid profes-
                                     sionals who helped create and carry out the complicated corporate ruse when they
                                     should have been raising concerns, from the regulators who did not protect the pub-
                                     lic and our public markets, from Congress and from the courts. Now we must con-
                                     tribute to making the Enron situation right and making sure that this does not hap-
                                     pen again. This travesty will be compounded if we do not now learn from it and
                                     try to prevent it from happening again. Unfortunately, as we were reminded again
                                     during the savings and loan failures of the 1980s, without discipline, profes-
                                     sionalism, an effective legal structure, and accountability, greed can run rampant,
                                     with devastating results. And unfortunately, business failures during a permissive
                                     era rarely happen in isolation.
                                        Congress can do more to make sure that our laws help deter corporate fraud and
                                     we should help defrauded investors to recoup their losses. In fact, by forcing through
                                     special exemptions for securities fraud, accountants and others made Congress a
                                     contributor to the Wild West mentality that came to be reflected in Enron’s hidden
                                     partnerships. The time has come for Congress to re-think and reform our laws in
                                     the other direction in order to prevent corporate deceit, to protect investors and to
                                     restore full confidence in the capital markets.
                                        I should also comment briefly on the relevance of the Enron bankruptcy to bank-
                                     ruptcy reform legislation that is now in conference between the House and Senate.
                                     I recently received a letter from 35 law school professors regarding Section 912 of
                                     both the House-passed and Senate-passed bankruptcy reform bills. This section
                                     amends the Bankruptcy Code to provide a safe harbor from bankruptcy court review
                                     for certain asset-backed securitizations—a type of complex, off-the-books financial
                                     transaction. These bankruptcy experts believe that the provision ‘‘would encourage




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000010   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 11 ===
                                                                                       7
                                     more companies to recast liabilities so that they no longer appear on balance sheets,
                                     much to the detriment of the investing public and other creditors of the business.’’
                                     I have asked the Department of Justice for its views on this controversial provision
                                     in light of the Enron matter and intend to work with the other conferees to get this
                                     matter right.
                                        I am also concerned that Enron executives who made millions of dollars in sweet-
                                     heart corporate deals could abuse Texas’s unlimited bankruptcy homestead exemp-
                                     tion by shielding any unjust enrichment from defrauded investors. Last week on na-
                                     tional televison, the wife of Enron’s former Chairman and former CEO, disclosed
                                     that her husband is considering filing for bankruptcy protection. Under Texas law
                                     there are no limits on the dollar amount that debtors may plow in their personal
                                     residences and then shield from creditors in bankruptcy. The Enron demise under-
                                     scores the need for Congress to enact a nationwide cap on homestead exemptions,
                                     such as the cap that Senator Kohl and Senator Feinstein authored in the Senate-
                                     passed bankruptcy reform bill.
                                        Accountability and transparency help our markets work as they should, in ways
                                     that benefit investors, employees, consumers and our national economy. The Enron
                                     experience has arrived on our doorstep, and our job is to make sure that there are
                                     adequate doses of accountability in our legal system to prevent such debacles in the
                                     future, and to offer a constructive remedy if there are not.
                                        I look forward to the comments and questions of the Senators participating today
                                     and to hearing from our panel of witnesses. I will introduce them after we hear from
                                     our distinguished Ranking Republican Member, Senator Hatch.

                                      STATEMENT OF HON. ORRIN G. HATCH, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
                                                      THE STATE OF UTAH
                                        Senator HATCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to first com-
                                     mend you for calling this important hearing on the lessons we can
                                     learn from the Enron collapse. I appreciate the willingness of all
                                     of our witnesses here today to testify on such short notice and I
                                     look forward to hearing all of your testimony. It is important. I
                                     would especially like to thank Washington State Attorney General
                                     Christine Gregoire for making the trip here to the other Wash-
                                     ington to talk about the States’ pension plan lawsuits. We are all
                                     concerned and feel for the many hard-working people who lost their
                                     pensions and their hard-earned savings.
                                        Mr. Chairman, we all know about the unbelievable chain of
                                     events that led so many innocent Enron investors to lose so much
                                     so very quickly. Enron’s highest trading point was $90. Today, it
                                     is worth about 26 cents. Injured parties include pension funds that
                                     lost hundreds of millions of dollars, Enron employees, who lost vir-
                                     tually the entire value of their 401(k) plans, and individual inves-
                                     tors, both large and small, who have suffered losses that may in-
                                     clude many people’s life savings.
                                        These are not just personal tragedies. This is a failure of the
                                     transparent system meant to protect investors in our securities
                                     market, and, of course, it is a national shame. I am glad that we
                                     are here today to learn about the lawsuits being filed against
                                     Enron, the business and ethical conflicts that got us where we are
                                     today, and suggested reforms to make the system work better in
                                     the future. No investor should ever lose confidence in our securities
                                     market and no American should ever have to fear for the safety of
                                     his or her retirement savings programs.
                                        As several witnesses will testify here today, in 1995, Congress
                                     overwhelmingly passed the bipartisan Private Securities Litigation
                                     Reform Act, overriding a Presidential veto. This law was meant to
                                     reform securities class action practices and to abate the epidemic
                                     of so-called ‘‘strike suits’’ that were plaguing American businesses,




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000011   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 12 ===
                                                                                       8

                                     particularly in the nascent high-tech industry. For instance, I have
                                     been led to believe by one 1995 estimate that a majority of Silicon
                                     Valley firms have been sued by plaintiffs’ lawyers in class action
                                     lawsuits, and one in every eight companies on the New York Stock
                                     Exchange was being sued for securities fraud every 5 years. Wheth-
                                     er that is right or wrong, we will have to try and determine that.
                                        But that law was meant to reform securities class action prac-
                                     tices and to abate the epidemic of so-called strike suits that were
                                     plaguing American businesses, particularly in the high-tech indus-
                                     try. Now, in these suits, nominal shareholders and/or professional
                                     plaintiffs and their lawyers were holding American corporations
                                     hostage with causes of action based on non-performance of publicly
                                     traded stock. Every time the stock price would go down or an earn-
                                     ings report was off, lawyers would line up on the courthouse steps
                                     to allege securities fraud on the part of the corporation or its advi-
                                     sors. Ultimately, these class actions were not only damaging to the
                                     businesses that would get tied up in meritless suits, but also to
                                     American consumers who were losing the benefits of innovations
                                     that had to be put on hold while managers and directors were oth-
                                     erwise engaged in directing against frivolous lawsuits or litigation.
                                        The provision of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act
                                     that is most squarely under the jurisdiction of the Judiciary Com-
                                     mittee is the exemption for securities fraud under the civil provi-
                                     sions of the Racketeer and Corrupt Organizations Act, or RICO. In
                                     1995, the Securities and Exchange Commission vigorously sup-
                                     ported the inclusion of this provision in the PSLRA and the former
                                     chairman, President Clinton’s appointee, Arthur Levitt, was one of
                                     its most vocal proponents. Chairman Levitt testified before Con-
                                     gress that, ‘‘because securities laws generally provide adequate
                                     remedies for those injured by securities fraud, it is both unneces-
                                     sary and unfair to expose defendants in securities cases to the
                                     threat of treble damages and other extraordinary remedies pro-
                                     vided by RICO.’’
                                        It is important to note, especially in light of the ongoing criminal
                                     investigation of Enron, that this provision does not exempt any per-
                                     son from being criminally convicted under the RICO statute in con-
                                     nection with securities fraud.
                                        Legislation has recently been introduced in the House and may
                                     also be introduced here in the Senate that would remove the civil
                                     RICO exemption for securities fraud. It is my hope that we will
                                     give such legislation measured and careful consideration while
                                     studying the lessons learned from Enron. The PSLRA was designed
                                     to weed out frivolous lawsuits, not to prevent legitimate claims,
                                     like the ones represented here today, from being prosecuted. I look
                                     forward to hearing testimony from the witnesses on this matter.
                                        I also look forward to hearing from the witnesses about the eth-
                                     ical questions that have been raised regarding the conduct of the
                                     attorneys who set up the Enron deals and the analysts rating
                                     Enron stock. In particular, I would like to know where the lawyers
                                     were when Andersen and Enron started shredding documents. Why
                                     would any attorney allow or even encourage a client to commit pos-
                                     sible obstruction of justice in the face of civil lawsuits and criminal
                                     investigations? Now, maybe it was not. I do not know. We will have
                                     to hear, and we have to keep an open mind on these matters to




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000012   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 13 ===
                                                                                       9

                                     make sure that we do not just jump all over people because of ap-
                                     pearance irregularities. I am not just talking about the law firms
                                     involved, however, but also the in-house counsels who are held to
                                     the same ethical standards as every other member of the bar.
                                        The final aspect of the Enron debate that I would like to address
                                     here today involves the proper and appropriate, and I should add
                                     constitutional, oversight role of Congress. Of course, I am referring
                                     to the General Accounting Office’s threatened lawsuit against Vice
                                     President Cheney. As I have often said elsewhere, I strongly be-
                                     lieve that the GAO’s original efforts to impose disclosure of White
                                     House policy discussions and meetings raise serious constitutional
                                     and privacy concerns. From a policy standpoint, I believe that the
                                     powers asserted by the GAO in initially seeking specific details of
                                     the meetings attended by the Vice President deserve our attention.
                                        From a constitutional perspective, I strongly feel that the GAO’s
                                     interpretation of its investigative powers raises substantial separa-
                                     tion of powers questions. I have looked carefully at the legal argu-
                                     ments on both sides of this issue and have real concerns regarding
                                     the GAO’s novel case and look forward to hearing whether the ex-
                                     ercise of such powers by the GAO can be reconciled with the basic
                                     constitutional principles that underlie the doctrine of separation of
                                     powers.
                                        I would like to just take a minute to comment on the asset-
                                     backed securitization provisions in the bankruptcy bill. Let me say,
                                     when I first heard of the concerns raised in light of the Enron de-
                                     bacle, I did want to examine the policy implications of the provision
                                     in the bankruptcy reform bill, and after reviewing it, I must say
                                     that the provision would, to some extent, act counter to the goal
                                     of the bankrupt corporation’s rehabilitation in bankruptcy.
                                        But it is important to recognize that in this instance, the enrich-
                                     ment of the corporate debtor’s estate to pay off creditors may not
                                     be the greater good. For example, the proceeds of an asset-backed
                                     securitization could allow sufficient liquidity to help a company
                                     avoid bankruptcy altogether. It would provide for greater certainty
                                     in the financial markets, as well. At the very least, such
                                     securitization could well provide essential funds to help the cor-
                                     porate debtor to stave off an accelerated bankruptcy filing, a much
                                     preferred outcome for both employees and shareholders.
                                        Also, I should caution that the reforms of Section 912 should be
                                     viewed in perspective. Most companies that engage in
                                     securitization transactions do not end up in bankruptcy, nor do
                                     they engage in the alleged fraudulent acts we have been reading
                                     about with regard to Enron’s dealings, assuming the accounts are
                                     true, and I do not assume that. I just have noticed them.
                                        Moreover, Section 912, which, as my colleagues may know, is
                                     limited to securitization transactions and would not encourage the
                                     kinds of abuses that occurred in Enron. Those problems reportedly
                                     were caused by Enron’s manipulative use of special purpose enti-
                                     ties capitalized by Enron stock in order to, A) sell assets at inflated
                                     profits, enabling Enron to recognize the inflated profit for financial
                                     statement purposes and, B) sell assets that would be falling in
                                     value in order to book the sale proceeds and avoid having to later
                                     write down asset value. These are accounting, not bankruptcy law,
                                     failures.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000013   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 14 ===
                                                                                      10

                                        Finally, I should also note, and I would be happy to listen to any
                                     of our witnesses respond to my comments, that under our Federal
                                     securities laws, a company originating a securitization transaction
                                     is prohibited from capitalizing the special purpose vehicle, or SPV,
                                     a trust that is set up to enable the transaction with company stock,
                                     or pension funds.
                                        Contrary to some of the accusations of observers, most, if not all
                                     of whom have been part of the vocal minority of opponents to
                                     meaningful bankruptcy reform, I do not believe that Section 912 of
                                     the reform legislation, which has passed both houses of Congress,
                                     I might add, overwhelmingly, could cause Enron-style abuses.
                                        I would also like to comment on the concerns raised with respect
                                     to the now-famous homestead issue in the bankruptcy reform bill.
                                     Mr. Raynor will make a point in his testimony about the home-
                                     stead exemptions in place in both Texas and Florida under those
                                     States’ constitutions. I should also like to note and thank Senator
                                     Kohl and others who have been true and genuine leaders on ad-
                                     dressing this issue in the bankruptcy reform legislation. Senator
                                     Kohl has not tried to use this, as some others have, to derail need-
                                     ed reforms and has been very open to compromise or compromises
                                     that address the underlying problem.
                                        I agree that it is an injustice that rich debtors conceal their as-
                                     sets from creditors in large homesteads in these and a few other
                                     States. I do not think anyone would disagree with that, especially
                                     now. However, it is important to know the real fact that either of
                                     the House and Senate bills, which are now in conference, would ad-
                                     dress the homestead issue quite effectively and would squarely ad-
                                     dress Mr. Raynor’s concerns.
                                        As we know, the Senate bill contains a flat $125,000 cap on the
                                     homestead exemption any debtor can claim when filing for Chapter
                                     7 bankruptcy. The House bill contains a $100,000 cap on the home-
                                     stead exemption a debtor may claim when filing for Chapter 7
                                     bankruptcy on property acquired in the 2-years preceding the fil-
                                     ing. The House bill also contains an additional 7-year look-back for
                                     fraud or abuse. In any case where such fraud or abuse is found,
                                     the homestead exemption would not apply. Thus, a fraudulently
                                     rich Enron executive cannot shield such assets unless he or she has
                                     been really planning for both the debacle and to use bankruptcy for
                                     more than 7 years. That, I do not think, has ever been alleged by
                                     anyone and would be pretty remarkable.
                                        I should also say that the House language is the bipartisan com-
                                     promise reached during last year’s conference report, which passed
                                     overwhelmingly last year with veto-proof margins. I think the goal
                                     of the reformers, particularly with respect to the homestead cap, is
                                     to prevent forum shopping and abuse, and both the House and Sen-
                                     ate provisions would do just that.
                                        Additionally, the means test reforms in the bill, these have a pro-
                                     found effect on the availability of the homestead exemption in
                                     every State. Under the means test, above-average-income debtors
                                     will most likely be placed in Chapter 13, where they will have to
                                     come up with a payment plan, not liquidate. In fact, if last year’s
                                     compromise had been enacted into law and not vetoed by President
                                     Clinton, we would not be sitting here today worrying about wheth-
                                     er or not Enron executives are hiding assets in their homes as we




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000014   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 15 ===
                                                                                      11

                                     speak. I think this calls for us to complete our work on the bank-
                                     ruptcy reform conference committee and get the bill to President
                                     Bush for his signature. That way, we will not have to talk again
                                     with the 20/20 hindsight when and if the next Enron occurs, if that
                                     is the case.
                                        Again, I want to thank the chairman for calling this hearing. I
                                     look forward to hearing the witnesses and I appreciate the efforts
                                     that you have all put forth in being here today. Thank you, Mr.
                                     Chairman.
                                        [The prepared statement of Senator Hatch follows.]
                                       STATEMENT OF HON. ORRIN G. HATCH, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF UTAH
                                        I want to first commend you for calling this important hearing on the lessons we
                                     can learn from the Enron collapse. I appreciate the willingness of all the witnesses
                                     to testify on such short notice and I look forward to hearing all of your testimony.
                                     I would especially like to thank Washington State Attorney General Gregoire [Greg-
                                     waar] for making the trip here to the other Washington to talk about the States’
                                     pension plan lawsuits. We are all concerned and feel for the many hard-working
                                     people who lost their pensions and hard-earned savings.
                                        Mr. Chairman, we all know about the unbelievable chain of events that led so
                                     many innocent Enron investors to lose so much so very quickly. Enron’s highest
                                     trading point was $90; today, it is worth about 26 cents. Injured parties include pen-
                                     sion funds that lost hundreds of millions of dollars, Enron employees who lost vir-
                                     tually the entire value of their 401Ks, and individual investors, both large and
                                     small, who have suffered losses that may include many peoples’ life savings. These
                                     are not just personal tragedies; this failure of the ‘‘transparent system’’ meant to
                                     protect investors in our securities market is a national shame. I am glad we are
                                     here today to learn about the lawsuits being filed against Enron, the business and
                                     ethical conflicts that got us where we are today and suggested reforms to make the
                                     system work better in the future. No investor should ever lose confidence in our se-
                                     curities market, and no American should ever have to fear for the safety of his or
                                     her retirement savings.
                                        As several witnesses will testify here today, in 1995 Congress overwhelmingly
                                     passed the bi-partisan ‘‘Private Securities Litigation Reform Act,’’overriding a presi-
                                     dential veto. This law was meant to reform securities class action practices and to
                                     abate the epidemic of so-called ‘‘strike suits’’ that were plaguing American busi-
                                     nesses, particularly in the nascent high-tech industry. In these suits, nominal share-
                                     holders and/or ‘‘professional plaintiffs’’ and their lawyers were holding American cor-
                                     porations hostage with causes of action based on the non-performance of publically
                                     traded stock. Every time a stock price would go down or an earnings report was off,
                                     lawyers would line up on the court house steps to allege securities fraud on the part
                                     of the corporation or its advisors. Ultimately, these class actions were not only dam-
                                     aging to the businesses that would get tied up in meritless suits, but also to Amer-
                                     ican consumers who were losing the benefits of innovations that had to be put on
                                     hold while managers and directors were otherwise engaged in defending against
                                     frivolous litigation.
                                        The provision of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act that is most square-
                                     ly under the jurisdiction of the Judiciary Committee is the exemption for securities
                                     fraud under the civil provisions of the Racketeer and Corrupt Organizations Act
                                     (RICO). In 1995, The Securities and Exchange Commission vigorously supported the
                                     inclusion of this provision in the PSLRA, and the former Chairman, President Clin-
                                     ton’s appointee, Arthur Levitt, was one of its most vocal proponents. Chairman
                                     Levitt testified before Congress that: ‘‘because securities laws generally provide ade-
                                     quate remedies for those injured by securities fraud, it is both unnecessary and un-
                                     fair to expose defendants in securities cases to the threat of treble damages and
                                     other extraordinary remedies provided by RICO.’’ It is important to note, especially
                                     in light of the ongoing criminal investigation of Enron, that this provision does not
                                     exempt any person from being criminally convicted under the RICO statute in con-
                                     nection with securities fraud.
                                        Legislation has recently been introduced in the House, and may also be consid-
                                     ered here in the Senate, that would remove the civil RICO exemption for securities
                                     fraud. It is my hope that we will give such legislation measured and careful consid-
                                     eration while studying the lessons learned from Enron. The PSLRA was designed
                                     to weed out frivolous law suits, not to prevent legitimate claims like the ones rep-




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000015   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 16 ===
                                                                                      12
                                     resented here today from being prosecuted. I look forward to hearing testimony from
                                     the witnesses on this matter.
                                        I also look forward to hearing from the witnesses about the ethical questions that
                                     have been raised regarding the conduct of the attorneys who set up the Enron deals
                                     and the analysts rating Enron stock. In particular I would like to know where the
                                     lawyers were when Anderson and Enron started shredding documents? Why would
                                     any attorney allow, or even encourage, a client to commit possible obstruction of jus-
                                     tice in the face of civil law suits and criminal investigations? I am not just talking
                                     about the law firms involved, but also the in-house counsels who are held to the
                                     same ethical standards as every other member of the bar.
                                        The final aspect of the Enron debate that I’d like to address here today involves
                                     the proper and appropriate - and I should add Constitutional - oversight role of Con-
                                     gress. Of course, I am referring to the General Accounting Office’s threatened law-
                                     suit against Vice President Cheney. As I’ve said elsewhere, I strongly believe that
                                     the GAO’s original efforts to impose disclosure of White House policy discussions
                                     and meetings raise serious constitutional and policy concerns. From a policy stand-
                                     point, I believe that the powers asserted by the GAO in initially seeking specific de-
                                     tails of the meetings attended by the Vice President deserve our attention.
                                        From a constitutional perspective, I strongly feel that the GAO’s interpretation of
                                     its investigative powers raises substantial separation of powers questions. I have
                                     looked carefully at the legal arguments on both sides of this issue and have real
                                     concerns regarding the GAO’s novel case and look forward to hearing whether the
                                     exercise of such powers by the GAO can be reconciled with the basic constitutional
                                     principles that underlie the doctrine of separation of powers.
                                        Again, I thank the Chairman for calling this hearing and I look forward to hear-
                                     ing from the witnesses.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. I thank you very much for being here, but I
                                     would comment on two things. One, this came as a result of our
                                     last effort on legislation and we wanted to make sure we do not
                                     make that mistake again because nobody in the Congress, as I
                                     said, Republican or Democratic, intended that. I do not want to see,
                                     whether it is bankruptcy legislation or anything else, being in
                                     somebody’s door stopper or paperweight saying, away we go. You
                                     cannot legislate against greed, but you can stop greed from suc-
                                     ceeding.
                                        Christine Gregoire is the Attorney General for Washington State.
                                     She is here today to tell us about Washington State’s pending secu-
                                     rities fraud litigation, the one that recovered more than $100 mil-
                                     lion from lost Enron investments in the State’s pension fund. Gen-
                                     eral Gregoire is Past President of the National Association of Attor-
                                     neys General. She is a lead negotiator for the States in the historic
                                     1998 class action tobacco litigation.
                                        Bruce Raynor is the President of the Union of Needletrades, In-
                                     dustrial, and Textile Employees. He is here to testify on behalf of
                                     the UNITE Amalgamated Bank and the AFL–CIO. UNITE and its
                                     members suffered a double-whammy from Enron’s fall since the
                                     union pension fund lost money and Amalgamated Bank, which
                                     UNITE owns, lost $10 million, I believe it is, in Enron investments.
                                     UNITE is engaged in private securities litigation against Enron ex-
                                     ecutives and Arthur Andersen to recoup its losses.
                                        Steve Schatz is a partner with Wilson, Sonsini, Goodrich and
                                     Rosati in Palo Alto, California. He will be testifying today. He is
                                     the Past President of the Association of Business Trial Lawyers of
                                     Northern California. He has been a lead lawyer in more than 60
                                     securities class actions suits. He will discuss securities litigation in
                                     light of the Enron debacle and the benefits of the Private Securities
                                     Litigation Reform Act.
                                        Professor Nelson Lund of George Mason University Law School
                                     is also joining us today. Professor Lund has held positions in the




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000016   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 17 ===
                                                                                       13

                                     Department of Justice, the Office of the Solicitor General, and the
                                     Office of Legal Counsel. Professor Lund will testify about constitu-
                                     tional issues and the lessons that will be learned from Enron’s fall.
                                        Professor Susan Koniak of Boston University School of Law, a
                                     leading expert in legal ethics and professional responsibility and
                                     securities law, will testify about the ethical issues raised by the
                                     roles of inside and outside advisors on Enron’s finances. Professor
                                     Koniak is the co-author on the law on ethics on lawyering—how
                                     lawyers should act, the definitive treatise on the scope of an attor-
                                     ney’s professional responsibilities to the public and legal profession.
                                     It is actually a book that more and more law firms are requiring
                                     their students to read and then maybe to keep on their desk.
                                        General Gregoire, welcome, and we will start with you.
                                           STATEMENT OF HON. CHRISTINE O. GREGOIRE, ATTORNEY
                                           GENERAL, STATE OF WASHINGTON, OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON
                                        General GREGOIRE. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members
                                     of the committee. Thank you for the opportunity to be here today
                                     and speak with you about this important and troubling issue. As
                                     Washington State Attorney General, I am working on several
                                     fronts to sort out the impacts on millions of our State residents
                                     from the secretive, questionable, and potentially illegal business
                                     practices of Enron.
                                        In Washington, we feel like Enron has been the gathering of the
                                     perfect storm. First, they gouged our consumers and ratepayers
                                     with highly questionable power prices last year, and now, sadly,
                                     they have defrauded our investors and others across the nation.
                                        Enron first came on our radar screen in June 2000, when the
                                     Western States began to experience a serious energy crisis. About
                                     1 year ago, I joined the Attorneys General of California and Oregon
                                     in an investigation of whether the energy market was being manip-
                                     ulated. The price spikes, unplanned maintenance outages, trans-
                                     mission capacity restraints certainly were peculiar and warranted
                                     a closer look.
                                        Over a year later, I wish I could tell you the answer. While the
                                     companies, including Enron, keep insisting to you that they have
                                     nothing to hide, in fact, they have refused consistently to turn over
                                     documents in document production necessary for us to determine
                                     once and for all what role they played in the energy pricing atmos-
                                     phere. I can tell you that the price of some unregulated long-term
                                     energy contracts in the West dropped as much as 30 percent when
                                     Enron declared bankruptcy in December. Now, that may be just a
                                     coincidence, but until Enron begins cooperating with our investiga-
                                     tion, we simply will not know. So I applaud the efforts of Senator
                                     Cantwell and Senator Wyden to push for a 206 Federal investiga-
                                     tion by FERC.
                                        Currently, I am also involved in a lawsuit against Enron on be-
                                     half of our State pension fund. At least 31 public pension funds
                                     across the Nation have lost an estimated $1.5 billion on their
                                     Enron investments. These are losses to our funds for the retire-
                                     ment obligations made to millions of police officers, fire fighters,
                                     teachers, and other public servants around the nation. I have
                                     joined attorneys general from Ohio and Georgia in seeking lead
                                     plaintiff status in the class action lawsuits filed on behalf of inves-




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003    Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000017   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 18 ===
                                                                                      14

                                     tors against Enron, its executives, and Arthur Andersen. There are
                                     1.3 million employees and retirees covered by our three systems.
                                        Our suit contends that Enron and others violated the Securities
                                     and Exchange Act by improper accounting, disclosure of false and
                                     misleading information, and some outrageous examples of insider
                                     trading. We have alleged that Enron used offshore tax havens to
                                     hide its debt burden from investors and that it misstated its finan-
                                     cial position and investors’ equity in the company repeatedly.
                                        As a State Attorney General, I warned consumers about avoiding
                                     shady get-rich-quick schemes and I urged them to check a company
                                     out carefully before handing over their money. In Enron’s case, in-
                                     vestors followed the rules. They listened to Wall Street. They relied
                                     on the audits. They relied on published financial reports. They as-
                                     sumed there was adequate regulatory oversight by the Federal
                                     Government. They assumed that the seventh largest company in
                                     America was playing by the rules, and in the end, they found them-
                                     selves ripped off just like the naive person who lost money in a pyr-
                                     amid scheme. Now investors find themselves having to sue, with a
                                     real question whether they will be able to recoup their losses, little
                                     or no accountability by the accountants, and an insurance policy
                                     likely to be denied because of fraud by the directors.
                                        Enron’s ability to operate in secrecy with soft or limited regu-
                                     latory overview and with apparently no independent audit over-
                                     sight are the common factors behind our lawsuit and the energy
                                     price manipulation probe.
                                        I know Congress is discussing a number of lessons learned from
                                     the implosion of Enron and what we can do to avoid future prob-
                                     lems. I have just a few thoughts.
                                        First, we must see that SEC has the quality staff and the nec-
                                     essary resources to investigate and take enforcement action. But
                                     before we try to rely on government and government regulation for
                                     the solution, it seems that first we should focus on what is a ter-
                                     ribly flawed function that is going on. It appears that the account-
                                     ants for Enron, and I fear for many other companies, have put
                                     their allegiance to money over their ultimate allegiance owed to the
                                     creditors, the stockholders, and the investing public. It is time to
                                     look at other ways to hold accounting firms more accountable.
                                        As we have learned in the Enron case, document retention rules
                                     obviously need more scrutiny. Clearly, we need to consider prohib-
                                     iting accounting firms from collecting consulting fees from the com-
                                     panies they audit. I would also like to suggest recent amendments
                                     to the securities laws be reviewed to ensure responsible parties,
                                     such as auditors and others, are not improperly shielded from li-
                                     ability. In particular, I think a review of the statute of limitations,
                                     stay of discovery, denial of aiding and abetting liability, and pro-
                                     portionate liability all are in order.
                                        Finally, Senator Leahy and members of the committee, I would
                                     suggest that the fundamental problem here has to do with simple
                                     corporate culture. It is a problem, I am afraid, as you suggest, that
                                     is far more pervasive than Enron and not something about which
                                     we can legislate.
                                        As Attorney General, when we take consumer protection or anti-
                                     trust actions, we find that those companies who are defendants
                                     have discarded their business ethics and values and replaced them




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000018   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 19 ===
                                                                                      15

                                     with a goal of making money at whatever cost. The new economy
                                     may demand new ways to do business, but values from the old
                                     economy still are vital. Directors have a fiduciary responsibility to
                                     investors. Auditors have a responsibility for independent audits
                                     that the public can trust, and corporate executives should put in-
                                     vestors before their hunger for profits and stock options.
                                       Again, thank you, Senator Leahy and members of the committee,
                                     for the opportunity to testify before you today.
                                       Chairman LEAHY. Thank you, General.
                                       [The prepared statement of Ms. Gregoire follows.]
                                      STATEMENT OF HON. CHRISTINE O. GREGOIRE, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF WASHINGTON
                                                                       STATE
                                        Good morning. Thank you Senator Leahy and members of the committee for the
                                     opportunity to testify here today and your work on this important and troubling
                                     issue.
                                        As Washington’s Attorney General I am working on several fronts to sort out the
                                     impacts on millions of state residents from the secretive, questionable, and poten-
                                     tially illegal business practices of Enron. Clearly it is a corporation with a troubled
                                     culture that cared little for its customers, employees and investors, and now we all
                                     are left to try and pick up the pieces and see what can be done to make sure this
                                     never happens again.
                                        In Washington we feel like Enron has been the gathering of the perfect storm.
                                     First they gouged our consumers and ratepayers with highly questionable power
                                     prices last summer, and now, sadly, they have defrauded our investors and others
                                     across the nation.
                                        Enron first came on our radar screen in June 2000, when the Western States
                                     began to experience a serious energy crisis. About one year ago I joined the attor-
                                     neys general of California and Oregon in an investigation of whether the energy
                                     market was being manipulated.
                                        The price spikes, unplanned maintenance outages and transmission capacity re-
                                     straints certainly were peculiar and warranted a closer look.
                                        Wholesale market rates for a megawatt-hour of electricity skyrocketed from $30
                                     to $300 and even as high as $3,000. Was that the result of natural market forces,
                                     or was there manipulation?
                                        Over a year later, I wish I could tell you the answer. But while the companies,
                                     including Enron, keep insisting to you that they have nothing to hide, in fact they
                                     have refused to turn over documents necessary for us to determine once and for all
                                     what role they played in energy pricing.
                                        I can tell you that the price of some unregulated long-term energy contracts in
                                     the West dropped by as much as 30 percent when Enron declared bankruptcy in
                                     December. It may be just a coincidence, but until Enron begins cooperating with in-
                                     vestigators, we won’t know.
                                        So I applaud the efforts of Senators Cantwell and Wyden to push for a federal
                                     investigation.
                                        Currently I am also involved in a lawsuit against Enron on behalf of our state
                                     pension fund. At least 31 public pension funds across the nation have lost an esti-
                                     mated $1.5 billion on Enron investments. These are losses to our funds for the re-
                                     tirement obligations made to millions of police officers, firefighters, teachers and
                                     other public servants around this nation.
                                        I have joined attorneys general from Ohio and Georgia in seeking lead plaintiff
                                     status in the class action lawsuits filed on behalf of investors against Enron, its ex-
                                     ecutives and Arthur Andersen. There are 1.3 million employees and retirees covered
                                     by our three systems.
                                        Our suit contends Enron and others violated the Securities and Exchange Act by
                                     improper accounting, disclosure of false and misleading information, and some out-
                                     rageous examples of insider trading.
                                        We have alleged that Enron used off-shore tax havens to hide its debt burden
                                     from investors and that it misstated its financial position and investors’ equity in
                                     the company repeatedly.
                                        As a state Attorney General, I warn consumers about avoiding shady get-rich-
                                     quick schemes and I urge them to check a company out carefully before handing
                                     over money.
                                        In Enron’s case, investors followed the rules. They listened to Wall Street. They
                                     relied on audits and published financial reports. They assumed there was adequate




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000019   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 20 ===
                                                                                      16
                                     government regulatory oversight. And they assumed the seventh largest company
                                     in America was playing by the rules. In the end they found themselves ripped off
                                     just like the naı̈ve person who lost money in a pyramid scheme.
                                        Now investors find themselves having to sue with questionable financial restitu-
                                     tion, little or no accountability by the accountants, and an insurance policy likely
                                     to be denied because of fraud by the directors.
                                        Enron’s ability to operate in secrecy, with soft or limited regulatory review, and
                                     with apparently no independent audit oversight are the common factors behind our
                                     lawsuit and the energy price manipulation probe.
                                        I know Congress is discussing a number of lessons learned from the implosion of
                                     Enron and what we can do to avoid future problems. I have a few thoughts.
                                        First, the SEC must have quality staff and necessary resources to investigate and
                                     take enforcement action.
                                        But before we try to rely on government and government regulation for the solu-
                                     tion, it seems we first should focus on the terribly flawed audit function.
                                        It appears the accountants for Enron, and I fear many other companies, have put
                                     their allegiance to money over their ultimate allegiance owed to creditors, stock-
                                     holders and the investing public. The auditing role is not a business partner but
                                     an independent force in the market place that lets investors make decisions based
                                     on accurate financial information.
                                        The United States Supreme Court recognized this in a 1984 opinion in which it
                                     referred to the role of the accountant. ″This ’public watchdog’ function demands that
                                     the accountant maintain total independence from the client at all times and re-
                                     quires complete fidelity to the public trust.″
                                        Something obviously went dreadfully wrong with this independent role with a
                                     duty to the public and I think we need to hold the accounting industry accountable.
                                        Approximately 67 percent of the class action litigation against publicly-traded
                                     companies today allege accounting fraud as a basis of liability.
                                        As Attorney General in case after case of Medicaid Fraud, we file against pro-
                                     viders who claim they have simply followed accounting schemes approved by their
                                     accountants.
                                        The problem is, when the providers are found guilty of fraud, the accountants
                                     walk away. I don’t think it is too strong to suggest that in many cases, the account-
                                     ing firms are facilitating the commission of a white collar crime, but they aren’t held
                                     accountable.
                                        For that reason I support the discussions I have heard to provide more account-
                                     ability by accounting firms, and to end the peer review process which has resulted
                                     in negligible censure or discipline.
                                        And as an elected Attorney General, who is not beholden to my state agency cli-
                                     ents and can give them independent legal advice, I strongly support proposals to
                                     prohibit accounting firms from collecting consulting fees from clients they are audit-
                                     ing.
                                        It is time to look at other ways to hold accounting firms more accountable. I don’t
                                     have specific answers today, but I think there are some fertile areas to look at -
                                     particularly those areas where the industry has built up a shield from account-
                                     ability.
                                        As we have learned in the Enron case, document retention rules obviously need
                                     more scrutiny.
                                        I would also suggest recent amendments to the Securities laws be reviewed to en-
                                     sure responsible parties, such as auditors and others, are not improperly shielded
                                     from liability. In particular, I think a review of the statute of limitations and pro-
                                     portionate liability are in order.
                                        Finally, Senator Leahy and members of the committee, I would suggest the real
                                     problem here has to do with corporate culture. It is a problem, I am afraid, that
                                     is far more pervasive than Enron and is not something you legislate.
                                        As Attorney General, whenever we take Consumer Protection or Antitrust actions
                                     we find the company has discarded its business ethics and values and replaced them
                                     with a goal of making money whatever the cost.
                                        The new economy may demand new ways to do business. But values from the old
                                     economy still are vital. Directors have a fiduciary responsibility to investors. Audi-
                                     tors have a responsibility for independent audits that the public can trust. And cor-
                                     porate executives should put investors before their hunger for profits and stock op-
                                     tions.
                                        Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
                                           Chairman LEAHY. Mr. Raynor?




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000020   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 21 ===
                                                                                      17
                                     STATEMENT OF BRUCE RAYNOR, PRESIDENT, UNION OF
                                      NEEDLETRADES, INDUSTRIAL, AND TEXTILE EMPLOYEES,
                                      AFL–CIO, NEW YORK, NEW YORK
                                       Mr. RAYNOR. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the oppor-
                                     tunity to testify before this distinguished committee that includes
                                     my Senator, the Senator from New York, Senator Schumer.
                                       I am the President of UNITE, which is the 250,000-member
                                     union of garment, laundry, and textile workers. We also own the
                                     Amalgamated Bank of New York, which is a bank that is the only
                                     labor-owned bank in America that invests the pension funds, some
                                     $6 billion of pension fund money and custodians for $23 billion, of
                                     workers’ pensions. That is the retirement of hospital workers and
                                     teachers and janitors and textile workers and garment workers.
                                     The workers whose money we invest do not earn enough to save
                                     very much. Their entire future depends upon their pensions and we
                                     are outraged by what has happened in the Enron situation that
                                     has stolen their money and we implore you and ask you to help us
                                     do something about it.
                                       This is not the first time in my years as a labor union organizer
                                     that I have seen pension issues such as this. Unfortunately, it is
                                     not the first time. Fifteen years ago, we sued Cannon Mills in
                                     North Carolina when the owner of that company took the assets of
                                     the pension fund to make a corporate transaction and left those
                                     workers with $40-a-month pensions after working 35 years in a
                                     textile mill in North Carolina, which today they are drawing and
                                     cannot possibly live on.
                                       The Enron case, in our opinion, represents not simply a single
                                     horrible example of abuse but something that is systemic. Kenny
                                     Lay, who has become a national figure in our society these days—
                                     some of his close personal friends call him ‘‘Kenny Boy’’—Kenny
                                     Lay said in 1997 that Enron intends to be the people’s cops—I am
                                     quoting—‘‘to blow the whistle on monopolies and to challenge legis-
                                     lators and regulators to get the job done, done right and done now.’’
                                     Kenny Lay was not the people’s cop. Kenny Lay was the people’s
                                     crook.
                                       The fact is that I wish Enron was an isolated example. We have
                                     seen over the years the rise in accounting fraud, 400 instances of
                                     corporate accounting fraud that has cost retirees—this is not inves-
                                     tors’ pension fund money, this is the pension fund money of retired
                                     workers who work hard for a living—$31 billion in accounting
                                     fraud.
                                       Now, we have got Harvey Pitt, the Chairman of the SEC, a
                                     former Arthur Andersen lawyer, gives us a great deal of confidence
                                     that someone is watching what is going on here. And then we have
                                     the prospect that the administration has nominated two Big Five
                                     accounting representatives to round out the majority of the SEC.
                                     We implore the Senate and the committee to not let that happen.
                                     The American people, retired workers, need an SEC that will en-
                                     force the law and will not allow these corporate criminals to steal
                                     people’s money, particularly workers in pension funds.
                                       Institutional investors are particularly vulnerable to accounting
                                     fraud because we invest our money largely in index funds. When
                                     you are a large institutional investor, it is the least expensive and
                                     safest way to invest money. We rely upon the market forces, which




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000021   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 22 ===
                                                                                      18

                                     rely upon accurate information certified by auditors that the mar-
                                     ket can analyze and price securities at. Our pension funds, as most
                                     big public pension funds and all the union funds, invest in index
                                     funds. Index funds are the most vulnerable to accounting fraud and
                                     lack of information and something must be done about that.
                                        Our bank and our pension funds have been active institutional
                                     investors, trying to regulate corporate governance. We file resolu-
                                     tions aimed at corporations, and one of the practices that has be-
                                     come rampant is the ignoring of majority shareholder votes. Great
                                     Lakes Chemical has had five majority shareholder votes and ig-
                                     nored every single one of them. Management has a majority of the
                                     shareholders vote against a certain policy or for one and they
                                     choose to ignore it. Can you imagine what would happen in our
                                     country if a majority voted for a candidate for the U.S. Senate and
                                     that person was not put in office? It is absolutely amazing to me.
                                        The reform legislation a few years ago that Congress passed ac-
                                     complished some good things. The reform legislation took lawyers
                                     away from controlling securities litigation and gave it to the plain-
                                     tiffs, to the pension funds, to the retired workers who deserve to
                                     control it. But it also provided protections for executives, provided
                                     protections for companies that need to be changed.
                                        One of the items in that so-called reform legislation that needs
                                     to be looked at very carefully is the standard we use. The standard
                                     is intentionality. That is like making public prosecutors of our liti-
                                     gation. We cannot possibly be charged with the responsibility to
                                     uncover evidence to find out that someone intentionally defrauded
                                     us. Recklessness should be a standard. If you are reckless with re-
                                     tirees’ money, then that ought to make you liable.
                                        Retirees also should be able to collect from any pocket they can
                                     find. There is joint and several liability that was part of that law
                                     that needs to be looked at very, very carefully. When someone de-
                                     frauds retired workers who work hard all their lives, they ought to
                                     be able to go to any pocket that they can to get their money back,
                                     or at least a portion of their money back.
                                        And then there needs to be some effective regulation of the ac-
                                     counting industry, and then we also have to stop the Enron-style
                                     so-called independent directors. Those are directors that depend
                                     upon the company, that do business with the company, that rely
                                     upon the company to earn a living and they cannot possibly be
                                     independent directors. The AFL–CIO and the Council of Institu-
                                     tional Investors has filed many motions against requiring compa-
                                     nies—asking companies to have only real independent directors on
                                     auditing committees.
                                        Let me conclude by saying this, that we believe that this is not
                                     an isolated example but a part of the abuse of corporate power in
                                     our society. Retirees and workers need, deserve, and are ready to
                                     fight for some kind of control to protect ourselves from this and we
                                     ask the Senate to join us in that.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Raynor.
                                        [The prepared statement of Mr. Raynor follows.]
                                       STATEMENT OF BRUCE RAYNOR, PRESIDENT, UNION OF NEEDLETRADES, INDUSTRIAL
                                                              AND TEXTILE EMPLOYEES

                                        My name is Bruce Raynor. I am President of the Union of Needletrades, Indus-
                                     trial and Textile Employees, (UNITE). I am also a Vice President of the American




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000022   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 23 ===
                                                                                      19
                                     Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (‘‘AFL–CIO’’), the Vice
                                     Chair of the Amalgamated Bank and a Co-Chair of the Council of Institutional In-
                                     vestors. My testimony today is given on behalf of the AFL–CIO, UNITE, and the
                                     Amalgamated Bank.
                                        UNITE represents over 250,000 workers in the apparel, textile, laundry, distribu-
                                     tion and other manufacturing industries across the United States. UNITE members
                                     participate in over 35 multi-employer retirement and other benefit plans with total
                                     assets of over $4 billion. The AFL–CIO’s member unions represent 13 million Amer-
                                     ican workers and sponsor pension plans with over $400 billion in assets. Amal-
                                     gamated Bank acts as a financial advisor and custodian to defined benefit retire-
                                     ment plans. Amalgamated has over $6 billion under management in its LongView
                                     Collective Investment Trust Fund (‘‘LongView Funds’’) and over $23 billion in custo-
                                     dial accounts, which collectively represent a portion of the retirement savings of
                                     hundreds of thousands of electricians, operating engineers, hotel employees, service
                                     employees and public employees as well as textile and garment workers. I appre-
                                     ciate the opportunity to appear this morning before this committee.
                                        Over the past 30 years, as a labor organizer, elected labor leader, Bank official,
                                     and investor activist, I have witnessed first hand, at the bargaining table and from
                                     the picket line, the ongoing efforts of corporate leaders to bend the rules, hide the
                                     facts, and take whatever steps necessary to mislead investors and deny their work-
                                     ers a fair share of a company’s gains. And far too often, these actions impact not
                                     only the wages and working conditions of active workers, but also the equally sig-
                                     nificant pension funds of retirees who have given a life’s service to the very company
                                     that cuts them off. Ten years ago, I stood and fought alongside retirees from the
                                     Fieldcrest-Cannon textile mills, workers who had put 40 years into mills that filled
                                     their lungs with cotton dust and their wallets with meager paychecks. Those retir-
                                     ees had seen their monthly pension checks dwindle to $40 a month, because $39
                                     million from their pension funds had been given to a former owner of their mill as
                                     part of the mill’s sale just four years before. And just as we’ve seen in the Enron
                                     case, that deal was done by insiders, hidden in the cost of a sale, for the single ben-
                                     efit of one corporate leader, as if it were a minor footnote. For those retirees in 1991,
                                     like so many retirees and former workers at Enron, losing one’s pension defined
                                     their ability to survive at a time in life when they deserved to retire with dignity.
                                        This fight, like the one we were able to win in Kannapolis NC, is about workers
                                     who pay taxes, help build their communities, and deserve the right to trust an eco-
                                     nomic investment system that they want to support as they seek a stable retire-
                                     ment. And just as then, we hear the same basic refrain on factory floors, Athere
                                     ought to be a law against that kind of behavior.@ I hope my testimony today will
                                     provide this committee with basic ways that you can act to restore confidence in the
                                     public arena and the economic markets.

                                                                   WORKER FUNDS’ EFFORTS AT ENRON
                                       On November 2, 2001, the Amalgamated Bank and the AFL–CIO wrote to Ken
                                     Lay and Dean Powers and to outside director in response to the initial revelations
                                     of insider transactions and false accounting statements. I should note the
                                     Amalgamated’s Longview index funds held over $15 million in Enron’s securities on
                                     behalf of our clients. We asked that Enron reform its board, riddled with conflicts
                                     of interest, some disclosed and some undisclosed. Receiving no answer, we wrote
                                     again on November 9, 2001, after the announcement of the Dynergy transaction,
                                     asking that persons of high integrity and reputation, with no prior connection to
                                     Enron, be asked to join the Enron board. We also asked that the company imme-
                                     diately disclose all the details of its financial situation in order to restore the capital
                                     market’s ability to price Enron’s securities and reduce the mounting uncertainty
                                     among investors.
                                       We received a perfunctory acknowledgement from a corporate staffer. It is quite
                                     possible that had Enron taken early on the steps we urged, much of the panic that
                                     occurred both among its investors and its customers would have been avoided and
                                     a more orderly and less destructive adjustment to the true state of Enron’s finances
                                     might have been achieved. But as we all know, they did not, and Enron filed for
                                     bankruptcy on December 2, 2001.
                                       At that point, the Amalgamated Bank chose to litigate to try and recover some
                                     of our worker beneficiaries’ money. On December 5, 2001, acting on behalf of the
                                     Long View Funds, Amalgamated Bank brought a class action lawsuit suit against
                                     Kenneth Lay, Enron’s Board Chairman, and other high ranking Enron officials for
                                     insider trading, breach of their disclosure duties to their shareholders and other
                                     wholesale violations of the nation’s securities law. We also sued Arthur Andersen.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000023   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 24 ===
                                                                                       20
                                     We are seeking recovery of billions of dollars in damages and the freezing of more
                                     than $1 billion in proceeds from insider trading.
                                       Unfortunately, the Enron debacle is no aberration. It is only the most recent and,
                                     perhaps, worst case in a series of securities frauds and self dealing acts by corporate
                                     executives centered around a corrupted relationship between corporate executives,
                                     their boards, attorneys, and public auditors. Absent systematic legal and regulatory
                                     reform, the Enrons of the future are a certainty.
                                                                       RISE OF ACCOUNTING FRAUD
                                        Waste Management, RiteAid, Sunbeam Corporation, McKesson, Cendant, and,
                                     most recently, Enron—these large cap companies are included in many major indi-
                                     ces and, as a result, are among the core holdings of public employee and union pen-
                                     sion funds. These are also just a few of the companies that in the past few years
                                     have admitted to filing false financial statements with the SEC and have, as a re-
                                     sult, restated billions of dollars in previously-reported earnings. More than 400
                                     other publicly-traded companies in the past several years have admitted to report-
                                     ing inflated earnings statements. The resulting drop in share prices has caused over
                                     $31 billion of dollars in losses to investors, foremost of whom are workers’ pension
                                     funds like UNITE’s funds and the Amalgamated Bank’s clients—funds that are re-
                                     sponsible for investing and safeguarding the retirement savings of millions of work-
                                     ing men and women in this country. A headline in USA Today (June 22, 2001) de-
                                     scribed accurately what is happening: ‘‘Fuzzy Accounting Raises Flags—Crafty Ac-
                                     counting Can Steer Investors Wrong,’’ That’s why as a benefit plan trustee and fidu-
                                     ciary, I found it astounding to read the quote in Barron’s magazine attributed to
                                     SEC Chairman Harvey Pitt that ‘‘there is nothing rotten with the accounting profes-
                                     sion.’’ The evidence suggests otherwise.
                                        The big five audit firms have been engaged in a race to the bottom in financial
                                     reporting which has undermined a core element of our capital markets— the integ-
                                     rity of public company financial reporting. Accurate financial statements are essen-
                                     tial to informed investor decisions, confidence in our markets, and the allocation of
                                     capital to credible businesses that create long-term economic job growth and positive
                                     investor returns. The collapse of Enron dramatically demonstrates the systematic
                                     failures in these vital controls that are intended to ensure transparency and fairness
                                     in business.
                                        Over 9,000 new public companies were created by the IPO boom of the 1980s-
                                     1990s— more than half of all existing public companies today. Many of these new
                                     public companies were smaller high-growth high-tech or bio-tech companies where
                                     the pressure to show earnings growth is intense. Others were Dot-Com enterprises
                                     which have no earnings and were under pressure to show revenue increases— or
                                     create apparent profits by using so-called ‘‘pro forma’’ accounting to generate finan-
                                     cial results which Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) would never
                                     sanction.
                                        An article in the Journal of Business (Francois Degeorge, Jayendu Patel, Richard
                                     Zeckhauser, Earnings Management to Exceed Thresholds, Journal of Business,
                                     1999, Vol 72, no 1.) concluded: ‘‘executives have both the incentive and ability to
                                     manage earnings.’’ Manipulation was most frequently present when needed to meet
                                     bright line tests, i.e. earnings estimates, and occurred most often in the fourth quar-
                                     ter just when the supposedly independent auditors are arriving on the scene for the
                                     annual audit. What does this conclusion suggest about the effectiveness of annual
                                     audits by so called independent accountants? Another study concludes ‘‘we have no
                                     doubt that short term earnings are being manipulated in many, if not all, compa-
                                     nies.’’ (W. Bruns and K. Merchant The Dangerous Morality of Managing Earnings.
                                     Management Accounting. 72. 1996)
                                        Worth Magazine ran a story, ‘‘Taking the Lies Out of Earnings,’’ which concluded,
                                     ‘‘earnings are becoming an increasingly less reliable tool for investors, as changes
                                     in executive compensation and accounting practices give corporate officials both a
                                     reason to bend the rules and greater leeway in doing so.’’ (February 1997 issue)
                                        According to Richard Walker— the former SEC enforcement chief who resigned
                                     earlier this year—‘‘If we had nothing else to do, the accounting investigations alone
                                     would keep us busy for the next five or 10 years.’’ (‘‘SEC List of Accounting-Fraud
                                     Probes Grows, Stretching Agency’s Resources,’’ The Wall Street Journal, July 6,
                                     2001.) In short, Enron was a disaster waiting to happen.

                                                                               AUDITOR CONFLICTS
                                       At the center of the erosion in accounting practices are the conflicts of interest
                                     created when ‘‘independent’’ auditors are also providing consulting services to their
                                     audit clients. We have seen that at Enron, according to the Powers Committee re-




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000024    Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 25 ===
                                                                                      21
                                     port, Arthur Andersen was actually structuring, as a consultant, the partnerships
                                     whose accounting treatment it was then approving as the independent auditor—in
                                     effect auditing itself. Andersen then flatly denied it had done this in appearances
                                     before the Senate Commerce Committee and the House Financial Services Com-
                                     mittee.
                                        As a result of new regulations fought for by the SEC under former Chairman Ar-
                                     thur Levitt, with the support of the Council of Institutional Investors and the AFL–
                                     CIO and against fierce opposition from the accounting industry and the Congress,
                                     this year companies were forced to disclose previously secret information about their
                                     audit firms’ consulting work. We now are learning how much companies pay their
                                     supposedly independent auditors for consulting services as compared to fees for
                                     ‘‘independent’’ audit work. The SEC had guessed consulting fees would run 25%-40%
                                     more than audit fees.
                                        In fact, of total corporate payments to auditors only about 27 cents of every dollar
                                     is for audit work— the rest is for consulting services. (‘‘Auditors Exposed! Cozy
                                     Deals Alleged! How ’Independent’ Are These Book Checkers?’’ U.S. News & World
                                     Report, July 23, 2001.)
                                        There can be no question these huge consulting fees have undermined the inde-
                                     pendence of the big accounting firms. According to The Wall Street Journal, ‘‘Study
                                     Faults Work of Auditors Who Consult’’ (August 1, 2001):
                                        Auditing firms are more likely to compromise and stretch the bounds of accepted
                                     accounting practices when they are receiving substantial consulting fees from the
                                     firms they audit, according to an academic study. . . .The study— by professors at
                                     Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Michigan State University and Stanford
                                     University— is one of the first to pore through financial filings to answer empiri-
                                     cally one of the key questions facing the accounting industry: How objective can an
                                     accounting firm be in an audit when it is also making millions of dollars providing
                                     the same client with other services?. . . ‘‘Our study suggests that paying an ac-
                                     counting firm more for nonaudit services impairs auditor independence and reduces
                                     the quality of earnings,’’ said Karen Nelson, a co-author and accounting professor
                                     at Stanford.
                                        We also need to recognize the obstacles preventing the SEC— the supposed ‘‘cop
                                     on the beat’’— from doing its job. The resources of the SEC have long been out-
                                     stripped by our surging markets. When Arthur Levitt tried to take on the account-
                                     ing industry, Congress opposed him. Now the SEC is headed by a lawyer who used
                                     to represent Arthur Andersen and the other big accounting firms who fought to con-
                                     tinue to conceal the billions in consulting fees they were pocketing from their cor-
                                     porate clients while certifying billions in phony profits. The White House has indi-
                                     cated it intends to fill two further seats on the SEC with Big Five audit firm part-
                                     ners—essentially giving the Big Five control of the Commission.
                                        Pressure to Manipulate Earnings Driven by Runaway Executive PayWhile the
                                     protections against accounting fraud have been weakened, the incentive on the part
                                     of executives to commit accounting fraud has been greatly increased by the phe-
                                     nomenon of runaway executive compensation. The AFL–CIO has been calling atten-
                                     tion to this scandal since 1997 at its website www.paywatch.org. The explosion in
                                     executive pay was fueled by FASB’s refusal, again under Congressional pressure in
                                     the mid-1990’s, to require companies to account for the economic reality of executive
                                     option grants in their financial statements. These huge grants then became an over-
                                     whelming incentive for executives to pump up stock prices—even when their compa-
                                     nies’ real performance was less than stellar.
                                        According to a recent Watson Wyatt study (AStock Option Over-hang; Share-
                                     holder Boon, Shareholder Burden?@ 2001 study), an important cause of the recent
                                     devastation of tech stocks is the ill effects of enormous stock-option grants over the
                                     past several years. Stock options became an addiction of pandemic proportions in
                                     the 1990s. Companies liked them because they did not have to be counted as an
                                     expense and made earnings look better than they really were. Executives liked them
                                     because they provided easy riches as the greatest bull market of all time pushed
                                     stocks higher and higher, regardless of individual corporate performance. But this
                                     had hidden costs. It overstated real corporate earnings by billions of dollars during
                                     the past decade. And the more options there were, the less valuable the underlying
                                     stock became, creating real dilution that lowered actual earnings per share even
                                     more.
                                        The Watson Wyatt study documents that even before the recent Nasdaq/NYSE
                                     collapse, companies giving the biggest option grants produced lower total returns to
                                     shareholders and higher stock volatility. The study, which examined option grants
                                     and stock price moves at 850 of the nation’s largest companies, concluded that the
                                     heavy use of stock options had motivated executives to pursue riskier business strat-
                                     egies, like adding debt and making high-priced stock buy-backs. These strategies re-




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000025   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 26 ===
                                                                                      22
                                     flected the difference between an option holder, which has an upside but not a
                                     downside, and a stockholder, who paid real money for the stock and for whom the
                                     downside is very real..
                                        Companies with a high percentage of outstanding options also suffer from option
                                     overhang. In 1998 and 1999, companies with the highest growth in option overhang
                                     produced much lower returns to shareholders. Now, the bill for all these options is
                                     coming due. The study concludes companies should encourage outright stock owner-
                                     ship instead of options. Companies that do so show higher returns to shareholders.
                                     As it becomes clearer that options exacerbated corporate stock declines, perhaps ex-
                                     ecutives at companies with option excesses will be forced to rethink their strategy.
                                     But it is doubtful. Executives know that stock options mean having their cake and
                                     eating it too; but now comes the indigestion— unfortunately it’s for their share-
                                     holders, not them.
                                        And, it is even worse. We not only have executives getting compliant boards to
                                     re-price their options lower when the stock declines, but to keep doing it, literally
                                     chasing the stock price downward to continue to protect the insiders from either the
                                     vagaries of the market or their own mistakes. Amazon.com fell from over $120, re-
                                     priced at $23 and then again at $13. Clarent re-priced at over $50, then $26, and
                                     now $13. Excessive stock option grants and abusive re-pricing actions are clear ex-
                                     amples of ignoring the interests of the true owners of corporations and of the need
                                     for better corporate governance procedures to make executives more accountable to
                                     the true owners of the enterprise.
                                                   INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS VULNERABLE TO ACCOUNTING FRAUD
                                        Now let me take a moment to explain why institutional investors are particularly
                                     vulnerable to accounting fraud. Large institutions with billions of dollars invested
                                     in the equity markets typically invest most of their assets in index funds. Index
                                     funds buy the entire market and hold each company’s stock in proportion to its mar-
                                     ket capitalization. Index funds rely on the market to accurately price the securities
                                     in which they invest—and their track record of beating the average active manager
                                     is testimony to the depth of the liquidity of our markets and the effectiveness of
                                     our system of market regulation. Index funds are also by far the cheapest way to
                                     prudently invest in the equity markets. But index funds are also the perfect victim
                                     of accounting fraud—if corporate numbers are fraudulent, the markets will price
                                     stocks too high, and index funds cannot help but be the victims. That is why the
                                     Longview Funds have always seen good corporate governance, strong securities reg-
                                     ulation and independent auditors, backed up by activist institutional investors ready
                                     to sue when victimized, as key to our money management strategy.
                                        For the past ten years, Amalgamated Bank has joined other institutional inves-
                                     tors in seeking to persuade corporate America to adopt a wide variety of governance
                                     improvements— smaller annually-elected boards dominated by independent direc-
                                     tors; appointment of only independent directors to audit, nominating and compensa-
                                     tion committees; and, now that there is disclosure of fees paid to auditors, the hiring
                                     of auditors unencumbered by conflicts of interest. However, even facing scrutiny
                                     from institutional investors, corporations have ignored shareholder resolutions that
                                     passed with overwhelming votes. We cannot protect our interests effectively in cor-
                                     porate annual meetings or in our courts when the laws and the regulators are allow-
                                     ing the companies in which we invest and the auditors who are supposed to be pro-
                                     tecting us to steal from us with impunity.
                                                       LIABILITY LIMITS IN PSLRA ENCOURAGE ACCOUNTING FRAUD
                                       When I talk about laws that protect the misconduct we saw at Enron, I am think-
                                     ing particularly of the 1995 amendments to the federal securities laws, the Private
                                     Securities Litigation Reform Act@ (‘‘PSLRA’’). While parts of this legislation had
                                     positive consequences, such as the lead plaintiff provisions that took control of liti-
                                     gation from the lawyers and gave it to the investors, the bulk of this legislation im-
                                     posed a series of often impossible hurdles for investors seeking to hold corporate ex-
                                     ecutives and accountants liable for securities fraud. To put it bluntly, congress
                                     opened the door and Enron and its ilk drove right on through. The PSLRA was en-
                                     acted on December 22, 1995, when the Senate overrode a veto by one vote.
                                       Testimony by consumer and investor groups warned that the proposed drastic cut-
                                     back on investor protections against and remedies for securities fraud would reduce
                                     corporate executives’ and securities professionals’ accountability for misconduct.
                                     This, in turn, would result in an increase in securities fraud and investor losses and
                                     impair investor confidence, thus harming capital formation and our nation’s econ-
                                     omy. Not only was the PSLRA opposed by Arthur Levitt’s SEC and vetoed by Presi-
                                     dent Clinton, but virtually every major consumer, labor and investor group in Amer-




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000026   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 27 ===
                                                                                      23
                                     ica and the vast majority of America’s newspapers editorialized against the PSLRA.
                                     They all warned that it would grant those best positioned to profit from stock price
                                     inflation a license to lie and result in a massive upsurge of fraudulent conduct and
                                     investor losses. Those predictions have now come true with a vengeance.

                                           THE WORKER-INVESTOR REFORM AGENDA: SECURITIES LAW, BANKRUPTCY LAW,
                                                                     PENSION LAW
                                        Now Enron has exposed to widespread public attention a whole series of conflicts
                                     of interest and inadequate regulation affecting our capital markets and our retire-
                                     ment savings system—problems that the labor movement and institutional investors
                                     have been warning about for years. But with the exception of a few brave public
                                     spirited individuals like Arthur Levitt, few here in Washington heeded these warn-
                                     ings. But now is the time to act on a range of issues. I will begin with where this
                                     Committee has clearest jurisdiction. Congress needs to:
                                        (1) Restore meaningful access to the courts for investors victimized by accounting
                                     fraud. We need to restore the right of investors to sue accountants and lawyers for
                                     aiding and abetting their clients’ securities fraud. Every major securities fraud case
                                     since the passage of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act has had significant
                                     involvement on the part of auditors and attorneys, but the victims of their actions
                                     cannot sue them for their role in it. We also need to restore access to victims of
                                     Enron like conspiracies to claims under civil RICO. Nothing looks more like a rack-
                                     eteering conspiracy than the events involving Enron, Andersen, their law firms and
                                     their political allies, yet the PSLRA immunizes these racketeers against RICO li-
                                     ability. Congress also needs to establish one clear and fair standard nationally for
                                     liability for securities fraud, and that standard should be recklessness. The
                                     intentionality requirement some federal courts have inferred is in the PSLRA effec-
                                     tively makes it impossible for investors to recover in most securities fraud cases. It
                                     requires private litigants to essentially find an informant—a task more suited to a
                                     criminal investigation by the government. Finally, the PSLRA repealed joint and
                                     several liability, which has a particularly harmful impact in the most serious cases
                                     like Enron where the company itself, as a result of its conduct, is bankrupt. Joint
                                     and several liability should be restored.
                                        (2) Reform the bankruptcy laws so that rich miscreants in Texas and Florida can’t
                                     sit in their million dollar homes while their victims across town get thrown out of
                                     their apartments—as is literally happening in Houston today. In this regard the
                                     bankruptcy bill this Congress passed last year is a shocking travesty—it would pun-
                                     ish the victims of Enron who have to file for personal bankruptcy while legitimizing
                                     the very transactions Enron used to hide its liabilities. (Prof. Elizabeth Warren and
                                     34 Bankruptcy Law Professors letter to Chairmen Leahy and Sensenbrenner, Janu-
                                     ary 23rd, 2002) It should die where it is now in conference.
                                        (3) Put into place an effective public regulatory organization over the accounting
                                     industry and end the practice of so-called ‘‘independent’’ auditors collecting millions
                                     of dollars of non-audit fees from companies they are auditing. The AFL–CIO has pe-
                                     titioned the SEC to enact further rules ensuring auditor independence, but in light
                                     of the lack of responsiveness and the conflicts of interest potentially affecting a ma-
                                     jority of the Commission on this issue, we believe Congress must act either by man-
                                     dating rulemaking or by enacting a ban on consulting by audit firms into law.
                                        (4) Ensure corporate directors are really independent of the CEO’s they are sup-
                                     posed to be overseeing by ending the practice of having Enron-style independent di-
                                     rectors who were really financially and politically dependent on Enron executives.
                                     The AFL–CIO and the Council of Institutional Investors have both petitioned the
                                     SEC to enact rules that would have this effect, but there has been no response from
                                     the Commission and we frankly believe that Congressional action is needed either
                                     to mandate rulemaking or to enact the principles of independence into law.
                                        (5) Reform the accounting treatment of stock options given to corporate insiders
                                     and put meaningful restrictions on how those options may be exercised and sold so
                                     that we won’t see again executives who are running a company into the ground si-
                                     multaneously taking a billion dollars out of the company by exercising options.
                                        (6) Reform 401(k)-type retirement savings plans to prevent employers from push-
                                     ing employer stock into worker retirement accounts—a practice which is great for
                                     employers because it is cash-free but terrible for workers whose retirement savings
                                     are bet entirely on one company. In this regard President Bush’s proposals are com-
                                     pletely inadequate to this problem, and in fact would put employees’ retirement sav-
                                     ings further at risk by repealing ERISA’s current ban on conflicted investment ad-
                                     vice by 401-k money managers trying to promote high fee and high risk investment
                                     options.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000027   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 28 ===
                                                                                      24
                                                       CONCLUSION: PEOPLE ARE HURTING—CONGRESS MUST ACT
                                        The corruption of our securities markets which Enron symbolizes has hurt a lot
                                     of people. While it is too early to tell how long or severe the current recession will
                                     be, no one can deny that significant economic harm has occurred due to collapse of
                                     our securities markets. Financial and accounting scandals have plunged companies
                                     into crises leading to many bankruptcies. Investor losses have turned into a
                                     Areverse wealth effect.@ Massive layoffs abound. Capital formation has been im-
                                     paired as burned investors shun the IPO market. New public offerings are sparse
                                     in today’s environment..
                                        Baby boomers without defined benefit retirement plans are considering what to
                                     try to do next now that their 401(k)s have been hit. According to Business Week
                                     (‘‘Retirement Gets Scary for Baby Boomers,’’ July 30, 2001):
                                        Lulled by recent dreams of early and easy retirement, millions of Americans are
                                     suddenly facing the harsh truth that they will have a much harder time retiring....
                                     Those with lots of high-tech company stock in their 401(k)s may be in the worst
                                     shape.... Stripped of the illusions fed by a booming stock market, retirement is shap-
                                     ing up to be a nightmare of cost and complexity.
                                        Or as an article in the New York Times puts it—‘‘the inevitable bottom line of
                                     a 401(k) system—postponed retirement—is surfacing.’’ (‘‘Workers Find Retirement is
                                     Receding Toward 70,’’ New York Times, February 3, 2002, Money and Business, p.
                                     4.) The truth is what the labor movement has been saying for decades—401-k plans
                                     are a good supplement to a defined pension plan and Social Security, but a disas-
                                     trous replacement.
                                        And then there are individuals like the many Enron 401-k participants who came
                                     to Washington last week—secretaries, vice-presidents, electrical lineworkers—people
                                     in their 50’s who gave a lifetime to their employer and were rewarded with layoff
                                     notices, bounced severance checks and empty retirement accounts. Surely these peo-
                                     ple should receive the ill-gotten gains of the insiders here.
                                        I will conclude by pointing out that the workers I represent are appalled by what
                                     happened at Enron. I wish I could say that they are shocked. But they are not. They
                                     are not shocked because what happened at Enron has exposed something that they
                                     know very well—the reality of excess corporate power in our society. That power
                                     manifests itself daily. It is demonstrated in the stimulus bill supported by the ad-
                                     ministration that provides a windfall for the wealthiest people in our society while
                                     giving workers almost nothing. That power was also behind a multi-billion dollar
                                     bailout of the airline industry, while, again, workers received almost nothing. The
                                     story of how millionaire executives used their wealth and political clout to rig the
                                     rules and free themselves from accountability, and then used that freedom to enrich
                                     themselves while workers, consumers, and small investors pay the consequences is
                                     becoming all to commonplace in our society.
                                        These then are the lessons of the last several years, only most dramatically dem-
                                     onstrated by Enron. It is now up to Congress to act, quickly and decisively to protect
                                     the American people’s retirement income and prevent the Enron’s of the future. The
                                     labor movement and institutional investor community stand ready to work with this
                                     Committee and this Congress to adopt true reform legislation. Thank you for consid-
                                     ering our views.
                                           Chairman LEAHY. Mr. Schatz?
                                     STATEMENT OF STEVEN M. SCHATZ, WILSON, SONSINI, GOOD-
                                      RICH AND ROSATI PROFESSIONAL CORPORATION, PALO
                                      ALTO, CALIFORNIA
                                       Mr. SCHATZ. Thank you, Senator Leahy. Chairman Leahy and
                                     members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, it is an honor to ap-
                                     pear before you today and offer my thoughts on possible responses
                                     to the Enron debacle. My knowledge of the specific details of what
                                     happened at Enron comes only from media accounts, but for pur-
                                     poses of today’s discussion, I assume they are substantially accu-
                                     rate.
                                       As a former Federal prosecutor in the Southern District of New
                                     York, I am simply appalled by the rampant fraud that reportedly
                                     took place at Enron. As a member at Wilson, Sonsini, Goodrich and
                                     Rosati, which represents some of Silicon Valley’s most innovative




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000028   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 29 ===
                                                                                      25

                                     and successful companies, and someone who has personally rep-
                                     resented technology companies ranging from multi-billion-dollar en-
                                     terprises to smaller but no less innovative companies, all of which
                                     depend on the country’s capital and financial markets, I am deeply
                                     troubled by the Enron scandal’s effects, those effects on the mar-
                                     kets, investors, and employees.
                                        There can be no doubt that the perpetrators of this fraud must
                                     be punished, punished swiftly, and punished severely. In addition
                                     to punishing the culpable, I think we all agree that the Enron
                                     fraud and the fact that it continued undetected for so long and
                                     harmed so many people demands us to take a hard look at certain
                                     reforms to prevent such a reoccurrence.
                                        In crafting an adequate and well-reasoned response, however, we
                                     must not allow our anger at Enron’s egregious and, I believe, aber-
                                     rational conduct to have unintended negative consequences. Spe-
                                     cifically, I am concerned that some of the recent proposals to revise
                                     provisions of the PSLRA may inadvertently and unfairly punish
                                     the many honest companies and employees that make our economy
                                     flourish.
                                        As you no doubt are aware, with broad and deep bipartisan sup-
                                     port, Congress passed the Reform Act of 1995 to curb what it accu-
                                     rately perceived as substantial litigation abuses by the private
                                     plaintiffs’ securities class action bar. As Senator Hatch previously
                                     indicated, prior to its passage, the announcement of disappointing
                                     quarterly results all too frequently led to a host of fraud by hind-
                                     sight litigations. Indeed, some of the best companies in the valley
                                     had to endure such lawsuits.
                                        Three provisions of the Reform Act are particularly crucial to
                                     protecting companies and their employees from frivolous and abu-
                                     sive litigation. Those three are the safe harbor for forward-looking
                                     statements, the discovery stay, and the heightened pleading stand-
                                     ard. None of these provisions facilitated Enron’s accounting scandal
                                     and none will shield Enron from the consequences of its conduct.
                                     Let me consider each in turn.
                                        Roughly speaking, the Reform Act’s safe harbor encourages com-
                                     panies to publicly disclose their predictions of future performance
                                     by insulating them from liability in the event that those predictions
                                     do not come true. This protection, in conjunction with Regulation
                                     FD, has allowed investors to benefit from increased information
                                     flow and to make more informed financial decisions. In order to
                                     limit potentially burdensome fishing expeditions, discovery in pri-
                                     vate securities class actions are stayed until plaintiffs survive a
                                     motion to dismiss, that is, until they establish that their complaint
                                     is not facially inadequate.
                                        At the same time, the Reform Act compels companies to preserve
                                     all relevant evidence while the case is pending and allows discovery
                                     when evidence is at risk. This expressed command not to destroy
                                     evidence is a strong protection for plaintiffs, and clearly, the Re-
                                     form Act’s pleading standard will not preclude the plaintiffs from
                                     proceeding in this case.
                                        In that regard, it is clear that what the pleading standard does
                                     do is it sets a barrier so that when meritless cases are filed, compa-
                                     nies do not have to bear the expense of those lawsuits unless and




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000029   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 30 ===
                                                                                      26

                                     until there has been a decision that the complaint is facially suffi-
                                     cient.
                                        The Reform Act did not cause the Enron scandal but it did help
                                     curtail the filing of lawsuits. But even with the Reform Act, this
                                     past year, 487 companies have been sued in private class action
                                     lawsuits, nearly double the next highest number of lawsuits.
                                        I would like to briefly comment on some of the proposed legisla-
                                     tion. There is a proposed bill in the House that would allow plain-
                                     tiffs to add legal claims to their securities class action complaints
                                     and thereby seeking treble damages. At first blush, it seems tempt-
                                     ing to increase penalties for wrongdoers. However, cases such as
                                     Enron’s already involve damages beyond any defendant’s ability to
                                     pay, even absent the addition of RICO penalties. This proposal
                                     would do little to inflict additional pain on those that commit the
                                     fraud. Rather, it would allow plaintiffs’ counsel to reflexively in-
                                     clude a RICO claim and obtain unfair leverage and settlement ne-
                                     gotiations in the typical case that they file.
                                        As Senator Hatch previously indicated——
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Mr. Schatz, just to let you know, we have a
                                     vote coming up. If you could sum up, we will put your whole state-
                                     ment in the record.
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. Very well. I will just summarize it, Senator, that
                                     Chairman Levitt himself supported the exclusion of RICO.
                                        Senator Leahy, let me make just two other points if I could.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. You are a good enough trial lawyer. I am sure
                                     you can make them in 15 seconds. Go ahead.
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. Your Honor——
                                        [Laughter.]
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. Senator Leahy, the current provision allows for joint
                                     and several liability for knowing misconduct and that is one of the
                                     virtues of the legislation, and again, I believe that the discovery
                                     stay here did not impede the prosecution of the case. It was the
                                     fact that individuals flaunted the provisions of the Reform Act.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Thank you.
                                        [The prepared statement of Mr. Schatz follows.]
                                       STATEMENT OF STEVEN M. SCHATZ, ESQ., WILSON, SONSINI, GOODRICH AND ROSATI
                                                   PROFESSIONAL CORPORATION, PALO ALTO, CALIFORNIA
                                       Chairman Leahy, Senator Hatch, and Members of the Senate Judiciary Com-
                                     mittee:
                                       It is an honor to appear before you today and offer my thoughts on possible re-
                                     sponses to the Enron debacle. As a former federal prosecutor, I urge you to bring
                                     swift and severe punishment to the wrong-doers who have apparently harmed so
                                     many innocent people. As an advisor to numerous honest companies that depend on
                                     the capital markets, however, I urge you to be sensitive to the indirect consequences
                                     your actions may have on those whom are frequently targets of frivolous litigation.

                                                                               I. INTRODUCTION
                                       For four and a half years, I served as Assistant United States Attorney for the
                                     Southern District of New York in the Criminal Division. That experience has given
                                     me particular insight into the types of frauds that rapacious companies and rapa-
                                     cious individuals can and do perpetrate, and has impressed upon me the importance
                                     of harshly punishing those who would exploit their positions for personal gain at
                                     the expense of others. I applaud your efforts today to ensure that wrong-doers face
                                     appropriately severe consequences.
                                       Today, I am a senior member of the law firm of Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati,
                                     P.C., located in Silicon Valley and numbering over 700 lawyers. We are proud to
                                     represent some of the most innovative, successful companies in the United States.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000030   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 31 ===
                                                                                      27
                                     Our clients include leaders in computers (Hewlett-Packard, Sun), semiconductors
                                     (Cypress, LSI Logic, Micron, VIA), disk drives (Seagate), electronics manufacturing
                                     (Solectron), software (Autodesk, Sybase), networking (3Com, Juniper, Broadcom),
                                     aviation (America West), and biotechnology (Genentech). We currently represent ap-
                                     proximately 300 public companies. We also represent hundreds of start-ups that are
                                     working to become leaders of their industry sectors. Frankly, our clients depend on
                                     the availability of capital and the integrity of the financial markets, both of which
                                     the Enron scandal has jeopardized. I am heartened to know that you are considering
                                     measures to ameliorate these harms and protected against future abuses.
                                       As a litigator, I have devoted a significant portion of the last seventeen years of
                                     my life to defending securities class action, representing clients such as Hewlett-
                                     Packard, Informix, Convergent Technologies, InfoSpace, Unisys, Cirrus Logic, Crit-
                                     ical Path, Splash, Ventana Medical Systems, Robertson Stephens & Co., Santa Cruz
                                     Operations, MicroAge, Pyramid Technology, STAC Electronics, Ventritex,
                                     Laserscope and Continental Savings. In defending more than sixty securities class
                                     actions over the past two decades, I have personally witnessed the explosive growth
                                     of frivolous litigation, the measures Congress has taken to curb abusive litigation
                                     tactics, and the salutary effects those measures have had.
                                       Others have detailed, and will detail, the specific conduct that allegedly gave rise
                                     to fraud at Enron, and I yield to their expertise.1 I think we all agree that the
                                     Enron fraud—and the fact that it continued undetected for so long and harmed so
                                     many people—demands us to take a hard look at certain reforms. Simply put, we
                                     must prevent such a situation from ever recurring. In crafting an adequate and
                                     well-reasoned response, however, we must not allow our anger at Enron’s egregious
                                     conduct to have unintended, negative consequences. Specifically, I am concerned
                                     that recent, and perhaps well-meaning, proposals to revise provisions of the Private
                                     Securities Litigation Reform Act 2 may inadvertently and unfairly punish the many
                                     honest companies and employees that make our economy flourish.

                                                         II. THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT
                                        As you are no doubt aware, Congress passed the Reform Act in 1995 to curb what
                                     it accurately perceived as substantial litigation abuses by the private plaintiffs secu-
                                     rities class action bar. Congress took this action in response to ‘‘significant evidence
                                     of abuse in private securities lawsuits,’’ including, among other things, ‘‘the routine
                                     filing of lawsuits against issuers of securities and others whenever there is a signifi-
                                     cant change in an issuer’s stock price, without regard to any underlying culpability
                                     of the issuer, and with only faint hope that the discovery process might lead eventu-
                                     ally to some plausible cause of action.’’ 3 These meritless cases diverted companies’
                                     attention from their core businesses and forced them either to spend millions in de-
                                     fense costs or millions on unwarranted settlements. Simply put, abusive litigation
                                     cost public companies—and hence the investing public—tremendous amounts of
                                     money each year.
                                        Recognizing this serious problem, Congress adopted the Reform Act with broad bi-
                                     partisan support. The Act contains numerous provisions, but three are particularly
                                     crucial to protecting companies and their employees from frivolous and abusive liti-
                                     gation. Those three are: the Safe Harbor for forward-looking statements, the dis-
                                     covery stay, and the heightened pleading standard. None of these provisions facili-
                                     tated Enron’s accounting scandal, and none will shield Enron from the consequences
                                     of its fraudulent conduct. Let me very briefly consider each in turn.
                                                                               A. SAFE HARBOR

                                        The Reform Act’s Safe Harbor encourages companies to publicly disclose their pre-
                                     dictions of future performance by insulating them from liability in the event those
                                     predictions do not come true. Specifically, the Safe Harbor provides that ‘‘[A defend-
                                     ant] shall not be liable with respect to any forward-looking statement, whether writ-
                                     ten or oral, if and to the extent that. . .the forward looking statement
                                     is. . .identified as a forward-looking statement, and is accompanied by meaningful
                                     cautionary statements identifying important factors that could cause actual results
                                     to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statement.’’ 4 The Safe Harbor

                                       1 My knowledge of the specific details of what happened at Enron comes only from media ac-
                                     counts, but for purposes of today’s discussion, I will assume that they are substantially accurate.
                                       2 H.R. Conf. Rep No. 104–369 (1965), reprinted in 1995 U.S.C.C.A.N. 730 (‘‘Conference Re-
                                     port’’).
                                       3 Conference Report at 31.
                                       4 15 U.S.C. § 78u–5(c)(1)(A).




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000031   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 32 ===
                                                                                         28
                                     also protects forecasts and projections of future results that are not accompanied by
                                     ‘‘meaningful cautionary statements’’ by requiring plaintiffs to demonstrate that they
                                     were made with actual knowledge of falsity.5
                                        This protection, in conjunction with Regulation FD, has allowed investors to ben-
                                     efit from increased information flow and to make more informed financial decisions,
                                     by making companies less nervous about disclosing their necessarily uncertain
                                     hopes for the future. The Safe Harbor often serves as an effective tool for companies
                                     unfairly accused of fraud-by-hindsight. It does not, however, provide any protection
                                     for perpetrators of accounting frauds such as Enron’s. Indeed, the Safe Harbor ex-
                                     pressly does not apply to audited financial statements. In short, the Enron scandal
                                     and the Safe Harbor have nothing to do with each other.
                                                                                  B. DISCOVERY STAY

                                        Congress enacted another core provision of the Reform Act, the discovery stay, in
                                     response to evidence that ‘‘the abuse of the discovery process. . .impose[d] costs so
                                     burdensome that it is often economical for the victimized party to settle’’ private se-
                                     curities class actions, regardless of guilt.6 In order to limit potentially unnecessary
                                     and burdensome fishing-expeditions, discovery in such cases is stayed until plain-
                                     tiffs survive a motion to dismiss; that is, until they establish that their complaint
                                     is not facially inadequate.7 At the same time, the Reform Act compels companies
                                     to preserve all relevant evidence while the case is pending,8 and allows discovery
                                     when evidence is at risk.9
                                        The Reform Act’s express command not to destroy evidence strongly protects
                                     plaintiffs. More importantly, in cases such as Enron’s, in which the fraud seems
                                     clear and the likelihood of surviving a motion to dismiss seems almost certain, the
                                     Reform Act ultimately does nothing to prevent plaintiffs from getting the evidence
                                     they need.
                                                                       C. HEIGHTENED PLEADING STANDARD

                                        Finally, the Reform Act provides a heightened pleading standard designed to weed
                                     out cases where plaintiffs lack a substantial basis for their fraud accusations.10 Spe-
                                     cifically, it requires that every securities class action complaint ‘‘shall specify each
                                     statement alleged to have been misleading, the reason or reasons why the statement
                                     is misleading, and, if an allegation regarding the statement or omission is made on
                                     information and belief, the complaint shall state with particularity all facts on
                                     which that belief is formed.’’ 11 It further requires plaintiffs to ‘‘state with particu-
                                     larity facts giving rise to a strong inference’’ of scienter.12 Given the extent of its
                                     fraud, Enron can hardly expect to benefit from this provision; undoubtedly there will
                                     be no issue with respect to the pleading standard in that case.
                                        The key Reform Act provisions did not cause the Enron scandal and will not allow
                                     Enron to escape punishment. They do, however, protect companies from frivolous
                                     lawsuits, onerous discovery and exposure to extortionary settlements. The concerns
                                     which motivated Congress to enact the Reform Act in 1995 and the Securities Liti-
                                     gation Uniform Standards Act in 1998 are equally valid today, as demonstrated by
                                     the fact that the number of private securities class actions filed each year continues
                                     to rise. The Reform Act remains of vital importance in defending honest companies
                                     against these often meritless suits.

                                                                             III. REFORM PROPOSALS
                                       In evaluating proposals to modify the Reform Act, I urge you to be sensitive to
                                     potential spillover effects on frivolous cases. Reform is vital, but it is also imperative

                                           5 Conference Report at 43-44.
                                           6 Conference Report at 31.
                                           7 Id. at 37.
                                           8 Id.
                                           9 Id.
                                       10 It is worth noting that the Courts of Appeals have divided on the proper interpretation of
                                     this heightened pleading standard, compare Novak v. Kasaks 216 F.3d 300 (2d Cir. 2000) with
                                     In re Silicon Graphics, Inc. Securities Litigation, 183 F.3d 970 (1999). The Ninth Circuit inter-
                                     pretation appears more consistent with Congressional intent, particularly in the light of the fact
                                     that certain amendments adopting other interpretations were rejected. See 141 Cong. Rec.
                                     S9170 (daily ed. June 27, 1995). Should Congress decided to amend the Reform Act in response
                                     to recent events, it may with to take the opportunity to clarify and reaffirm that the Ninth Cir-
                                     cuit’s interpretation of the pleading standard is correct.
                                       11 15 U.S.C. § 78u-4(b)(1).
                                       12 15 U.S.C. § 78u-4(b)(2).




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003     Jkt 84416    PO 00000   Frm 000032   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 33 ===
                                                                                        29
                                     not to undermine key aspects of the Reform Act. In our zeal to respond to the Enron
                                     disaster, we must be careful to avoid creating new vehicles for frivolous litigation.
                                        For example, one proposed bill would allow plaintiffs to add RICO claims to their
                                     securities class action complaints, and thereby seek treble damages.13 At first blush,
                                     it may seem appealing to increase penalties for wrong-doers. In actual fact, however,
                                     cases such as Enron’s already involve damages beyond any defendant’s ability to
                                     pay, even absent the addition of RICO penalties. Thus, this proposal would do little
                                     to inflict additional pain on those who commit fraud.
                                        Rather, this provision would allow plaintiffs’ counsel to reflexively include a RICO
                                     claim in every garden-variety securities class action complaint, providing addi-
                                     tional—and typically unwarranted—leverage in settlement negotiations. By adopt-
                                     ing this provision, Congress would simply increase the frequency with which ‘‘inno-
                                     cent parties are often forced to pay exorbitant ’settlements’ ’’ 14—precisely the sort
                                     of abuse this body sought to deter in 1995. Indeed, no less than then-SEC Chairman
                                     Arthur Levitt testified in favor of the RICO exclusion, recognizing that ‘‘[b]ecause
                                     the securities laws generally provide adequate remedies for those injured by securi-
                                     ties fraud, it is. . .unfair to expose defendants in securities cases to the threat of
                                     treble damages and other extraordinary remedies provided by RICO.’’ 15
                                        Similar proposals involve efforts to impose aider and abettor liability and/or joint
                                     and several liability for securities violations.16 In weighing these proposals, it bears
                                     mentioning that the Reform Act (in a section titled ‘‘Reduction of Coercive Settle-
                                     ments ’’) already imposes joint and several liability—without exception—for know-
                                     ingly violating the securities laws; in addition, the Act already specifies that if a
                                     defendant cannot pay its share of the damages due to insolvency, each of the other
                                     defendants must make an additional payment—up to 50% of their own liability—
                                     to make up the shortfall in plaintiff’s recovery.17 The Reform Act provides for even
                                     broader contributions to make whole certain small investors. Also, in evaluating aid-
                                     ing and abetting liability proposals, it should be recognized that courts have taken
                                     a broad view of direct liability. Undue expansion of these doctrines could become
                                     a tool allowing plaintiffs to expose tangential defendants to enormous risk even in
                                     frivolous cases.
                                        Effectively, expanding the scope of liability would give plaintiffs an undeserved
                                     bargaining chip with which to compel settlement of meritless cases. Congress recog-
                                     nized this risk in the enactment of the Reform Act, criticizing plaintiffs’ ‘‘targeting
                                     of deep pocket defendants. . .without regard to their actual culpability.’’ 18 These
                                     concerns remain equally pressing today, and should be fully considered in any re-
                                     forms. In addition, keep in mind that the SEC is authorized to investigate and pur-
                                     sue civilly and/or administratively anyone who violates the federal securities laws,
                                     whether directly or as an aider and abettor, and, where appropriate, can refer the
                                     matter for criminal prosecution.
                                        Another proposal would allow immediate discovery in cases where a company’s ac-
                                     countant is named as a defendant.19 No doubt this was drafted to prevent Arthur
                                     Anderson-type document destruction abuses. Unfortunately, it would also allow
                                     plaintiffs to gut the Reform Act’s discovery stay simply by naming company auditors
                                     in every lawsuit. (Moreover, as I explained before, the Reform Act itself prohibits
                                     the destruction of documents and provides severe penalties for violations.) Congress
                                     must carefully consider whether it wishes to punish every honest company with on-
                                     erous and costly discovery obligations in response to Enron’s extreme misconduct,
                                     particularly when early discovery will serve little purpose.

                                                                                 IV. CONCLUSIONS
                                       In addition to the proposals that have already been suggested, Congress has many
                                     other options. For example, Congress may wish to consider approaches that would
                                     require auditors to make affirmative and descriptive assertions about companies in
                                     their financial statements. In a recent speech, a former SEC Commissioner raised
                                     the possibility that auditors be required to supplement their audited financial state-
                                     ments with ‘‘an opinion and report describing significant accounting treatments and
                                     judgments that comply with GAAP but that, if disclosed, would have a material ef-

                                           13 H.R. 3644, 107th Cong. (2d Sess. 2002).
                                           14 Conference Report at 32.
                                           15 Conference Report at 47.
                                           16 H.R. 3617, 107th Cong. § 3 (2d Sess. 2002).
                                           17 15 U.S.C. § 78u-4(f); Conference Report at 39.
                                           18 Conference Report at 31.
                                           19 H.R. 3617, 107th Cong. (2d Sess. 2002)




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003     Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000033   Fmt 06633     Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 34 ===
                                                                                      30
                                     fect on the valuation’’ of the company.20 This sort of response suggests one possible
                                     remedy that should be explored and may be part of an overall approach to deter
                                     Enron-like abuses. Naturally, the various proposals offered in response to the Enron
                                     debacle will need to be carefully studied, and their advantages and disadvantages
                                     carefully weighed, before any decisions regarding the appropriate prophylactic ac-
                                     tions and reforms are made.
                                        Enron has hurt our financial markets, our economy, and millions of innocent in-
                                     vestors. Reform is vital; we must act to prevent this from ever happening again. At
                                     the same time, we must make sure that our response does not do more harm than
                                     good, and thus must be sensitive to the collateral consequences that reforms may
                                     have for frivolous class actions. We should not let the extreme circumstances of the
                                     Enron matter cause us to forget the very real and tangible reasons for enacting the
                                     Reform Act.
                                           Chairman LEAHY. Professor Lund?
                                      STATEMENT OF NELSON LUND, PROFESSOR OF LAW, GEORGE
                                      MASON UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW, ARLINGTON, VIRGINIA
                                        Mr. LUND. Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, I am hon-
                                     ored by your invitation to comment on the accountability issues
                                     that have arisen in connection with Enron’s bankruptcy and its
                                     aftermath. These issues are obviously numerous and variegated.
                                     My testimony addresses questions of Congressional oversight and
                                     investigation that have suddenly attained renewed prominence. In
                                     particular, I will comment on the role of the GAO in obtaining in-
                                     formation held by the executive branch. I have submitted detailed
                                     written testimony for the record, which I will very briefly summa-
                                     rize this morning.
                                        As you know, Congress and the executive have had a great many
                                     disputes with each other about Congressional access to information
                                     that the executive has preferred not to share. There was a signifi-
                                     cant dispute about this issue during the administration of Presi-
                                     dent Washington and the tug of war has been going on ever since.
                                        Neither the Congressional right to conduct investigations nor the
                                     executive’s right to resist disclosure of information to Congress is
                                     expressly granted by the Constitution. Given the implicit nature of
                                     both rights, it should not be surprising that Members of Congress
                                     have tended to have a somewhat different view of the constitu-
                                     tional allocation of power than Presidents and their lawyers have
                                     taken. Traditionally, these disputes have been settled through ne-
                                     gotiation, compromise, and sometimes capitulation, but as far as I
                                     am aware, no court has ever issued a final judgment resolving such
                                     a dispute when the President has asserted his constitutional
                                     claims. That may be about to change.
                                        The Comptroller General has demanded that the Vice President
                                     disclose information about private meetings that he held while he
                                     was a member of the National Energy Policy Development Group,
                                     or NEPD Group, which was entrusted by the President with the
                                     task of developing recommendations for a new energy policy. After
                                     the Vice President resisted this request, the Comptroller General
                                     stopped pursuing it last September, but in the wake of the Enron
                                     controversy, he has announced that he plans to bring a lawsuit to
                                     compel the Vice President’s compliance.
                                       20 See Joseph A. Grundfest, Enron: Can We Craft an Efficient Disclosure-Based Policy Re-
                                     sponse?, Presentation to the Silicon Valley Chapter of The Federalist Society (Jan. 29, 2002).
                                     As proposed, this obligation would not expose auditors to private civil liability for non-compli-
                                     ance.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000034   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 35 ===
                                                                                      31

                                        I think this raises the question of whether the GAO’s demand is
                                     authorized by the statute. It is possible, though not very easy, I
                                     think, to read the statute to authorize a GAO investigation of the
                                     NEPD Group’s activities. But even assuming that the statute au-
                                     thorizes GAO to investigate the work of the NEPD Group, the stat-
                                     ute clearly does not purport to authorize the GAO to use any and
                                     all means to conduct its investigations. Thus, the real question is
                                     whether the statute purports to require that the Vice President
                                     comply with GAO’s demands for records about the nature of spe-
                                     cific meetings, and I think that it does not.
                                        There is a general principle of statutory construction under
                                     which ambiguous statutes should be interpreted so as to avoid seri-
                                     ous constitutional questions, and the constitutional questions
                                     raised by the GAO demand letter are very serious indeed. Begin-
                                     ning with George Washington, Presidents have consistently
                                     claimed that they may withhold some information from Congress
                                     and the Supreme Court has recognized that a right of executive
                                     privilege does exist. It is implicit in the Constitution.
                                        The most recent case law from the D.C. Circuit contains lan-
                                     guage that would appear to cover this case, although it arose in the
                                     somewhat different context of an independent counsel investiga-
                                     tion. When one steps back from the case law, which in any event
                                     cannot provide a definitive resolution, the serious nature of the
                                     constitutional questions becomes even more apparent.
                                        In 1796 when the House of Representatives was debating its re-
                                     sponse to President Washington’s refusal to provide the House with
                                     documents relating to the Jay Treaty, a Congressman, a Congress-
                                     man named James Madison, argued that the House must have a
                                     right to ask for whatever information it saw fit. He also contended,
                                     however, that the President must have a correlative right to refuse
                                     the request if he saw fit. I think Madison’s point was that the
                                     President could not be compelled to disclose information, just as
                                     the Congress could not be compelled to enact legislation without
                                     what it considered adequate information, and Madison subse-
                                     quently did vote against an appropriation to implement the Jay
                                     Treaty.
                                        That has become the traditional way to resolve these disputes,
                                     with each party using its political leverage to bargain over the out-
                                     come. The resulting compromises have no doubt frequently left
                                     both sides dissatisfied, but neither side has ever had to concede a
                                     matter of principle to the other. Once the courts become involved,
                                     that may change.
                                        I believe that Madison did identify the constitutionally appro-
                                     priate presumption. Applied to the present case, this suggests that
                                     Congress might refuse to enact President Bush’s energy proposals
                                     if a majority of legislators believe that they first needed more infor-
                                     mation about the Vice President’s work on the NEPD group. But
                                     that is not at all what is going on here. Instead, we have a situa-
                                     tion where neither House of Congress or even a Congressional com-
                                     mittee has demanded any documents from the Vice President, and
                                     the GAO’s purpose in conducting the investigation is, so far as I
                                     have been able to ascertain, somewhat unclear.
                                        While I was thinking about these issues, I began to wonder what
                                     would happen if a staffer in the White House Office for Political




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000035   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 36 ===
                                                                                      32

                                     Operations were to ask the FBI to investigate all meetings between
                                     Senators and private parties or even with their own staffs at which
                                     matters before the Congress were discussed or mentioned, such as
                                     energy or, for that matter, the regulation of the accounting profes-
                                     sion. If the FBI then demanded the Senators provide documents
                                     and records like those that the GAO has sought from the Vice
                                     President, I imagine that quite a firestorm would ensue. The cases
                                     are not perfectly analogous, of course, but I think the hypothetical
                                     does suggest one reason why it might not make much sense for the
                                     Comptroller General to provoke a constitutional confrontation in
                                     this case.
                                       Elected officials in the legislative and executive branches have a
                                     long history of resolving their differences in the manner suggested
                                     by Congressman Madison without involving the courts. The lawsuit
                                     that the Comptroller General is threatening to bring will no doubt
                                     be very interesting to professors like me, but I am not sure it will
                                     serve the long-term institutional interests of Congress.
                                       Chairman LEAHY. And I should also note, Professor, that I appre-
                                     ciate your defense of Vice President Cheney having a closed door
                                     hearing. We are not investigating the Vice President in this hear-
                                     ing.
                                       Mr. LUND. Yes, I understand that.
                                       Chairman LEAHY. I just want to make sure we do not lead any-
                                     body astray here.
                                       Mr. LUND. Right. I understand that, Mr. Chairman. That con-
                                     cludes my presentation. I would be happy to answer any questions.
                                       Chairman LEAHY. Thank you.
                                       [The prepared statement of Mr. Lund follows.]
                                           STATEMENT OF NELSON LUND, PROFESSOR OF LAW, GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY
                                                                      SCHOOL OF LAW
                                        Mr. Chairman, Senator Hatch, Members of the Committee, I’m honored by your
                                     invitation to comment on the accountability issues that have arisen in connection
                                     with Enron’s bankruptcy and its aftermath. These issues are obviously numerous
                                     and variegated. My testimony addresses questions of congressional oversight and in-
                                     vestigation that have attained renewed prominence because of the Enron bank-
                                     ruptcy and the subsequent intense congressional interest in conducting its own in-
                                     vestigations of this matter. In particular, I will comment today on the role of the
                                     GAO in disputes over access to information held by the Executive Branch.
                                        As you know, Congress and the Executive have had a great many disputes with
                                     each other about congressional access to information that the Executive has pre-
                                     ferred not to share. There was a significant dispute about this issue during the ad-
                                     ministration of President Washington, and the tug of war has been going on ever
                                     since. Neither the congressional right to conduct investigations, nor the Executive’s
                                     right to resist disclosure of information to Congress, is expressly granted by the
                                     Constitution. Given the implicit nature of both rights, it should not be surprising
                                     that Members of Congress have tended to have a somewhat different view of the
                                     constitutional allocation of power than Presidents and their lawyers have taken.
                                     Traditionally, these disputes have been settled through negotiation, compromise,
                                     and sometimes capitulation. But as far as I’m aware, no court has ever issued a
                                     final judgment resolving such a dispute when the President has asserted his con-
                                     stitutional claims. That may be about to change.
                                        The Comptroller General—acting in response to a request from Congressmen Din-
                                     gell and Waxman—has demanded that the Vice President disclose information
                                     about private meetings that he held while he was a member of the National Energy
                                     Policy Development Group (‘‘NEPD Group ’’), which was entrusted by the President
                                     with the task of developing recommendations for a new energy policy. The Comp-
                                     troller General’s demand letter was quite comprehensive, for it embraced all meet-
                                     ings in which the Vice President participated and it required a full account of every
                                     meeting, including ‘‘any information presented’’ as well as minutes or notes of the




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000036   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 37 ===
                                                                                      33
                                     meeting. The Vice President responded that the GAO lacks statutory authority to
                                     enforce these demands, and argued that the demands would exceed Congress’ con-
                                     stitutional authority even if the GAO was acting pursuant to statutory authoriza-
                                     tion. At one point, the Comptroller General appeared to withdraw his most intrusive
                                     inquiries, but he continued to seek a number of details about every meeting the Vice
                                     President and his support staff had, including the identity of everyone who attended
                                     every meeting, the agenda of the meeting, and the manner in which the Vice Presi-
                                     dent or the staff decided who would be invited.
                                        The Comptroller General stopped pursuing his demands in September, but in the
                                     wake of the Enron controversy he has announced that he plans to bring a lawsuit
                                     to compel the Vice President’s compliance.
                                        Is the GAO’s demand authorized by the statute?
                                        Two sources of authorization have been suggested. First, the GAO’s organic stat-
                                     ute authorizes the Comptroller General to ‘‘evaluate the results of a program or ac-
                                     tivity the Government carries out under existing law.’’ A natural reading of the ref-
                                     erence to programs or activities carried out ‘‘under existing law’’ suggests that these
                                     evaluations are meant to cover programs and activities established by Congress,
                                     rather than activities conducted under the President’s independent constitutional
                                     authority to develop recommendations for future action. ‘‘Existing law,’’ however,
                                     could conceivably be construed to include the Constitution, which might enable this
                                     provision to cover the Vice President’s ‘‘activities’’ in preparing policy recommenda-
                                     tions for the President.
                                        The statute also authorizes the GAO to investigate ‘‘all matters related to the re-
                                     ceipt, disbursement, and use of public money.’’ This statutory language is on its face
                                     so broad that it could conceivably cover any matter related in any way, no matter
                                     how remote or indirect, to the use of public money. Because the Vice President re-
                                     ceives a salary from the Treasury, and because public funds were no doubt used in
                                     other ways in connection with the meetings that the GAO is purporting to inves-
                                     tigate, the statute could be read to authorize an investigation of these meetings.
                                        Assuming for the sake of argument that the statute authorizes GAO to evaluate
                                     or investigate the work of the NEPD Group, however, the statute clearly does not
                                     purport to authorize the GAO to use any and all means to conduct its investigations
                                     or evaluations. The Vice President has already provided some records to the GAO,
                                     and the real question is whether the statute purports to require that the Vice Presi-
                                     dent comply with GAO’s demands for additional records about the nature of specific
                                     meetings. I think that it does not.
                                        The statute requires government ‘‘agencies’’ to supply information about their ac-
                                     tivities to the GAO, and the term ‘‘agency’’ is given a broad definition that includes
                                     every ‘‘department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States Government’’
                                     other than the legislative branch or the Supreme Court. The bare language of the
                                     statute could conceivably be stretched to include the Vice President, either as such
                                     or in his role as a member of the NEPD Group, but it certainly need not be so inter-
                                     preted. Under the interpretive principle adopted by the Supreme Court in Franklin
                                     v. Massachusetts, moreover, the statute should not be construed to cover the Presi-
                                     dent, and probably not the Vice President either, because it does not expressly so
                                     provide.
                                        In any event, the express-statement rule invoked in Franklin v. Massachusetts is
                                     related to a more general principle of statutory construction, under which ambig-
                                     uous statutes should be interpreted so as to avoid serious constitutional questions.
                                     And the constitutional questions raised by the GAO demand letter are very serious
                                     indeed. Beginning with George Washington, Presidents have consistently claimed
                                     that they may withhold some information from Congress, and the Supreme Court
                                     has recognized that a right of executive privilege is indeed implicit in the Constitu-
                                     tion. Although the exact contours of the Executive’s privilege of confidentiality re-
                                     main subject to some uncertainty, the GAO’s demands at the very least raise serious
                                     constitutional questions.
                                        The most recent major decision on executive privilege arose from the Independent
                                     Counsel investigation of Secretary Mike Espy. The White House refused to disclose
                                     a number of documents that had been generated in the course of the Administra-
                                     tion’s own investigation of allegations against Espy. Notwithstanding the fact that
                                     many of these documents had never been shown to the President, the D.C. Circuit
                                     held that most of them were immune from discovery by the Independent Counsel.
                                     The court explained that the privilege extends:
                                        to communications authored or solicited and received by those members of an im-
                                     mediate White House advisor’s staff who have broad and significant responsibility
                                     for investigating and formulating the advice to be given the President on the par-
                                     ticular matter to which the communications relate. Only communications at that




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000037   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 38 ===
                                                                                      34
                                     level are close enough to the President to be revelatory of his deliberations or to
                                     pose a risk to the candor of his advisors.
                                        Vice President Cheney plainly qualifies under this or any other description of a
                                     high-level advisor, and much of what the GAO demanded amounts to ‘‘communica-
                                     tions authored or solicited and received by’’ the Vice President and his staff. Even
                                     after the GAO’s apparent narrowing of its demands, it continues to demand ‘‘records
                                     providing the following information with regard to each of these meetings: (a) the
                                     date and location, (b) any person present, including his or her name, title, and office
                                     of clients represented, (c) the purpose and agenda, . . . and (f) how [members of the
                                     NEPDG, group support staff, the Vice President himself or others] determined who
                                     would be invited to the meetings.’’ These records would appear to be ‘‘communica-
                                     tions’’ and they were presumably authored or received by the Vice President’s staff.
                                        Although the Espy court noted that its decision applied only in the context of judi-
                                     cial proceedings, it would be surprising if the courts were to give the privilege a nar-
                                     rower scope in the context of a GAO inquiry into the President’s policy-development
                                     process than it has in the context of a serious criminal investigation.
                                        When one steps back from case law, which in any event cannot provide a defini-
                                     tive resolution, the serious nature of the constitutional questions becomes even more
                                     apparent. In 1796, when the House of Representatives was debating its response to
                                     President Washington’s refusal to provide the House with documents relating to the
                                     Jay Treaty, Congressman James Madison argued that the House must have a right
                                     to ask for whatever information it thought fit. He also contended, however, that the
                                     President must have a correlative right to refuse the request if he saw fit. Madison
                                     concluded that ‘‘[i]f the Executive conceived that, in relation to his own department,
                                     papers could not be safely communicated, he might, on that ground, refuse them,
                                     because he was the competent though a responsible judge within his own depart-
                                     ment.’’ Madison’s point was that the President could not be compelled to disclose
                                     information, just as Congress could not be compelled to enact legislation without
                                     what it considered adequate information. And Madison subsequently did vote
                                     against an appropriation to implement the Jay Treaty. This has become the tradi-
                                     tional way to resolve these disputes, with each party using its political leverage to
                                     bargain over the outcome. The resulting compromises have no doubt frequently left
                                     both sides dissatisfied, but neither side has ever had to concede a matter of prin-
                                     ciple to the other. Once the courts become involved, that may change.
                                        Without claiming that Madison’s theory would properly settle every dispute be-
                                     tween Congress and the Executive, I believe that Madison did identify the constitu-
                                     tionally appropriate initial presumption. Applied to the present case, Madison’s ap-
                                     proach suggests that Congress might refuse to enact President Bush’s energy pro-
                                     posals if a majority of legislators believed they first needed more information about
                                     the Vice President’s work in the NEPD Group. But that is not at all what is going
                                     on here. Instead, we have a situation where neither House of Congress, or even a
                                     congressional committee, has demanded any documents from the Vice President,
                                     and the GAO’s purpose in conducting the investigation is, so far as I have been able
                                     to ascertain, rather unclear. Construing a statute that is at best ambiguous to per-
                                     mit this kind of constitutionally dubious fishing expedition would seem highly ques-
                                     tionable at best.
                                        While I was thinking about these issues, I began to wonder what would happen
                                     if a staffer in the White House office for political operations were to ask the FBI
                                     to investigate all meetings between Senators and private parties, at which matters
                                     before the Congress were discussed or mentioned (such as energy, or for that matter
                                     the regulation of the accounting profession). If the FBI then demanded that Sen-
                                     ators provide documents and records like those that the GAO has sought from the
                                     Vice President, I imagine that quite a firestorm would ensue. And properly so.
                                        The two cases are not perfectly analogous, but the hypothetical does suggest one
                                     reason why it might not make much sense for the Comptroller General to provoke
                                     a constitutional confrontation in this case. Elected officials in the legislative and ex-
                                     ecutive branches have a long history of resolving their differences in the manner
                                     suggested by Congressman Madison, without involving the courts. The lawsuit that
                                     the Comptroller General is threatening to bring will no doubt be very interesting
                                     to professors like me, but it seems unlikely to serve the long-term institutional in-
                                     terests of the Congress.
                                        Mr. Chairman, I’d be happy to answer any questions the committee may have.
                                           Chairman LEAHY. Professor Koniak?




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000038   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 39 ===
                                                                                      35
                                     STATEMENT OF SUSAN P. KONIAK, PROFESSOR OF LAW, BOS-
                                      TON UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW, BOSTON, MASSACHU-
                                      SETTS
                                       Ms. KONIAK. I want to thank the chairman, the ranking member,
                                     Senator Hatch, my Senator, Senator Kennedy, and Senator Ed-
                                     wards, who first suggested that I come here and testify.
                                       Financial scandals are not new. In the early 1970’s, there was
                                     OPM. In the later 1970’s, there was National Student Marketing.
                                     In the 1980’s, there was the savings and loan debacle. and in each
                                     of those scandals, what ultimately became clear was that none of
                                     the fraudulent schemes could have succeeded without the assist-
                                     ance of very trained lawyers from very prestigious law firms. Now
                                     we have Enron, and I have no doubt that when the facts are known
                                     here, we will find that lawyers played a big role here, as well.
                                       The list of people and entities that may have broken the law in
                                     this Enron disaster is long—Enron itself, its Board of Directors,
                                     senior management, its accountants, Wall Street analysts, man-
                                     agers of pension funds, investment banks, partnerships with
                                     strange names, the people who invested in those partnerships, and,
                                     of course, Enron’s lawyers. But Enron was not the only institution
                                     to have lawyers. Everyone on the list I just read had a lawyer, too.
                                       Tightening the reins on accountants is a good idea, but as I have
                                     just said, accountants have lawyers. Those lawyers are perfectly ca-
                                     pable of helping accountants slip loose of whatever reins you de-
                                     vise, just as they apparently helped Enron slip loose of the reins
                                     of corporate and securities law. No reforms you enact will do much
                                     good unless you rein in the lawyers.
                                       Thus far, Enron’s accountants have borne the lion’s share of the
                                     blame, but let me put this as plainly as I can. To pull the wool over
                                     the eyes of the investing public, regulators, and the media for any
                                     considerable period of time, a corporation needs more than malle-
                                     able accountants. It needs the help of lawyers.
                                       Vinson and Elkins, Enron’s lawyers, have received some grief.
                                     They will undoubtedly receive more. But I want to start not with
                                     Enron’s lawyers but Andersen’s. Some group of people at Arthur
                                     Andersen shredded some substantial number of documents. This
                                     shredding not only left Andersen’s reputation in ruins, it put An-
                                     dersen in serious legal jeopardy under civil and criminal law. What
                                     were its lawyers doing while this was going on?
                                       The facts thus far suggest three possibilities, and none of them
                                     are good. First, they were encouraging the destruction, or they
                                     were recklessly ignoring the strong likelihood that documents
                                     would be headed for the shredder, or finally, they were acting care-
                                     lessly in relation to whether or not Enron’s documents ended up
                                     being preserved. What they should have been doing was issuing
                                     unequivocal direction that all Enron documents should be pre-
                                     served and devising procedures to make sure that happened.
                                       On October 12, an in-house lawyer at Andersen wrote a hope-
                                     lessly ambiguous memo referring people to a hopelessly ambiguous
                                     policy that was entitled, ‘‘Retention and Destruction of Documents.’’
                                     Andersen now describes that document in euphemistic terms as
                                     being not robust and poorly written, to say the least.
                                       The policy, which was written undoubtedly by a lawyer, could
                                     have easily been read to say, shred everything you would like until




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000039   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 40 ===
                                                                                      36

                                     a subpoena or litigation is actually filed. Then preserve everything,
                                     which is what the law would require.
                                        But this in-house lawyer at Arthur Andersen was not the only
                                     lawyer at the job at the time that this shredding occurred. Davis
                                     Polk was on the job representing Arthur Andersen from at least
                                     October 16, and according to Nancy Temple’s testimony, the in-
                                     house lawyer, she consulted with Davis Polk on October 16 about
                                     the destruction and retention of documents at Andersen.
                                        The shredding party began on October 23. That means that
                                     Davis Polk was on the job for 1 week in which it let stand this am-
                                     biguous memo and ambiguous policy that, as I said, and I have
                                     read both documents, could have easily been read to say ‘‘shred’’ as
                                     ‘‘not shred.’’ They were on the job for 2 weeks, and apparently
                                     nothing was done to withdraw the Temple memo. They were on the
                                     job for 3 weeks and nothing was done. Nothing was done until No-
                                     vember 8, when Arthur Andersen finally received the subpoena and
                                     the correct legal advice went out at that point, advice that should
                                     have gone out at least 3 weeks earlier, which was to preserve the
                                     documents.
                                        We may never know because of the destruction of these docu-
                                     ments what went on, but that is not the best part of the story. The
                                     best part of the story is that Davis Polk is now purporting to con-
                                     duct an investigation into what went wrong at Arthur Andersen.
                                     Who is going to investigate Davis Polk? One of the first questions
                                     to be asked in such an investigation is what were your lawyers
                                     doing? Were they just sitting around? Did they understand the im-
                                     portance of preserving those documents? Did they do anything to
                                     make sure that happens?
                                        Vinson and Elkins has gotten a lot of grief, as they should have,
                                     for conducting an investigation when their own work was involved.
                                     Davis Polk seems to be doing that now. I raise that as an example
                                     of how pervasive this problem is. These are well respected firms.
                                        My testimony has detailed explanation. I just would like to say
                                     two other things before I close, and a list of recommendations.
                                        One is, this is when you can tell when a lawyer is in trouble. It
                                     is a three-part test. It is quite easy. Your lawyer is committing a
                                     crime or fraud. You have enough facts in front of you that you
                                     should have figured it out, that it was either careless of you not
                                     to or you were reckless not to have figured it out. And with that
                                     mental state, you then act anyway to help or sit around and do
                                     nothing when you know that you have a duty to act when you rep-
                                     resent a corporation.
                                        Negligence here, from the material that we have already re-
                                     ceived, seems quite clear. That means malpractice was committed.
                                     Negligence means you have a little bunch of facts in front of you
                                     that suggests badness. Here, in front of the lawyers, there seems
                                     to be a mountain of red flags, flashing lights going off all over the
                                     place, which they ignored and continued to operate and help and
                                     not do anything by telling the Board. That is recklessness. The dif-
                                     ference between negligence is this amount versus this amount of
                                     facts.
                                        Congress changed the law to make it that lawyers could not eas-
                                     ily be sued when they were reckless. That has to change.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Professor, we are going to have to——




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000040   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 41 ===
                                                                                       37

                                       Ms. KONIAK. I am happy to conclude on that, to change.
                                       Chairman LEAHY. Thank you, and we are going to go back to
                                     that with further questions.
                                       [The prepared statement of Ms. Koniak follows.]
                                      STATEMENT OF SUSAN P. KONIAK, PROFESSOR OF LAW, BOSTON UNIVERSITY SCHOOL
                                                                       OF LAW

                                                                                I. INTRODUCTION
                                       Twelve years ago in a court opinion dealing with some aspects of the Lincoln Sav-
                                     ings and Loan fraud, Judge Stanley Sporkin wrote: ‘‘Where. . .were
                                     the. . .accountants and attorneys. . .?. . .[W]ith all the professional talent involved
                                     (both accounting and legal), why [didn’t] at least one professional. . .[act] to stop
                                     the overreaching that took place in this case’’? 1 Now, there is Enron. And we are
                                     here asking the same questions, Judge Sporkin and others were asking 12 years
                                     ago. To paraphrase Pete Seeger, ‘‘When will [we] ever learn?’’
                                       No one should have been surprised in the aftermath of the savings and loan crisis
                                     to learn that lawyers and accountants had averted their eyes from the fraud being
                                     perpetrated by some in the banking industry during the 1980s. Before the savings
                                     and loan debacle, there was OPM, a computer leasing company in New York that
                                     was a virtual fraud-factory that bilked such venerable institutions as Manufacturers
                                     Hanover and American Express. After filing bankruptcy, OPM’s Trustee issued a re-
                                     port that detailed how much OPM’s lawyers knew about its client’s shennanigans
                                     and how much help they provided their fraud-doing client; Stuart Taylor wrote a
                                     detailed expose of the involvement of OPM’s lawyers in seeing to it that their cli-
                                     ent’s fraud went undiscovered. And no one should have been surprised by that ei-
                                     ther.
                                       Before OPM, in the 1970s, lawyers and accountants aided and abetted the fraud
                                     that brought down National Student Marketing Corporation. And the law firms in
                                     most of these instances were not marginal players, they were pillars of the bar: ven-
                                     erable and well respected firms. Firms who settled with the government (and/or
                                     with defrauded investors) for their role in assisting Charles Keating, the head of
                                     Lincoln Savings and Loan included: Sidley and Austin, Kaye, Scholer and Jones
                                     Day. And participating as helpers in the National Student Marketing fraud were
                                     the law firms of Lord Bissell and Brook and White & Case. I hasten to add that
                                     had I had ‘‘world enough and time’’ those firms would appear on a much larger list,
                                     a list that would include many other prestigious firms. That is to say, the firms
                                     named above did nothing, unfortunately, that most other prestigious law firms
                                     haven’t done themselves. And now we sit here in 2002 professing to be shocked,
                                     shocked that gambling is going on at Rick’s saloon and that well respected law firms
                                     and accounting firms may have been involved.
                                       Thus far, Enron’s accountants have borne the lion’s share of the blame for helping
                                     the wrongdoers at Enron commit what appears now to have been massive fraud. Let
                                     me put this as plainly as possible: To pull the wool over the eyes of the investing
                                     public, regulators and the media for any considerable period of time a corporation
                                     needs more than malleable accountants, it needs the help of lawyers. Perhaps Lee
                                     Harvey Oswald acted alone, but Enron and its accountants did not. When all the
                                     facts that can be known about what happened here are known, one thing will be
                                     clear everyone in the drama had a lawyer whispering in its ear (Enron, Arthur An-
                                     dersen, the investment banks, the questionable partnerships that hid Enron’s losses
                                     and bilked Enron’s funds, the investors in those partnerships and on and on). And
                                     one more thing will be clear: no lawyer stepped in to stop this calamity.
                                       Tightening the reins on accountants is a good idea, but, as I have just said, ac-
                                     countants have lawyers too.2 Those lawyers are perfectly capable of helping account-

                                           1 Lincoln Sav. & Loan Ass’n Wall, 743 F. Supp. 901, 920 (D.D.C. 1990).
                                           2 Consider this exchange from the House Energy Committee:
                                        Representative Markey: Okay, let me—so you were—you were also worried that Andersen
                                     would be required to comply with the financial fraud reporting requirements of Section 10(a)
                                     of the Securities and Exchange Act, the Wyden-Dingell-Markey amendment that requires ac-
                                     counts to immediately report evidence of financial fraud to senior management, the board; and,
                                     if they take no action within five days to report the fraud to the SEC. You make that clear.
                                     If so, why didn’t you order the shredding to stop?
                                        Ms. Temple [an in-house lawyer at Andersen]: Congressman, there was no conclusion that
                                     there was any financial fraud, or that—in fact, no conclusion that there was no misleading
                                     statement. After consultation with others in the firm, and Davis Polk, I was being careful in
                                                                                                                         Continued




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003    Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000041   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 42 ===
                                                                                      38
                                     ants slip loose of whatever reins you devise, just as they apparently helped Enron
                                     slip loose the reins of corporate and securities law unless Congress, the SEC and
                                     state regulators 3 rein in lawyers too. Something needs to be done about the lawyers,
                                     if confidence is to be restored in the financial statements issued by companies. What
                                     the securities laws demand, is ultimately a legal question, not one for accountants.
                                     When documents must be preserved, is not simply a matter of some accounting con-
                                     vention; it depends on law: tax law, statutes prohibiting obstruction of justice, civil
                                     rules on spoliation of evidence, state laws on tampering with evidence and other
                                     such legal constraints.
                                        All too often lawyers act as if they were wearing magic caps—hats that transport
                                     them to some alternative reality, a law free zone, in which they are free to do any-
                                     thing and everything for the person or entity paying the lawyers’ fees, a magic land
                                     where lawyers need not fear that law will come crashing down on them.4 ‘‘It may
                                     hit the client, but it will never hit me.’’ There are no such magic caps. But the scant
                                     attention that has thus far been paid to the role of lawyers in this mess suggests
                                     that the myth of the magic cap has spread far and wide. With the report issued
                                     by Enron this weekend, Vinson & Elkins, Enron’s primary outside law firm, which
                                     has thus far received relatively little grief, will undoubtedly receive much more
                                     scrutiny. Later on, I will get to that firm and the other firms that Enron may have
                                     employed to help it with its financial shennanigans later. But to make concrete just
                                     how pervasive the magic cap myth has become, I want to start not with Enron’s
                                     lawyers, but with Arthur Andersen’s, in particular with the lawyers who are advis-
                                     ing Arthur Andersen right now. They’re acting like they’re wearing magic caps, and
                                     everyone appears to be going along. Let me explain what I mean.

                                                 II. TO SHRED OR NOT TO SHRED, TO INVESTIGATE OR TO STEP ASIDE
                                        Some group of people at Arthur Andersen shredded some substantial number of
                                     Enron documents. The shredding not only left Andersen’s reputation in ruins, it put
                                     Andersen into serious legal jeopardy under civil and criminal law. What were An-
                                     dersen’s lawyers doing while Andersen’s accountants and staff were doing that
                                     shredding? The facts disclosed thus far suggest three possibilities; none of them
                                     good. Andersen’s lawyers were either (1) encouraging this destruction through none-
                                     too-subtle hints; (2) recklessly ignoring the strong likelihood that documents were
                                     headed for the shredder; or (3) acting carelessly in relation to whether the Enron
                                     files were preserved or not.
                                        What should they have done to prevent the wholesale shredding that apparently
                                     began on or about October 23rd and continued for some considerable time thereafter?
                                     What they did way too late: Issue unequivocal legal advice that all Enron docu-
                                     ments were to be preserved and suggest procedures to Andersen’s management that
                                     would have helped ensure that the documents were actually preserved.
                                        Instead on October 12th Nancy Temple, a member of Andersen’s in-house legal
                                     staff, wrote the now infamously ambiguous retention/destruction memo that David
                                     Duncan, the Andersen partner in charge of Enron’s account, has told congressional
                                     investigators he read as authorizing him to begin the shredding. I have read that
                                     memo and the policy that it says might be ‘‘helpful’’ and thus suggests should be
                                     followed. As I read those documents, it seems like Attorney Temple’s memo was an
                                     effort to encourage others to destroy Enron documents, while preserving for its au-
                                     thor the ability to deny that she meant any such thing. (Indeed, Andersen’s reten-
                                     tion/destruction policy seems designed to achieve that same result and was probably
                                     written by a lawyer too).
                                        Perhaps, Attorney Temple did not mean the memo that way She has testified that
                                     she did not. She says that she meant the partner in charge, Mr. Duncan, to read
                                     the policy and interpret what it meant for himself. Why? Was she unsure of what
                                     the policy demanded? If so, was it sensible to believe an accountant would have an
                                     easier time deciphering it, this document that resembles a legal regulation much
                                     more than an accounting rule? And what of the law’s demands? Did she have no
                                     information to give Mr. Duncan and the other accountants on that either?

                                     asking Davis Polk to look at all angles and all issues, and advise us. And the conclusion was
                                     there were no further steps to take.
                                       3 By state regulators, I mean primarily state courts and bar disciplinary authorities. they have
                                     a role to play too. They should reexamine the rules that govern lawyers licensed by the states.
                                     Bare disciplinary authorities should also be better funded. Having said that, I assure you that
                                     such authorities will never have the resources necessary to take on the large and quite powerful
                                     law firms that are so often the relevant players in major and even minor securities’ frauds. the
                                     federal government thus has an important role to play here.
                                       4 See generally Koniak, The Law Between the Bar and the State, 70 N.Car.L.Rev. 1389 (1992).




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000042   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 43 ===
                                                                                      39
                                        But this is not a tale of one poorly-intentioned or careless lawyer, writing a reck-
                                     less or slip-shod memo on one particular day. The story gets much worse. Attorney
                                     Temple wrote her incredibly unhelpful memo on October 12th. A few days earlier,
                                     Arthur Andersen hired the well respected firm of Davis, Polk & Wardwell to advise
                                     it on Enron-related matters. Now, according to the testimony of Mr. Andrews, a sen-
                                     ior partner at Arthur Andersen, while Davis Polk was retained before the October
                                     12th memo was written, it did not begin its work for Andersen until October 16th.5
                                     No matter. Attorney Temple has testified that on Davis Polk’s first day on the job,
                                     October 16th, she consulted with Davis Polk lawyers on ‘‘document retention and
                                     destruction.’’6 Thus, before the major shredding party at Andersen began, which was
                                     on or around October 23rd,7 Davis Polk was consulted on the steps Andersen was
                                     taking or not taking to see to it that documents were preserved.
                                        Did Davis Polk advise Temple or anyone else at Arthur Andersen to clarify Tem-
                                     ple’s October 12th memo when she talked to Davis Polk lawyers on October 16th?
                                        Davis Polk was on the job about a week before the shredding extravaganza began.
                                     Why didn’t it take steps to see to it that Andersen’s notes, drafts and e-mails on
                                     Enron were preserved? We don’t know what, if anything, Davis Polk did advise be-
                                     cause Arthur Andersen seems to be relying on attorney-client privilege when it
                                     comes to what Davis Polk said,8 but we do know that the Temple memo was not
                                     withdrawn and the Andersen retention/destruction policy was not clarified in the
                                     first week of Davis Polk’s involvement in this case or the second week or the third.
                                        Before October 22nd, Arthur Andersen’s lawyers should have done something to
                                     make it clear to Andersen partners and staff that the Enron files were to preserved.
                                     The preservation of those Enron documents was necessary to protect Andersen’s
                                     legal interests as well as its future viability as a respected accounting firm. First,
                                     how is Andersen to demonstrate its innocence, assuming it is innocent, when its
                                     files are not intact. Second, assuming someone at Andersen did something wrong
                                     on the Enron account, how is Andersen to convince people that it has not gotten
                                     to the bottom of the problem and made all necessary changes when its files are in-
                                     complete. Third, if your client destroys documents when it is reasonably foreseeable
                                     that it will be sued and the documents will be relevant to that suit, a judge can
                                     instruct the jury to assume that the destroyed evidence would have shown your cli-
                                     ent’s guilt.9 And that is the least of the legal troubles that the destruction of these
                                     documents might bring.
                                        On October 22nd, Enron disclosed that the SEC had opened an inquiry into the
                                     company’s financial dealings, particularly the strange partnership transactions and
                                     Enron’s fuzzy disclosures on those deals. As with most legal matters, there is some
                                     uncertainty on precisely how formal an investigation by a government agency must

                                        5 Testifying before the House Energy Committee, Mr. Andrews of Arthur Andersen said: ‘‘Mr.
                                     Chairman, the firm was retained on October 9th, and commenced work with us on October 16th.’’
                                     [All quotes and references in this testimony to the House Energy Committee Testimony were
                                     taken from the New York Times’ website transcript of the hearing.]
                                        6 In testimony before the House Energy Committee, Attorney Temple said: I believe in my con-
                                     versation on October 16th I discussed the documentation and retention issues that had arisen
                                     as of the date with Davis Polk.
                                        7 Generally see the testimony before the House Energy Committee.
                                        8 I said ‘‘seems to’’ because Ms. Temple did testify, albeit somewhat vaguely, on the advice
                                     Davis Polk provided on another of her acts that has received some negative attention: her re-
                                     quest to have her name removed from some document and her suggestion that a reference to
                                     Andersen concluding something was ‘‘misleading’’ also be deleted. Her testimony before the
                                     House Energy Committee included these exchanges:
                                        Representative Whitefield: Okay. Now—and then Nancy Temple wrote a memo to Mr. Duncan
                                     on the 16th, which is one day after his memo to file, in which he’s concerned about this mis-
                                     leading recurring charges statement. And she said, ‘‘Dave, here are a few suggested comments.
                                     I recommend deleting reference to consultation with the legal group and deleting my name on
                                     the memo. I also suggest deleting language that might suggest we have concluded the release
                                     is misleading.’’ Why did you write that memo, Ms. Temple?
                                        Ms. Temple: I wrote that after reviewing the draft and consulting with our outside legal coun-
                                     sel. First—Representative
                                        Whitefield: Outside? Which outside?
                                        Ms. Temple: Davis Polk.
                                        At numerous other times during the hearing she alluded to advice given by Davis Polk, some-
                                     times with a little more content (which might affect a claim of privilege) and other times not.
                                     See also footnote 2 above.
                                        9 See e.g., Byrnie v. Town of Cromwell Bd. of Educ., 243 F.3d 93 (2d Cir. 2001) (‘‘We have
                                     defined spoliation as ‘the destruction or significant alteration of evidence, or the failure to pre-
                                     serve property for another’s use as evidence in pending or reasonably foreseeable litigation.’
                                     West v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 167 F.3d 776, 779 (2d Cir. 1999). The spoliation of evidence
                                     germane ‘to proof of an issue at trial can support an inference that the evidence would have
                                     been unfavorable to the party responsible for its destruction,’ v. United States, 150 F.3d 112,
                                     126 (2d Cir. 1998). (Emphasis added).




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000043   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 44 ===
                                                                                      40
                                     be before destroying documents might qualify as obstruction of justice.10 But there
                                     is precedent that holds that some, if not all, preliminary inquiries by the SEC qual-
                                     ify.11 Presumably, Arthur Andersen had no interest in being accused of obstructing
                                     justice, even if it could ultimately establish its innocence because the government
                                     could not quite prove that it had the requisite corrupt intent or because some court
                                     held that the SEC’s inquiry of Enron was not formal enough to constitute ‘‘a pro-
                                     ceeding’’ under the obstruction statute. Given that Andersen’s very survival might
                                     be threatened, if it managed to Convey that as Enron started coming apart, Ander-
                                     sen was busy flirting with violations of the criminal code, Andersen’s lawyers should
                                     have done everything possible to clarify the Temple memo and Andersen’s poorly
                                     written policy—at the latewst—immediately after they became aware that an infor-
                                     mal SEC inquiry of Enron was underway. They didn’t.
                                        On October 25, Enron, getting good legal advice—at least at this point—sent e-
                                     mails to its employees worldwide and to its auditors at Andersen, directing everyone
                                     to preserve all Enron documents. Andersen’s lawyers take no action to rescind the
                                     Temple memo or to clarify the policy to which the memo refers. A few more days
                                     go by, and on October 31, Enron announces that the SEC investigation has been
                                     upgraded to ‘‘formal.’’ Now any doubt about the potential applicability of § 1505
                                     should have been removed. Still Andersen’s lawyers did nothing. Even assuming
                                     that they somehow imagined that Temple’s memo and Andersen’s nonrobust, poorly
                                     written retention policy 12 were adequate to convey the ‘‘don’t destroy documents’’
                                     advice that they should have been giving, why weren’t Andersen’s lawyers checking
                                     to see what procedures Andersen was following to ensure that Temple’s supposed
                                     directive was being followed by Andersen’s Enron team?
                                        Finally, Andersen receives its own subpoena from the SEC. That happened, I be-
                                     lieve, on November 8th. The next day Attorney Temple calls Duncan, the head of An-
                                     dersen’s Enron team, and leaves him a message to preserve all documents. Appar-
                                     ently, that message managed to convey what Temple’s October 12th e-mail and An-
                                     dersen’s woefully inadequate retention/destruction policy could not. Duncan’s assist-
                                     ant now sends out an e-mail to those shredding Enron documents and tells them
                                     to stop. That e-mail went out the same day Temple left her voice message for Dun-
                                     can with its clear legal advice. The following day, November 10th, Attorney Temple
                                     sends an e-mail memo to the personnel at Andersen, which said in part, according
                                     to press reports:
                                        One of the first things we must do in preparing to respond to this subpoena and
                                     the lawsuits is to take all necessary steps to preserve all the documents and other
                                     materials that we may have relating to the claims that are being filed. . . .
                                        To do this we must first insure [sic] that all documents and materials already in
                                     existence are preserved and that nothing is done to destroy or discard any docu-
                                     ments or materials now in your possession.13
                                        What took her so long? And why didn’t Davis Polk, Andersen’s outside counsel,
                                     do any better than Attorney Temple and the rest of Andersen’s in-house legal team
                                     managed to do?
                                        Most troubling, how is it possible that Davis Polk has agreed to conduct an inves-
                                     tigation for Arthur Andersen to discover how so much shredding could have gone
                                     on at Arthur Andersen between October 23rd and November 9th? That shredding oc-
                                     curred on Davis Polk’s watch. Who is going to find out why Arthur Andersen’s out-

                                        10 See generally, Construction and Application of 18 USCA § 1505 Making It a Federal Offense
                                     to Obstruct Proceedings Before Federal Departments or Agencies or Congressional Committees,
                                     8 A.L.R. Fed. 893
                                        11 See United States v. Batten 226 F Supp 492 (D.D.C. 1964) cert. den. 380 US 912, 13 L Ed
                                     2D 799, 85 S Ct 898, reh den 381 US 930, 14 L Ed 2d 688, 85 Ct 1557 (preliminary investigation
                                     by the Securities and Exchange Commission). There is, however, some dispute about whether
                                     the fact that a subpoena had issued to the witness in that case, whom the defendant was ac-
                                     cused of trying to influence, was critical to the holding. See particularly, US v. Edgemon, 1997
                                     U.S. Dist. Lexis 23820 (ED Tenn). On the other hand, in Rice v. US. F.2d 709 (8th Cir. 1966,)
                                     the court albeit in dicta, said:
                                        In our view, it would be absurd to hold that Congress meant to proscribe interference with
                                     the administrative process only after a Labor Board Proceeding had reached a certain formal
                                     stage and let go unpunished individuals who obstruct earlier preliminary pro-
                                     ceeding. . . .Congress did not limit the term ‘‘proceeding’’ as used in §§ 1505 to only those acts
                                     committed after a formal stage was reached, and we cannot so limit the term.
                                        And in United States v. Kelly, 36 F.3d 1118, 1127 (D.C. Cir. 1994) the court summarized Bat-
                                     ten’ holding this way: ‘‘the SEC’s authority to issue subpoenas and administer oaths in conjunc-
                                     tion with its investigations made an SEC investigation a § 1505 proceeding’’ (Emphasis added).
                                        12 This is how Andersen executives testified that they now view the policy. See House Energy
                                     Committee hearing.
                                        13 Susan Schmidt and Kathleen Day, Testimony is Sought on File Shredding, Wash. Post, Jan.
                                     20, 2002, at A5 (quoting Temple’s November 10th e-mail).




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000044   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 45 ===
                                                                                       41
                                     side counsel, Davis Polk, did not properly protect its client and Enron’s documents?
                                     Davis Polk? One of the first questions Andersen needs to ask in its internal inves-
                                     tigation is: where were the lawyers? The lawyers who were out to lunch at the crit-
                                     ical time should not be the ones Andersen or the rest of us should be depending
                                     on to explain what went wrong. It’s that simple.
                                        Vinson & Elkins should have refused to investigate allegations of misconduct at
                                     Enron that happened on their watch, even if the firm had played no active part in
                                     any of the alleged wrongdoing.14 But they accepted an engagement that, if done
                                     right, would have required them to assess objectively their own competence, honesty
                                     and adherence to the law. That law firms routinely accept just such assignments
                                     is outrageous, but they do. It shows just how deeply they believe in those magic
                                     caps—deeply enough to imagine that they can assess a legal landscape that they
                                     were part of, as if they were not there at all. Vinson & Elkins had no magic cap
                                     and Davis Polk doesn’t have one either.
                                           III. ASSUME THERE WAS SECURITIES FRAUD, NOW ASSUME THERE WERE LAWYERS.
                                                                   YOU SEE I REPEAT MYSELF
                                       The mere fact that there are always lawyers around when securities fraud is tak-
                                     ing place does not mean that lawyers cause securities fraud nor does it demonstrate
                                     that they are always in a position to discover it or stop it from taking place. They
                                     aren’t. In plain English, fraud, as I tell my students year in and year out, is lying
                                     to someone to get them to give you their stuff.15 Fraud-doers are by definition liars
                                     (sneaks, cheats) and many are slick enough at lying to fool a room full of experi-
                                     enced lawyers. On the other hand, not all fraud-doers are quite that slick, and I
                                     dare say when it comes to securities fraud being slick enough to keep it from one’s
                                     lawyers for a significant period of time takes some considerable degree of skill. Don’t
                                     get me wrong, even a sophisticated and careful lawyer may not be able to detect
                                     a complex and well crafted scheme to defraud others in connection with the sale or
                                     purchase of securities. But then again many a sophisticated lawyer is not careful,
                                     at least, not about detecting securities fraud, and all too many sophisticated lawyers
                                     are all too willing to turn a blind eye.
                                       Enron released the Powers report this weekend. I have not yet had a chance to
                                     review it thoroughly, but it seems to support, not dispel, the idea that Enron, acting
                                     through its agents, was committing securities fraud and engaging in other violations
                                     of the securities laws and other laws as well, civil and criminal wrongs. Let’s as-
                                     sume that’s so for purposes of analyzing whether Enron’s in-house and outside coun-
                                     sel did wrong.
                                       To make this as simple as possible a lawyer has done wrong and is likely to be
                                     in significant legal trouble when three things are true. One, the client is breaking
                                     the law. Two, the lawyer has enough facts in front of her to have been able to figure
                                     out, with the exercise of reasonable care, that number one is true. And three, with
                                     number one and number two in place, the lawyer either acts to help the client to
                                     break the law or does nothing to stop the client from breaking the law in those in-
                                     stances (which are not as few as some would like to think) when the lawyer has
                                     a duty to intervene.16
                                       Using the three part test I have just laid out, we can gauge the universe of law-
                                     yers who might be in trouble by asking which clients are we likely, in the end, to
                                     discover were breaking the law? I started by assuming Enron will be in that cat-
                                     egory; possibly Arthur Andersen, possibly the partnerships that appear to have been
                                     part of what now appears to be a fraudulent scheme, some investors in those part-
                                     nerships, maybe some investment banks. And while that list may include some in-
                                     nocent parties, it is at least as likely to have left out some individuals and entities
                                     who we will later discover were involved in violations of law.
                                       The lawyers for any of the individuals or entities that turn out to be on the ‘‘broke
                                     the law’’ list constitute the universe of lawyers who need to start worrying. Vinson

                                        14 See the report released by Enron, referred to as the Powers report, which details the inves-
                                     tigation Vinson & Elkins conducted and criticizes the firm’s investigatory work. Apparently,
                                     Sharon Watkins, the author of the memo suggesting Enron was committing massive fraud—the
                                     memo whose allegations Vinson & Elkins was charged with investigating—said in that memo
                                     that Vinson & Elkins should not be given the investigatory task because they would be ruling
                                     on their own work. How is it Watkings could figure that out and not the lawyers at Vinson &
                                     Elkins?
                                        15 The lie can be a lie committed by omission if what is omitted is critical enough information
                                     to render that which is said seriously misleading (or as the law calls it ‘‘material’’ misleading).
                                        16 See generally the excellent article by my friend and co-author, Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr., How
                                     Far May a Lawyer Go in Assisting a Client in Unlawful Conduct, 35 U. of Miami L. Rev. 669
                                     (1981).




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003    Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000045   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 46 ===
                                                                                      42
                                     & Elkins was Enron’s outside counsel, but other law firms may have represented
                                     Enron during what may have been its crime spree and might have been in a posi-
                                     tion to have figured out that Enron was breaking the law and to have helped it to
                                     do so. Enron’s in-house counsel were certainly in a position to satisfy all three parts
                                     of the test I set forth above, as were Andersen’s in-house counsel, and any outside
                                     law firms who may have advised Andersen on Enron related-questions during the
                                     years Andersen was auditing and advising Enron. (Having given Davis Polk some
                                     considerable amount of grief above, I want to make clear that here I am not refer-
                                     ring to that law firm because to my knowledge they were not providing Andersen
                                     with advice during the period of time when Andersen might have been violating the
                                     securities laws through its work for Enron).
                                        But as my list of potential law breakers was designed to emphasize, the lawyers
                                     who may be in trouble for assisting their clients’ unlawful conduct (assuming those
                                     clients turn out to have broken the law) does not end with lawyers representing
                                     Enron and Andersen.17
                                        Now, we move to question two: Did any of the lawyers for clients who were break-
                                     ing the law have enough facts in front of them to have figured out with the exercise
                                     of reasonable care that law breaking was going on? Well, the Powers report strongly
                                     suggests that if Enron was breaking the law, its in-house counsel and Vinson & Elk-
                                     ins had enough facts in front of them to have figured it out, had they been exer-
                                     cising reasonable care. I hasten to add that does not make either in-house counsel
                                     or outside counsel, guilty of any crime, but it does leave them in legal jeopardy in
                                     malpractice actions brought on Enron’s behalf by the Trustee in bankruptcy or
                                     whomever ultimately emerges as the new management or entity in control of Enron.
                                        To take just one example detailed in the Powers report, knowing that the Board
                                     had waived Enron’s conflict of interest rules (and possibly having advised that it
                                     was a good idea to do so), it does not appear that any lawyer (within or outside)
                                     Enron bothered to worry much about the ‘‘procedures’’ that were supposed to pre-
                                     vent bad things from happening to Enron due to the conflicting roles its CFO was
                                     not licensed to play. The Powers report says whatever procedures were supposed to
                                     be in place, not only failed miserably but were not designed well enough to do any-
                                     thing but fail. It was Enron’s lawyers who should have designed better procedures,
                                     or at least, monitored whatever procedures were designed to see to it that they had
                                     some reasonable chance of working. I do not know whether this was within the
                                     scope of Vinson & Elkins retainer, but in-house counsel was apparently not paying
                                     all this much mind. Some lawyer or group of lawyers appears to have been hope-
                                     lessly careless on this matter. Indeed, it seems to me that a reasonably careful law-
                                     yer would have strongly advised the board not to waive the conflict rules in the first
                                     place, especially not as to the company’s CFO.
                                        The fact that agents within Enron, including senior management, may have been
                                     actively engaged in fraud does not, in most states, relieve the lawyer from a claim
                                     of negligence for having failed to take steps to have saved her client, the corpora-
                                     tion, from harm (legal and financial) that these wrongdoing agents may have been
                                     causing.18 Again, if a careful lawyer would not have discerned that agents within
                                     the client corporation were acting unlawfully, which includes breaching their duties
                                     to the corporation by self-dealing or taking actions that would leave the corporation
                                     open to a multitude of civil lawsuits and possibly criminal charges, the lawyer

                                        17 Although I was not asked to testify on accountants, I have discussed some and alluded to
                                     other possible wrongdoing by Arthur Andersen as a necessary predicate to an analysis of the
                                     problems that may face Andersen’s lawyers. I thus think it only fair to point out (and this seems
                                     as good a place as any) that Andersen may not be the only accounting firm with legal woes
                                     related to the Andersen mess. The Powers report says Pricewaterhouse Coopers did some work
                                     on the Enron-partnership transactions. If that accounting firm also proves to have stepped over
                                     some legal line, its lawyers (in-house or outside) may be in the universe of lawyers-in-potential
                                     trouble that I have described. I just don’t know enough at this point to say.
                                        18 See O’Melveny & Myers v. FDIC, 512 U.S. 79 (1994). In that case the Supreme Court re-
                                     versed the Ninth Circuit’s opinion, finding a law firm could be liable for malpractice for having
                                     breached its duty of care to a bank by failing to have taken steps to alert its board to the ongo-
                                     ing fraud of the agent in charge of the bank, who was also on the board. But that reversal was
                                     on the ground that the Ninth Circuit had applied federal common law to reject the law firm’s
                                     defense that the bank (its client) and the bank board already knew of the wrongdoing, so there
                                     was nothing more the law firm should have done. In reaching that conclusion, the Supreme
                                     Court mentioned that the FDIC’s brief pointed out that ‘‘in the vast bulk of decisions from 43
                                     jurisdictions, ranging from Rhode Island to Wyoming’’ the fraud of an agent that harmed the
                                     corporation (as is the case with Enron) would not be attributed to the corporation so as to bar
                                     a successful suit of negligence against the lawyers for failing to take steps to alert the corpora-
                                     tion of the fraud and stop it. Indeed, on remind the Ninth Circuit explained that California law
                                     would reach that result as well and affirmed its earlier opinion. FDIC v. O’Melveny & Myers,
                                     61 F.3d 17 (19th Cir. 1995).




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000046   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 47 ===
                                                                                      43
                                     should not be found liable. The liability of the lawyer will turn on how many red
                                     flags were in front of him, indicating ongoing fraud. The Powers report suggests
                                     there were signs aplenty. A company’s lawyers can avoid liability for negligence, but
                                     not if they are careless about detecting wrongdoing by the CEO or CFO or other
                                     senior management, and only if they take steps to bring any signs of serious wrong-
                                     doing to the attention of the board and advise management and the board that the
                                     wrongdoing must stop. The Powers report suggests that did not happen, although
                                     we have yet to hear from the lawyers involved.
                                        Malpractice, is of course a matter of state law. But extreme negligence amounting
                                     to reckless disregard of the fact that corporate actors are engaged in securities fraud
                                     has long been a matter of federal law, although that may no longer be the case. Be-
                                     fore the mid-1990s, federal securities law, as interpreted by the courts, provided
                                     that lawyers could be sued by shareholders in a derivative action and by the SEC
                                     for failing to take steps to stop securities fraud that those lawyers had to be deaf,
                                     dumb and blind not to have detected (i.e., fraud the lawyers recklessly ignored or
                                     to which the lawyers deliberately closed their eyes). This was ‘‘aiding and abetting’’
                                     securities fraud. It should be the law today, but for a number of reasons it isn’t.
                                     That should change.
                                        Before getting to why it should change. Let me explain why it is necessary for
                                     federal law to punish lawyer recklessness when state law allows a malpractice ac-
                                     tion for negligence and thus by definition presumably deters recklessness as well,
                                     both by leaving lawyers liable for less serious carelessness (negligence) and by pro-
                                     viding punitive damages when that negligence gets out of control and rises to the
                                     level of recklessness.
                                        First, there is the fact plain for all to see: the existence of state negligence actions
                                     has not proven to be an effective deterrent, possibly because lawyers bet on the
                                     fraud-doers staying in control of the corporation through fraud and thus there being
                                     no ‘‘clean, new’’ management with an interest in suing them. Possibly because law-
                                     yers believe that the wrongdoing of high corporate officials will somehow be attrib-
                                     uted to the corporation in such a way as to bar a negligence suit or that even if
                                     such a suit may legally proceed, a jury will be loathe to hit the lawyers hard when
                                     management was so dirty itself. Perhaps, some state tort law reform, e.g., laws cap-
                                     ping damages, have rendered it worthwhile for lawyers to risk a negligence suit
                                     when the fees to be reaped are high enough to pay whatever damages may be im-
                                     posed (discounted by the risk that the negligence may go undiscovered or
                                     unprosecuted).
                                        Perhaps it is as simple as lawyers believing (and being trained to act) as if the
                                     agents for their clients were their clients, making it much more difficult to inter-
                                     nalize the notion that there is a client out there that doesn’t know what’s going on.
                                     Perhaps (and I believe there is something to this) the elimination of private causes
                                     of action against lawyers for aiding and abetting liability, the changes to RICO, re-
                                     strictions on joint and several liability in many actions against lawyers, and other
                                     changes in federal law have encouraged lawyers to overlook that something as rel-
                                     atively trivial as negligently failing to take action to stop a fraud could still offend
                                     the law at all.
                                        ‘‘That still couldn’t be what state law says? Could it? Our magic caps undoubtedly
                                     will protect us.’’
                                        The Supreme Court’s decision in Central Bank 19 and the changes Congress made
                                     in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act 20 that helped lawyers to imagine
                                     themselves free (or nearly free from the constraints of law) were monumentally bad
                                     ideas.
                                        It really is no wonder that lawyers believe they are wearing magic caps. It is true
                                     that as a response to Congress’ elimination of the private cause of action against
                                     lawyers for aiding and abetting securities fraud, many courts have not been shy
                                     about holding lawyers liable as primary violators of the securities law in cases that
                                     previously would have been framed as aiding and abetting cases.21 But the degree
                                     to which lawyers may be liable as primary violators for what used to be thought
                                     of as ‘‘aiding’’ a client’s fraud is quite uncertain, and that uncertainty alone is
                                     enough to encourage lawyers to avoid ‘‘knowing’’ that fraud is being committed by

                                       19 Central Bank v. First Interstate Bank, 511 U.S. 164 (1994)
                                       20 Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, Pub. L. Non. 104–67, 109 Stat. 737 (1995)
                                     (codified in scattered sections of 15 U.S.C.) [hereinafter referred to as the 1995 Act].
                                       21 For example, a materially misleading opinion may give rise to primary liability, which
                                     would allow investors who relied on it to sue the lawyers for damages. See e.g., Kline v. First
                                     Western Govt. Securities Inc., 24 F.3d 480 (3rd Cir. 1994)




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000047   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 48 ===
                                                                                        44
                                     their clients and to continue acting in a reckless manner that helps the fraud con-
                                     tinue and makes it harder to discover. Lawyers are not dumb.
                                        Consider the case of Kline v. Boyd,22 the lawyer there tried to sidestep liability
                                     as a primary violator of the securities laws by writing the materially misleading dis-
                                     closure statements without putting the law firm’s name, the respected firm of
                                     Drinker, Biddle, or his own name on any of the blatantly misleading disclosure
                                     statements that the lawyer drafted and which the lawyer knew the client would give
                                     to investors. The Third Circuit had a hell of a time explaining how that conduct—
                                     which was clearly enough to qualify as substantial assistance had private parties
                                     been able to recover for aiding and abetting—amounted to a primary violation of
                                     the securities laws. It managed and I believe its effort was admirable because any
                                     other result would invite lawyers to further securities fraud behind the curtain of
                                     the lawyer-client relationship, free from the law’s reach so long as they kept their
                                     participation secret from the investors. Surely, not a good result.
                                        While I thus applaud the result in Kline, I recognize that the reasoning that
                                     called this bad behavior a ‘‘primary’’ violation instead of aiding and abetting
                                     stretched the law as far as it could go. (I do not think it broke it, but many others
                                     disagree.) And that stretch rendered the judgment quite vulnerable and ended up
                                     destroying its value as precedent. The entire Third Circuit apparently noticed the
                                     stretch and granted a rehearing of the case en banc. That rehearing never occurred
                                     because a settlement was reached while rehearing was pending, and the decision
                                     in Kline that I described above was vacated as part of that settlement.
                                        In the end then we really don’t know whether a lawyer who did what the lawyer
                                     in Kline did may be successfully sued by investors harmed by the lawyers actions.
                                     We should know. A lawyer who does what the lawyer in Kline did is no different
                                     than one who puts his name on work product that he knew or should have known
                                     was materially misleading, except insofar as the anonymous draftsman may be
                                     somewhat more despicable. What sense does it make to let that guy escape damages
                                     in a civil suit?
                                        It is true that the SEC retains jurisdiction to bring a civil cause of action against
                                     lawyers who aid and abet their clients’ securities fraud, but the statutory provision
                                     that now sets out that authority provides that the SEC must allege that the lawyer
                                     ‘‘knowingly’’ helped.23 Sounds fair enough on its face, but it’s not. If one kills some-
                                     one with reckless indifference to human life, most states call that murder and treat
                                     the defendant with little or no difference from one who kills someone with intent
                                     (premeditated murders are treated more harshly but I am not speaking here about
                                     them). If reckless indifference equals intent for ordinary folks charged with all sorts
                                     of crimes, not just murder, why should lawyers not be held to that standard too?
                                     Indeed, there is more not less reason to insist that reckless is as bad as actual
                                     knowledge when the defendant is a lawyer.
                                        Lawyers are notorious for never ‘‘knowing’’ their clients are guilty. That inability
                                     is built into the ethos of the bar, which still takes its shape from the paradigm of
                                     the lawyer as advocate, And by and large, as to lawyers charged with defending cli-
                                     ent’s in court, that ethos is okay. We do not want lawyers to substitute their judg-
                                     ment of the client’s guilt for that of the jury or that of the judge. Although I hasten
                                     to add that this ‘‘no judging’’ attitude sometimes leads to abuse in courtrooms too,
                                     as when litigators believe they have a license in civil and criminal cases to assist
                                     perjury on the ground that they are incapable of ‘‘knowing’’ what the truth of the
                                     matter is. That caveat made, in general it is appropriate that the trial lawyer leave
                                     ‘‘judging’’ the client to the finder of fact. That’s what trials are for.
                                        But none of that applies to the lawyer who is not litigating a matter after the
                                     alleged wrong has occurred, but rather one who enters the scene before or during
                                     the client’s wrongdoing—the lawyer in the role of a facilitator of the client’s trans-
                                     actions. Indeed, very few lawyers practice in court compared to the number whose
                                     daily work is to facilitate transactions. The transaction or office lawyer, as distin-
                                     guished from her trial colleagues, must understand what the client is doing and
                                     whether that is within or without the law. Otherwise, there is simply no reason for
                                     the lawyer being there.
                                        But transaction lawyers share the ethic of trial lawyers that makes it difficult to
                                     believe, difficult to ‘‘know’’ that their clients are breaking the law. Complicating that
                                     problem is the fact that every good transaction lawyer understands, what every good
                                     lawyer knows, the lines of the law are almost always fuzzy at the edges. It is simply
                                     not easy to ‘‘know for sure’’ when those lines have been crossed, particularly when
                                     clients want to walk on the wild side and expect their lawyers to support that be-

                                           22 Fed. Sec. L. Rep ¿ 90, 136, Vacated on Grant of Rehearing En Banc (3rd Cir. 1998).
                                           23 15 U.S.C. 78t(f) (Supp. I 1996).




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003     Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000048   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT    SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 49 ===
                                                                                      45
                                     havior. The lawyer who seems too quick to judge his client is likely to be replaced
                                     rapidly with one much more willing to ‘‘believe’’ that his client is right.
                                        Letting lawyers know that there is a price to be paid for failing to ‘‘know’’ what
                                     the facts in front of the lawyer plainly suggest—that the client is committing
                                     fraud—is absolutely necessary. Without that we create a world in which fraud doers
                                     can count on high-priced and savvy lawyers to help them with their schemes, as
                                     long as the fraud doer never directly admits to the lawyer precisely what he is up
                                     to. This is not a world we should encourage. It is a world our law should try to
                                     erase.
                                        In 1964, Judge Friendly said this about the importance of holding lawyers and
                                     accountants liable when they recklessly disregarded evidence of their client’s securi-
                                     ties fraud:
                                        Congress did not mean that every mistake of law or misstatement of fact should
                                     subject an attorney or an accountant to criminal liability simply because more
                                     skilled practitioners would not have made them. But Congress equally could not
                                     have intended that men holding themselves out as members of these ancient profes-
                                     sions should be able to escape criminal liability on a plea of ignorance when they
                                     have shut their eyes to what was plainly to be seen or have represented a knowl-
                                     edge they knew they did not possess.24
                                        Congress should change the securities laws to make clear once again that such
                                     recklessness on the part of lawyers and accountants is enough to subject a lawyer
                                     to a private suit for money damages from those the lawyer’s recklessness has helped
                                     to harm. Such recklessness is rightly thought of as ‘‘criminal,’’ given the learning,
                                     privileged position, substantial financial rewards and expertise that come with being
                                     a securities lawyer. And if it’s rightly thought of as criminal when such privileged
                                     folks behave recklessly, it should be a civil wrong as well.
                                        Were the lawyers who represented Enron negligent? Were they reckless? Did they
                                     actually know, what we now suspect, that Enron through its agents was committing
                                     securities fraud? I can tell you this much I am highly doubtful that they ‘‘knew,’’
                                     if ‘‘knowing’’ means subjectively believing that Enron was breaking the law. I am
                                     sure they convinced themselves that however close to the legal line Enron was, it
                                     had not crossed it. I am sure they refused to see and took no steps to actively ferret
                                     out, facts that would have burst that bubble—facts that would have made it difficult
                                     to maintain their ‘‘belief’’ that nothing was rotten in the state of Denmark. Hard
                                     as I am on lawyers, I can hardly blame them. The law as ‘‘reformed’’ by Congress
                                     invited them to act that way. If they ‘‘knew’’ I am sure that it was only in the sense
                                     that it may have crossed their mind, but any agile legal mind can formulate a doubt
                                     about whether something is ‘‘illegal’’ to chase those occasional bogey-men away.
                                        But the facts (as we know them so far) do seem to suggest that at least some of
                                     Enron’s lawyers and likely some of the lawyers for other actors in this drama went
                                     way beyond negligence. According to the Powers report there were not just red flags
                                     all over the place but cannons booming and music playing, all with the same mes-
                                     sage: Enron’s financial condition is way different than what it (with its lawyers’ help
                                     and its accountants’ blessings) was leading everyone to believe. A jury need not ac-
                                     cept a lawyer’s denial of knowledge. It is perfectly free to infer that with so many
                                     major clues, some of these lawyers did ‘‘know,’’ no matter what they were telling
                                     themselves or what they tell the jury under oath. That is, a jury can decide not to
                                     believe the lawyer, assuming a court allows the case to get to the jury, something
                                     Congress’s reforms discourage judges from doing in cases when ‘‘actual knowledge’’
                                     is in doubt.25
                                        But whatever happens or doesn’t happen to the lawyers in Enron, there is every
                                     reason to believe that there will be securities fraud in our future and every reason
                                     to believe that its success will depend in part on lawyer’s being asleep at the wheel
                                     or acting with reckless abandon. Keep in mind that in the past, as will be the case
                                     here—assuming lawyers are found to have substantially assisted fraud at Enron—
                                     the lawyers who have done wrong were (and will be) members of our finest law
                                     firms, not some nobodies from nowhere. The bar can complain all it wants about
                                     federal encroachment on self-regulation, but one thing should be abundantly clear
                                     by now: Without the discipline that fairly certain and substantial liability brings,
                                     the bar will not reform itself. Lawyers need law at least as much, if not more, than

                                       24 328 F.2d 854 (2d Cir. 1964).
                                       25 I am referring here to the strong pleading requirements in securities actions that Congress
                                     has enacted. Whatever merit those requirements have, they operate perversely when combined
                                     with the elimination private cause of action against lawyers for aiding and abetting liability and
                                     the new ‘‘knowingly’’ standard for aiding and abetting actions that the SEC retains the power
                                     to bring.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000049   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 50 ===
                                                                                      46
                                     everyone else.26 You do neither the bar nor anyone else a favor by leaving them be-
                                     hind the curtain trusting in their magic caps.

                                                                     RECOMMENDATIONS FOR REFORM
                                        1. Restore private causes of action against lawyers for aiding and abetting securi-
                                     ties law (and against accountants too).
                                        2. Replace the ‘‘knowingly’’ standard that now defines the scope of the SEC’s abil-
                                     ity to bring civil actions against lawyers and provide that recklessness will suffice
                                     in actions brought by the SEC and by private parties as well.
                                        3. Pass legislation that removes the legal cloud that has long surrounded Rule
                                     102(e), the securities regulation promulgated by the SEC to discipline securities law-
                                     yers and accountants.27 Make it clear in that legislation that the SEC need not first
                                     secure a ruling from a federal district court affirming that the lawyer has violated
                                     the securities laws before proceeding against that lawyer via Rule 102(e).28 Finally,
                                     affirm a version of the standard that the SEC has been pushing for years: in-house
                                     and outside counsel who become aware of facts strongly suggesting that an agent
                                     of a corporation is involved in securities fraud must take steps, designed to be effec-
                                     tive, to ensure that the board understands what the lawyer has discovered and must
                                     take steps to encourage the board to take action to disclose what it has discovered
                                     to the SEC and investing public.29 A lawyer who fails to take such action should
                                     be subject to discipline by the SEC whether or not he has been found liable or would
                                     ever be found liable by a court for aiding and abetting a violation of the securities
                                     law.
                                        4. Ensure that RICO can reach organizations, as Enron may yet turn out to be,
                                     whose profits are largely the product of fraud. To the extent that the restrictions
                                     now in RICO on securities fraud as a predicate act make that statute ineffective
                                     against organizations that are (or that evolve into) little more than giant fraud ma-

                                        26 In the seminal case on lawyer liability for aiding and abetting securities fraud, which the
                                     bar fought vigorously when it was brought by the SEC, the National Student Marketing Case,
                                     457 F.Supp. 682 (D.D.C. 1978), lawyers at Lord Bissell & Brook were found to have aided and
                                     abetted securities fraud by sitting by and allowing a merger to go forward (without even speak-
                                     ing up to try and stop it) that the lawyers should have known (were reckless not to have known)
                                     was being consummated when the financial information in the proxy statements was materially
                                     misleading. The court, however, obviously quite sensitive to the storm of criticism that the
                                     SEC’s action had engendered from the securities bar (something the court mentions) decided
                                     that although the lawyers had aided and abetted the fraud, no sanction was necessary because
                                     they were lawyers and we could trust them to go forth and never sin again. A few years later
                                     the same (quite otherwise respectable) law firm was charged with assisting another client to
                                     violate the securities laws, a claim the law firm settled for $24 million. In an interview with
                                     the press after that charge, the managing partner of the law firm admitted that the judge’s deci-
                                     sion on what constituted securities fraud—the decision the judge was so sure lawyers would
                                     take seriously even without a sanction—was never circulated to the partners of the firm and
                                     that no policies of the firm were changed as a result of the ‘‘no penalty’’ holding by the National
                                     Student Marketing judge. See Hazard, Koniak & Cramton, The Law and Ethics of Lawyeri8ng
                                     3d ed. (1999) at 117 (footnote c).
                                        27 While the rule has been upheld as a valid exercise of the SEC’s rulemaking authority as
                                     to accountants, see e.g., Touch Ross & Co. v. SEC, 609 F.2d 570 (2d Cir. 1979). I am not aware
                                     of similarly definitive rulings when it comes to the rule’s application to lawyers. Moreover, the
                                     fact that it is a rule and not a clear statutory mandate seems to cause court’s to withhold def-
                                     erence from the SEC’s interpretation of the rule and application. Cf. Checkosky v. SEC, 23 F.3d
                                     452 (D.C. Cir. 1994); and especially, Checkosky v. SEC, 139 F.3d 221 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (criticizing
                                     the SEC’s straddling of the fence on whether negligence sufficed in a 102(e) proceeding s or
                                     whether recklessness was the standard for discipline. That matter too should be decided. More-
                                     over, I believe that some discipline, although perhaps not disbarment or suspension, should be
                                     provided on a finding of negligence. By definition negligence is the first step on the road to reck-
                                     lessness and it should be discouraged, at least when it comes to accountants, by the threat of
                                     SEC censure or reprimand.
                                        28 See Ann Maxey, SEC Enforcement Actions Against Securities Lawyers, 22 Del. J. Corp. L.
                                     537 (1997) (discussing the SEC’s declaration that it would not use 102(e) against lawyers with-
                                     out first seeking a court ruling that the lawyers had violated the securities laws.) The declara-
                                     tion was one of many retreats the SEC has had to make over the years from its efforts to see
                                     to it that securities lawyers were not recklessly assisting fraud. For a description of some of
                                     that history of retreat and how aggressively the bar reacts to any attempt by the SEC to rein
                                     in reckless securities lawyers. See Hazard, Koniak & Cramton, The Law and Ethics of
                                     Lawyering, 3d Ed. (1999) at pp. 117–188 & 739–758. See also Koniak, The Law Between the
                                     Bar and the State, 70 N.Car.L.Rev. 1389 (1992); and Koniak, When Courts Refuse to Frame
                                     the Law and Others Frame it to their Will, 66 S.Cal.L.Rev. 1075 (1993).
                                        29 This was what the court in National Student Marketing described as a lawyer’s duty. 457
                                     F.Supp. 682 (D.D.C. 1978). And see In re Carter, Fed. Sec. L. Rep ¿ 82,847 (Feb. 28, 1981); and
                                     In re Gutfreund Fed. Sec. L. Rep ¿ 83,597 (Dec. 3, 1992).




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000050   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 51 ===
                                                                                      47
                                     chines, the restrictions are unjustified and arbitrarily exclude a set of criminal en-
                                     terprises that cause much more harm than some now covered by the statute.30
                                        5. Restore joint and several liability, when a defendant has acted recklessly, at
                                     least when the defendant is a lawyer, for the reasons given above on the problems
                                     and inadequacy of an ‘‘actual knowledge’’ standard of liability for lawyers. (I believe
                                     accountants too should be jointly and several liable, even when their mental state
                                     is ‘‘reckless’’ and not ‘‘actual knowledge.’’ As to lawyers and accountants, as I ex-
                                     plained earlier, their recklessness makes them liable to their corporate client for
                                     malpractice and punitive damages (in almost all states). Given that the corporation
                                     already has a claim against the lawyers for damages, it makes little sense to make
                                     defrauded investors wait until the corporation recovers from its lawyers (in a neg-
                                     ligence action) to have access to money that will belong to the corporation sooner
                                     or later, assuming it pursues its lawyers (and accountants) for malpractice. By
                                     eliminating joint and several liability, you simply require that there be two lawsuits
                                     (the investor action against the corporation and the negligence action by the cor-
                                     poration against its lawyers and accountants) for the corporation to get its hands
                                     on the assets that it may have to distribute to those harmed by the fraud.
                                        6. Provide the SEC with sufficient funds to enforce Rule 102(e) (or preferably it’s
                                     new statutory counterpart, see recommendation 4 above) and enough funds to bring
                                     enforcement actions against lawyers (and accountants) who aid and abet securities
                                     fraud.
                                        7. Make clear that language in the Administrative Procedure Act that provides
                                     that lawyers admitted to the bar of any state may practice before any federal agency
                                     does not preclude the SEC from setting standards for securities lawyers and impos-
                                     ing those standards through discipline, including disbarment, in a Rule 102(e) pro-
                                     ceeding, an administrative enforcement action or any new statutory vehicle you may
                                     provide.31
                                        8. Require, or at least encourage, the SEC and the Justice Department to an-
                                     nounce that neither will accept for consideration of any sort any so-called ‘‘internal
                                     investigation’’ or ‘‘compliance report’’ or any similar document that purports to re-
                                     port on alleged wrongdoing of a corporation that was prepared by any law firm who
                                     was in the employ of the corporation at the time that the wrongdoing occurred, at
                                     least not if that law firm’s representation of the corporation during the alleged
                                     wrongdoing included any matter that is covered by the investigatory report. All such
                                     reports should include a statement by the law firm attesting to its compliance with
                                     this statutory requirement or government policy.
                                        9. Finally, I am more than deeply conversant, having written numerous articles
                                     on the subject, with the abuses committed by plaintiffs’ lawyers in class action suits,
                                     including the abuses that occur in securities suits. I am indeed so familiar with this
                                     problem that I know that much of the most serious abuse involves a form of joint
                                     venture between unlikely allies: plaintiffs’ lawyers and defendant corporations (and
                                     defense lawyers, of course). The aim of the venture: to make money for the ven-
                                     turers at the expense of the absent class.
                                        I would be happy in the future to work with any member of this Committee, ma-
                                     jority or minority staff, on meaningful reforms to cure class action abuse. But mak-
                                     ing it safe for lawyers and accountants to aid fraud-doers with reckless abandon is
                                     not the way to address abuses in class actions. The primary victims of most class
                                     action abuse, in securities cases and all other kinds of cases, are members of the
                                     absent class. Don’t ‘‘cure’’ that problem by leaving them subject to injury by a dif-
                                     ferent group of actors. That would make the cure worse than the disease.

                                                                                 CONCLUSION
                                        If Enron was the Emerald City, no matter what individual or groups of individ-
                                     uals end up to have been standing behind the curtain playing the Wizard of Oz (be
                                     it Enron’s CEO, its CFO, some or all of its board of directors or whomever), I guar-
                                     antee you one thing: A lawyer was standing beside them making sure the curtain
                                     stayed drawn and all the bells and whistles were hooked up and operating to fool
                                     Dorothy, the brainless scarecrow and the cowardly lion.
                                        You want to clean this mess up? Cherchez les avocats. Take off their magic caps
                                     by passing legislation that leaves them with no doubt that the law applies to them
                                     too, not just when they ‘‘know’’ what’s going on but when they act recklessly with

                                        30 The brief time I was provided to prepare this testimony did not allow me to refresh myself
                                     on the precise restrictions in RICO that might lead to the result I describe. I will be happy to
                                     supplement this statement at a later time with more details on this matter.
                                        31 See 5 U.S.C. 500(b). Note that it does not now appear to prevent this, see 500 (d)(2), but
                                     it would be wise to remove any doubt and save courts from deciding the matter.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000051   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 52 ===
                                                                                      48
                                     little regard for the harm they thereby help inflict on the rest of us and on their
                                     clients too.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. General Gregoire, again, I thank you for being
                                     here. I know Senator Cantwell and others had urged that you be
                                     here. You were one of the leaders in protecting the public health
                                     with the States’ tobacco litigation, so you understand as well as
                                     anybody in the room the role that State attorneys general play in
                                     holding corporations accountable.
                                        Under the civil RICO statute, the Attorney General of the United
                                     States is the only government actor who can bring a suit. Do you
                                     believe that it would be a good idea to give State attorneys general
                                     similar authority under our civil RICO?
                                        General GREGOIRE. Senator Leahy, I think I can speak not only
                                     on behalf of myself, but my colleagues, as well, in that I think it
                                     is clear that we believe the best law enforcement is done as locally
                                     as possible. So we would encourage you to consider such a move
                                     and we could work in partnership with the Federal Government,
                                     which we do in most actions, but it is troubling for us that we are
                                     without authority in this regard.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Another thing, as you know, again, using the
                                     tobacco case as an example, you are aided by corporate whistle-
                                     blowers. Several of us around here have been prosecuting attorneys
                                     or plaintiffs’ attorneys and we know that many times a corporate
                                     whistleblower is the first opening. When the window opens on
                                     wrongdoing, it is often a whistleblower, for whatever the reason,
                                     conscience or anything else, comes forward. Do we need to provide
                                     some protection to corporate whistleblowers in the securities fraud
                                     area?
                                        General GREGOIRE. I would urge you to consider this very seri-
                                     ously for the reason that with the amendments that were made in
                                     1995 to call for a plaintiff to bring a complaint forward with par-
                                     ticularity and without the ability to do discovery, more often than
                                     not, we are reliant now on whistleblowers bringing forward that
                                     kind of detailed information so we can plead the cases with particu-
                                     larity.
                                        If they are not given adequate protection, then I think we are
                                     going to find ourselves even more incapable of holding accountable
                                     companies like Enron and others and making it such that investors
                                     and those of us who represent the public funds cannot bring an ac-
                                     tion because we do not have the information and there has been
                                     a stay on discovery and we are incapable of getting access to it. So
                                     I think probably more importantly than ever, we have got to pro-
                                     tect those whistleblowers.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. In fact, there were whistleblowers at Enron.
                                     They took some risk in coming forward, did they not?
                                        General GREGOIRE. Considerable risk. I am, frankly, dis-
                                     appointed that, despite the fact they were shut down there, they
                                     did not take additional risk and go forward to the SEC or to the
                                     Justice Department, but I know there was considerable fear on
                                     their part, so I can also understand it. So protecting them, I think,
                                     is extremely important.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. Professor Koniak, looking back
                                     through your notes and your testimony, if I am stating it correctly,
                                     you said the 1994 Central Bank decision, the five-four Supreme




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000052   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 53 ===
                                                                                      49

                                     Court ruling that those who aid and abet securities fraud, such as
                                     accountants and lawyers, the Supreme Court held they can no
                                     longer be held liable by private parties under Federal law. Now,
                                     you disagree with that. In fact, you described it as monumentally
                                     bad, so I would take that as New England understatement that you
                                     thought the Supreme Court screwed up on that one.
                                        We know from Enron’s own report released this week that these
                                     same types of firms received literally millions of dollars in assist-
                                     ance in actually setting up the very corporate arrangements which
                                     are sort of problematical, but what do you think that these finan-
                                     cial incentives encourage lawyers and accountants to do when they
                                     learn about corporate fraud?
                                        Ms. KONIAK. There is absolutely—the decision and the legislation
                                     that affirmed the Supreme Court decision encourage lawyers who
                                     already do not need any more encouragement in this direction not
                                     to know what is going on. Now, for lawyers, lawyers are trained
                                     not to judge their clients, and that is appropriate, particularly for
                                     trial lawyers. They are not supposed to supplant the role of the
                                     jury. Judgment is for the jury.
                                        But most lawyers are not trial lawyers. Most lawyers are
                                     facilitators of transactions, and their job is to know what is going
                                     on. But the Supreme Court decision and the legislation place a pre-
                                     mium on not knowing, not understanding the signs that suggested
                                     that fraud or other criminal activity was going on by insulating a
                                     lawyer from liability unless the lawyer knew, had actual knowl-
                                     edge, and allowed and encouraged, therefore, reckless conduct. En-
                                     couraging reckless conduct among a profession that is trained to
                                     give their clients the benefit of the doubt, and for good reasons
                                     trained that way, is an invitation for disaster.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. But you mention on trial lawyers, for example,
                                     a trial lawyer, say it is a defense lawyer in a criminal case, he can-
                                     not aid and abet his client in perjury. He could not if they realized,
                                     while there is a lawyer-client privilege, if he realized the client is
                                     planning ongoing criminal conduct, he cannot aid and abet that. He
                                     has certain duties to the court. But are you saying that in this area
                                     of security fraud, they have sort of specially carved out immunity?
                                        Ms. KONIAK. Well——
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Under today’s law, using the Supreme Court
                                     decisions and all that—or maybe a better way of putting it, do we
                                     need to have the real threat of an aiding and abetting liability to
                                     keep people in line?
                                        Ms. KONIAK. You need the real threat of aiding and abetting li-
                                     ability and the standard of recklessness to keep lawyers in line, be-
                                     cause lawyers are helpers. The natural way in law to express help-
                                     ing is aiding and abetting. And lawyers, again, are trained, some-
                                     times for good reasons, not to be the first to judge their clients.
                                     Lawyers are supposed to stand by, whether their clients were cor-
                                     porations, their clients were individuals, stand by their client.
                                     Knowing and believing in your heart that a client did wrong is a
                                     hard step for a lawyer to take. Understanding that your client very
                                     well may have conceded wrong because all of the signs are pointing
                                     in that direction is something that lawyers can see.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. Senator Hatch?




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000053   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 54 ===
                                                                                      50

                                        Senator HATCH. Mr. Schatz, Rule 10(b)(5) is still alive and well,
                                     is it not?
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. Yes, Senator Hatch.
                                        Senator HATCH. It is a pretty broad rule, is it not?
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. I am sorry?
                                        Senator HATCH. It is a pretty broad rule of liability.
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. Yes, it is.
                                        Senator HATCH. Any corporate official or person manipulating
                                     that stock or making misstatements or errors or omissions can be
                                     found liable for what is called securities fraud, right?
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. Absolutely.
                                        Senator HATCH. It is not like people are left high and dry here.
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. No, 487 companies were sued this past year.
                                        Senator HATCH. I am clearly troubled by these events, there is
                                     no question about it, that led to the Enron collapse and the possi-
                                     bility that securities fraud was perpetrated not only by Enron ex-
                                     ecutives, but also by analysts and auditors. Of course, I think we
                                     ought to wait and see what the facts are, too. You never know.
                                     Companies do fail. But this one looks particularly bad, at least ac-
                                     cording to the media reports.
                                        Now, based on your extensive experience in securities litigation,
                                     both before and after the enactment of the PSLRA, would any of
                                     the reforms made by Congress prevent any culpable party in the
                                     Enron debacle from being held accountable for his or her actions?
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. No, Senator Hatch. I think, as I indicated to you,
                                     the provisions of the Reform Act had nothing to do in my mind
                                     with the Enron debacle. I think it is apparent that all potential
                                     parties are going to be brought in as defendants in the various liti-
                                     gation and I think at the end of the day, the system will work.
                                        Senator HATCH. The laws are broad enough to catch manipula-
                                     tive or errors or emissions or false conduct?
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. That is certainly my belief.
                                        Senator HATCH. Could you go over again the impact of civil RICO
                                     allegations in security fraud cases? Is it not true that the plaintiffs’
                                     lawyers often use the threat of treble damages to leverage high-
                                     tech companies and individuals into settling cases they might oth-
                                     erwise defend? If you could also elaborate on some of the outcomes
                                     you have heard here today, as well.
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. First, let me be explicit. In securities class action
                                     cases, there is virtually never an instance where the theoretical
                                     plaintiff-style damages are not enormous. You never have an in-
                                     stance where you need to treble the amount of recovery, because
                                     even as it stands now, companies and individuals are faced with
                                     staggering potential liability. What RICO would do, in my opinion,
                                     would give an unwarranted tool, and by the way, Chairman Levitt
                                     agreed that it would give an unwarranted tool to plaintiffs’ class
                                     action lawyers to, if you will, extort unreasonable settlements.
                                        Senator HATCH. Was I wrong in pointing out that a high percent-
                                     age of big board companies are constantly sued and that the vast
                                     majority of the Silicon Valley firms have been sued by plaintiffs’
                                     lawyers in class action lawsuits?
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. Senator Hatch, I do not know the exact percentages,
                                     but I can tell you that an enormous number of high technology
                                     companies have been sued, including companies which I think we




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000054   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 55 ===
                                                                                      51

                                     would all agree are sources of great pride for certainly the valley
                                     but also the country.
                                        Senator HATCH. As the chairman pointed out, we are not here
                                     today to specifically examine, and I am going to ask you this, Mr.
                                     Lund, the GAO lawsuit. However, the whole reason for the GAO
                                     suit is to obtain information about Enron, so I believe the two
                                     issues are interrelated and that is why I asked you to testify here
                                     today.
                                        So Professor Lund, as you know, Federalist Number 51, perhaps
                                     the most frequently quoted single commentary on the principle of
                                     separation of powers, James Madison wrote there that, quote, ‘‘The
                                     great security against a gradual concentration’’ of governmental
                                     powers in one of the three branches ‘‘consists in giving to those who
                                     administer each Department the necessary constitutional means
                                     and personal motives to resist encroachment of the others.’’
                                        In your testimony, you briefly discuss one of these ‘‘constitutional
                                     means.’’ Could you please explain or elaborate on the appropriate
                                     constitutional oversight role of Congress and the legitimacy of the
                                     GAO’s action in this area?
                                        Mr. LUND. Yes. Thank you, Senator. I think that the passage
                                     that you cited from Federalist 51, it is always good to think about
                                     that passage in connection with another passage from a different
                                     number of the Federalist where Madison pointed out that in a re-
                                     publican form of government, the most dangerous branch was al-
                                     ways the legislature, was always the branch that was the most ca-
                                     pable of unduly dominating the other departments of government.
                                        With Federalist 51, when Madison talks about giving every part
                                     of the government the necessary means to preserve its constitu-
                                     tional position, I think it is especially important in the case of the
                                     executive to recognize that that means must be adequate to the
                                     task, and over the course of our history, it has proven adequate to
                                     the task, I think in part because confrontations between the execu-
                                     tive and the legislature have taken the form of the—the serious
                                     confrontations have taken the form of confrontations between elect-
                                     ed officials, between the President exerting executive privilege, for
                                     example, and the Congress, the Members of Congress.
                                        What is a little worrisome about this GAO suit is, first, that it
                                     is not being—that the Comptroller General is a relatively inde-
                                     pendent and certainly unelected part of the legislative branch. It
                                     does not have the same political constraints on him that elected of-
                                     ficials do.
                                        And second, that it threatens to involve the courts. These mat-
                                     ters have been litigated to some extent, but the courts have been
                                     very reluctant, and properly so, to saddle with a kind of finality
                                     that judicial judgments have the exact nature of the proper rela-
                                     tionship between the President and the Congress. The GAO suit,
                                     I think, threatens to bring the courts in in a way that may not be
                                     healthy.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Again, I am sure that Vice President Cheney
                                     is appreciating the defense of his closed-door meetings here, but
                                     again, I want to emphasize, that is not the purpose of this. Others
                                     will talk about that. Others have talked about his closed-door meet-
                                     ings. I believe the Republican chairman of one of the House com-




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000055   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 56 ===
                                                                                      52

                                     mittees has raised problems with it and others, but we are not in-
                                     vestigating that.
                                        Senator Kennedy?
                                        Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much, and I want to thank
                                     all the panelists for very interesting and helpful testimony.
                                        To Mr. Raynor, just with regards to the current bankruptcy law
                                     and the one that is in conference now, I just give you these facts
                                     on the Enron situation. It is my understanding that just before
                                     Enron filed for bankruptcy, several steps were taken. First, mid-
                                     level and low-level workers were laid off. These workers were given
                                     nothing. These workers were given nothing.
                                        Then, second, derivative traders were given $50 million in reten-
                                     tion bonuses, and then executives, 500 executives were wired $55
                                     million in retention bonuses the day before the bankruptcy. Five
                                     hundred received $55 million, and I understand some of those em-
                                     ployees are still collecting paychecks.
                                        The day after Enron filed bankruptcy, 4,500 workers were laid
                                     off, and although their severance packages would have totaled $150
                                     million, they were given $4,500, a total of $20 million under the
                                     bankruptcy wage priority. After taxes, they received $3,000. Enron
                                     told them that under the bankruptcy law, the company could not
                                     give the workers a larger package.
                                        Under current bankruptcy law and under the one that we are
                                     considering in the conference, the workers were not protected, were
                                     they?
                                        Mr. RAYNOR. No, Senator. Not only were they not protected, but
                                     we believe workers and their pensions should be first in line under
                                     bankruptcy law to receive funds, and also, as we have been saying,
                                     this law in Texas and in Florida that allows executives to protect
                                     mansions while individual workers and retirees get thrown out of
                                     their apartments and their homes has got to be changed.
                                        Senator KENNEDY. Since you mentioned that, I understand in
                                     Texas, in 1999, their property code was amended to increase an
                                     urban homestead from one to ten acres, so the law permits a Texas
                                     resident to claim a residential and business homestead if they are
                                     on contiguous lots, a person lives and works on them. Accordingly,
                                     a person who lives and works in a condominium or penthouse or
                                     even an office building may purchase the entire office building to
                                     protect their wealth under Texas law.
                                        But the point I am trying to get at with regards to the existing
                                     bankruptcy law and the one that is in the conference, if we say we
                                     are interested in being fair to workers, we have learned a powerful
                                     lesson. We should not have to keep relearning it about what hap-
                                     pens to workers under these circumstances, and you have made an
                                     eloquent case. If we fail to protect workers, even under our new
                                     bankruptcy law, I think it is a shame. I do not know whether you
                                     want to express an opinion about it.
                                        Mr. RAYNOR. Let me say this, that unfortunately, my union and
                                     America’s unions and workers have experienced far too many cases
                                     where companies go bankrupt and the executives get taken care of
                                     under existing laws and under many that are being proposed and
                                     the workers wind up getting cheated. Enron is a widely publicized
                                     example, but it goes on, Senator, every day, and something needs




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000056   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 57 ===
                                                                                      53

                                     to be done to protect workers in bankruptcies instead of corporate
                                     executives.
                                        Senator KENNEDY. Tomorrow, our Human Resources Committee
                                     will be dealing with the pension aspects of the workers and what
                                     has happened to them and I want to just, if I could, ask both you
                                     and General Gregoire a question. You are both suing Enron be-
                                     cause of the losses in the retirement benefit funds, so I would like
                                     to ask your thoughts regarding the 401(k)-style savings plans. Your
                                     suits contend improper accounting measures, disclosure of false
                                     and misleading information, inside trading.
                                        General Gregoire, you assert that Enron used offshore tax ha-
                                     vens to hide its debt burden from investors, that it misstated its
                                     financial position and investors’ equity in the company. Repeatedly,
                                     you point out that it was virtually impossible for investors to make
                                     educated financial decisions because Enron was able to operate in
                                     secret with limited regulatory review and no independent audit.
                                        Mr. Raynor, you point out that many of these problems are not
                                     confined to Enron. Enron is simply one of the worst cases of cor-
                                     porate corruption.
                                        So I share your concern about the business practices that led to
                                     the losses suffered by the benefit funds, and I am also concerned
                                     about 401(k)-style funds that hold workers hostage, prevent them
                                     from selling the matching company stock until they are near retire-
                                     ment age. In many cases, workers holding company stock have not
                                     been permitted to sell the stock as the prices tumble, and even if
                                     they have access to information, they cannot help themselves be-
                                     cause they are trapped by the terms of their benefit plan.
                                        For example, like Enron, Polaroid, a major company in my State
                                     of Massachusetts, forced workers to invest their retirement savings
                                     in company stock and the employees were barred from selling until
                                     they quit or retired from the company.
                                        So, Mr. Raynor and General Gregoire, do you believe that Con-
                                     gress needs to consider reform legislation to address this problem,
                                     and if so, perhaps you could share your recommendations. Mr.
                                     Raynor, we often hear that the existent laws governing the 401(k)
                                     plans give workers choice and can you tell the committee if you be-
                                     lieve that choice is meaningful and any of your own experience on
                                     this issue, any insights that you might have.
                                        Mr. RAYNOR. Senator, first of all, we think that it ought to be il-
                                     legal for corporations to push the company stock in plans, because
                                     employees are susceptible to company pressure. They do not have
                                     the information that corporate executives have, and when compa-
                                     nies push employees to buy stock, it becomes you are disloyal if you
                                     do not buy the company stock and that needs to be regulated and
                                     workers need to be protected from that.
                                        Workers, many of the ones that we represent, do not have the
                                     knowledge to make those kinds of investment decisions and they
                                     need protection from their employer, and also protection under the
                                     administration’s proposal to allow money managers to use their
                                     high-pressure sales tactics on our members about investment deci-
                                     sions. That is going to be a disaster, allowing Fidelity, for instance,
                                     to try to sell——
                                        Senator KENNEDY. That is in the President’s proposal?




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000057   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 58 ===
                                                                                      54

                                        Mr. RAYNOR. Yes, to allow them to sell to workers 401(k) invest-
                                     ment decisions is something that workers need protection from, as
                                     well. The H.R. director of Enron was cashing in her money at the
                                     same time she was enforcing rules that did not allow the Enron
                                     workers to sell their stock. So, clearly, the—and many of our mem-
                                     bers have 401(k) plans, but we believe they should be an addition
                                     to defined benefit plans and not in place of defined benefit plans
                                     and we think that Congress ought to legislate in that direction.
                                        General GREGOIRE. Senator Kennedy, I agree with Mr. Raynor.
                                     I might simply add that, you know, with respect to State pension
                                     funds like the one at hand in our State, we are well diversified,
                                     well diversified. We had every right to rely on everything that we
                                     did by way of our investment. So I do not think you can fault my
                                     investment board for what they did.
                                        But at the end of the day, because of our diversification, our em-
                                     ployees are still going to get benefits. The problem with the em-
                                     ployees of companies like Enron and 401(k) is they are held cap-
                                     tive. That is all they have. They are not diversified, and at the end
                                     of the day, they end up with nothing.
                                        So I am here on behalf of the fire fighters and the State employ-
                                     ees of the State of Washington and the other States to say what
                                     has happened here is a travesty and it should never have been al-
                                     lowed to occur, but I must say, on behalf of the workers of these
                                     companies, at the end of the day, they are the ones who have been
                                     most defrauded by this kind of conduct.
                                        Senator KENNEDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. Thank you, Senator Kennedy and
                                     General Gregoire.
                                        Senator Specter?
                                        Senator SPECTER. I thank this distinguished panel for providing
                                     a lot of very important information on a great many very serious
                                     issues. I would like to pose three questions to be answered by the
                                     panel after the hearing because of the limitations of the 5-minute
                                     rule.
                                        First, I would like your opinion as to whether auditors should be
                                     precluded from doing both—or firms like Arthur Andersen should
                                     be precluded from doing both auditing and consulting work for the
                                     same firm, like Enron, since we have seen so much of professional
                                     opinions being for sale.
                                        Second, I would be interested in your judgment as to whether the
                                     Private Securities Litigation Act of 1995 should be repealed or
                                     modified in light of the testimony here about the very sharp limita-
                                     tions on pleading.
                                        And third, I would like your opinions as to whether Congress
                                     should legislate specifically by imposing criminal penalties on ac-
                                     countants and lawyers who advise their clients, like Enron, on how
                                     to break the law. The attorney-client privilege protects a lawyer on
                                     giving advice as to prior conduct, but is not applicable to working
                                     with a client, which is really a co-conspirator and I would like your
                                     advice as to whether we ought to legislate specifically in this field
                                     because the imposition of criminal penalties requires great speci-
                                     ficity and certainly would be in dealing with professionals like ac-
                                     countants and lawyers.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000058   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 59 ===
                                                                                      55

                                        In the limited time I have, I would like to address to you, Pro-
                                     fessor Lund, questions on this issue of executive privilege.
                                        What I want to ask you specifically, the reference to Congress-
                                     man James Madison is very illuminating on the President’s right
                                     to decline to provide information and the Congressional right not
                                     to enact legislation if Congress is dissatisfied with the information
                                     which it has.
                                        I note the reference in your testimony to the Espy case, which
                                     articulates the broad doctrine of executive privilege on advice to
                                     the President, and would note further the opinion of the District
                                     of Columbia Circuit upholding the action of First Lady Hillary
                                     Clinton in declining to provide information to the inquiring parties,
                                     saying that they would avoid the issue as to whether she was or
                                     was not a Federal employee on the ground that Article II was im-
                                     plicated. The circuit there said, quote, ‘‘A statute interfering with
                                     the President’s ability to seek advice directly from private citizens
                                     as a group, intermixed or not with government officials, therefore
                                     raises Article II concerns,’’ and the court declined to order that in-
                                     formation to be given.
                                        When I wrote to the Comptroller General raising the issues of ex-
                                     ecutive privilege and inquiring as to his authority in the sense the
                                     Vice President is not an agency, certainly would have the standing
                                     of the President as interpreted by Franklin v. Massachusetts, Mr.
                                     Walker, the Comptroller General, responded in part to me, ‘‘Impor-
                                     tantly, the President has not invoked executive privilege in this
                                     case. Should he do so before we file suit, we will assess that devel-
                                     opment.’’
                                        My question to you, Professor Lund, since a good bit of your
                                     statement deals with this issue, if the President did invoke execu-
                                     tive privilege, and I might add to it, I have asked the Vice Presi-
                                     dent about it and said that it has not been invoked because they
                                     feel the statute is not applicable, but if the President were to in-
                                     voke executive privilege, would there be any doubt at all that that
                                     principle, to protect the deliberation and advice to the President,
                                     would resolve the matter with finality?
                                        Mr. LUND. Well, there would be very little doubt in my mind, but
                                     I have to say that these matters have not received judicial resolu-
                                     tion and once something goes to court, I think there is no telling.
                                     The courts may agree with me, but they may not.
                                        Senator SPECTER. Well, is there any doubt under Espy or Nixon
                                     without a showing of some impropriety——
                                        Mr. LUND. The Espy court expressly noted that it was deciding
                                     this case in the context of the Judicial Department and noted that
                                     a conflict between the executive and the legislature would raise
                                     somewhat different issues, and that it did not explore those issues
                                     but it limited the decision to cases involving the Judicial Depart-
                                     ment.
                                        Senator SPECTER. But you think that would pretty much pre-
                                     clude it, subject to the vagaries of what the next court is going to
                                     decide on the next issue?
                                        Mr. LUND. I would certainly expect, but more forcefully, hope
                                     that if the courts are forced to decide the issue, as I understand
                                     the issues as they have arisen with the GAO, that they would favor
                                     the Vice President, but I cannot predict that with certainty.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000059   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 60 ===
                                                                                      56

                                        Senator SPECTER. You do not have to be a professor or a lawyer
                                     to understand that possibility. Even Senators understand that.
                                        Mr. LUND. Yes, sir, I understand.
                                        Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Thank you, Senator Specter.
                                        Senator Kohl?
                                        Senator KOHL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We appreciate your
                                     calling this hearing today on lessons learned from Enron’s failure.
                                     It would be wise to anticipate the next chapter in this story. Where
                                     corporations go bankrupt, people often follow.
                                        The next Enron scandal might be right around the corner. Texas
                                     and four other States allow people who declare bankruptcy to keep
                                     an unlimited amount of equity in their home. So the executives
                                     who may be at fault will be able to use the bankruptcy code to es-
                                     cape personal responsibility. They will continue to live in multi-mil-
                                     lion-dollar mansions, even as their former employees struggle to
                                     find a new paycheck or to cover their rent.
                                        Last week, we heard from the wife of Ken Lay, who said that
                                     they might need to declare personal bankruptcy and sell their
                                     homes in Aspen. However, Texas’s homestead law will allow them
                                     to keep an unlimited amount of equity in their 13,000-square-foot
                                     Houston penthouse, which is valued at over $7 million. Enron’s
                                     former CFO, Andrew Fastow, has property and a house worth al-
                                     most $3 million. Enron’s former CEO, Jeffrey Skilling, has a house
                                     worth $2.5 million. Under Texas law, if they declare personal bank-
                                     ruptcy, they keep their multi-million-dollar houses while, as you
                                     know, their creditors get nothing.
                                        While the Nation is focused on their misdeeds, real people, more
                                     than 4,000 of them fired from Enron and with 30 minutes’ notice,
                                     are looking for jobs and trying to pay the bills. Millions more have
                                     seen their pension funds and personal investments disappear be-
                                     fore their very eyes. There is no justice in a system that puts thou-
                                     sands of people on the street without a job, wondering about rent,
                                     but that helps perpetrators live in multi-million-dollar houses.
                                        The bankruptcy bill that we passed in the Senate and that is
                                     now in conference would fix this injustice. It would cap the home-
                                     stead exemption at $125,000 in equity. It is a reasonable and com-
                                     mon sense solution, and to those who have disagreed with this
                                     proposition before, I believe the Enron scandal should be enough to
                                     convince them.
                                        Mr. Chairman, let us put this in perspective. No Enron executive
                                     has declared personal bankruptcy yet. You can be sure their attor-
                                     neys are counseling them on how to do it. We have seen this before.
                                     People like Burt Reynolds, Bowie Kuhn, Paul Bilzerian, and others
                                     too numerous to list all escaped their creditors and kept living like
                                     kings. So the question is, do we intend to let Enron executives add
                                     their names to this list?
                                        For those of you who are familiar with this homestead exemption
                                     which exists in five States right now, among which Texas is one,
                                     do you believe that it is imperative that we fix this bankruptcy law
                                     and the exception that it has for personal domiciles?
                                        General GREGOIRE. My answer to you, Senator, would be yes.
                                     The inequities are obvious and if we are going to protect the kind
                                     of people who lost their livelihood, lost their pension, and have




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000060   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 61 ===
                                                                                      57

                                     nothing left while let corporate executives who have defrauded
                                     them, potentially to the tune of a criminal act, get by is just not
                                     fair in this country and I would implore you to do something about
                                     it.
                                         Mr. RAYNOR. Senator, I have, unfortunately, seen workers in
                                     bankruptcies lose their homes and there is no law that protects
                                     them when people take their homes away and throw their fur-
                                     niture and their families out on the street. The value of the Enron
                                     executives’ homes are equal to the entire severance given to the
                                     4,500 workers who got severance pay. They could have doubled the
                                     severance had they not had that exemption allowing these guys to
                                     keep those mansions.
                                         Senator KOHL. Thank you.
                                         Mr. SCHATZ. I would agree that the homestead exemption needs
                                     to be substantially revised.
                                         Mr. LUND. I am afraid I have to plead lack of expertise, Senator,
                                     on these complicated bankruptcy issues. I just do not know enough
                                     to comment. I am sorry.
                                         Chairman LEAHY. Do not feel bad. Not too many people do.
                                         Ms. KONIAK. I would like to say that, particularly because I know
                                     you are interested in class action abuse, that class actions now still
                                     provide a way in settlements for people to avoid the bankruptcy
                                     laws completely, and any priorities right into the bankruptcy laws
                                     can be avoided still—the Supreme Court has not closed the door on
                                     this—by using a class action settlement in lieu of bankruptcy
                                     under (1)(b)(i) of Rule 23 and I think the bankruptcy laws now can
                                     be avoided entirely. The creditors, any list of priorities you put in
                                     there can be avoided and you really have to look into that. Until
                                     you do that, anything you do in the bankruptcy bill is not going to
                                     be enough.
                                         Senator KOHL. Thank you. As I said in my statement, with the
                                     exception of five States now, what we are trying to do is to put in
                                     the bankruptcy bill an equity of $125,000 which you can maintain
                                     in a home, but beyond that, you cannot put anything into a home
                                     and have it exempted. Five States, of which Texas is one, have un-
                                     limited ability of individuals to sink money into a home and have
                                     it excepted from bankruptcy proceedings.
                                         Believe it or not, we are having a hard time getting it passed.
                                     We passed this in the Senate. The House has not passed such an
                                     exception, and the bankruptcy bill is now in conference where this
                                     exemption for these five States is attempted to be maintained and
                                     we are suggesting that we need to have a uniform 50-State amount
                                     of money for domicile exception and we are suggesting that be at
                                     $125,000.
                                         I appreciate your comments, and Mr. Chairman, I turn it back
                                     to you.
                                         Chairman LEAHY. Thank you very much.
                                         Next is Senator Feinstein. I understand the vote has been de-
                                     layed somewhat. Senator Feinstein?

                                           STATEMENT OF HON. DIANNE FEINSTEIN, A U.S. SENATOR
                                                    FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
                                           Senator FEINSTEIN. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000061   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 62 ===
                                                                                      58

                                        I just wanted to make a couple of remarks to the panel. In my
                                     judgment, this case is a real watershed. It points out so many
                                     things. It points out in the energy sector what has been a kind of
                                     unregulated, swashbuckling mentality. It points out that online fu-
                                     tures trading is essentially nontransparent and unregulated. It
                                     points out the failure for employees, as Senator Kennedy men-
                                     tioned. It is a double whammy. Here, the employees lose their job
                                     and their retirement. It points out, I think, the demise of financial
                                     reporting in our country, which, as Professor Coffey pointed out in
                                     House testimony, has deteriorated dramatically over the last 10
                                     years. It points out the failure of all gatekeeper mechanisms, the
                                     failure of independent auditors, of financial analysts, the failure of
                                     virtually bond-rating agencies to be able to predict and deal with
                                     this. So all protective measures have essentially failed.
                                        I think it throws into renewed scrutiny our private securities re-
                                     form litigation, Mr. Schatz. I voted for it. I voted to overturn the
                                     President’s veto, and yet I do not know whether the safe harbor on
                                     forward reporting, those provisions which provide for no regulation
                                     really make any sense in this new environment.
                                        So as I see this, this is going to mean a lot of work. I mean,
                                     clearly, if it is an outside auditor, they should not be permitted to
                                     do what Arthur Andersen did, be both an outside auditor and also
                                     be a consultant. As Professor Coffey also points out, the consultant
                                     aspects of these auditors of big companies have now overwhelmed
                                     the fees for independent auditing. So it has become a whole new
                                     area that I think breeds a kind of familiarity with the company
                                     which is unhealthy in terms of its outside independent auditing
                                     role. So I see this particular bankruptcy as really needing major
                                     scrutiny from a number of different points of view.
                                        Let me just, in the time I have left, ask a couple of questions.
                                     The 1994 Supreme Court case, Central Bank of Denver v. First
                                     Interstate Bank of Denver, clarified that aiders and abetters were
                                     not subject to liability in private securities fraud cases, making it
                                     harder to recover against those entities in fraud cases. But it is my
                                     understanding that the Congress specifically addressed this issue
                                     by allowing the government to file suit against aiders and abetters.
                                     While private suits on this basis are not allowed, the government
                                     can proceed. Is that true?
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. That is correct. If that question was directed at me,
                                     that is correct.
                                        Senator FEINSTEIN. Does anyone want to add anything on that
                                     particular question?
                                        Ms. KONIAK. Well, they are allowed to proceed, but ‘‘knowingly’’
                                     is the standard that the SEC is supposed to proceed under when
                                     they bring an aiding and abetting action and that was a change
                                     from prior law and it makes it harder even for the SEC. Plus, the
                                     SEC does not have the resources to go after all these aiders and
                                     abetters. It always had the right beforehand. Private causes of ac-
                                     tion were there in addition.
                                        Senator FEINSTEIN. And the SEC, I believe, has asked for addi-
                                     tional staff and been denied by the Congress, so we are going to
                                     have to be alert to that, as well.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000062   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 63 ===
                                                                                      59

                                        Let me ask you this. In the Enron case, do you believe that Ar-
                                     thur Andersen was simply aiding and abetting, if the allegations
                                     are true, or were they direct participants in fraud and libel?
                                        Ms. KONIAK. The courts have been struggling since Congress
                                     changed the Act in 1995 to define the line of when someone be-
                                     comes a primary violator who we normally think of in regular par-
                                     lance as a helper. Accountants are generally helpers. They also
                                     have liability potentially as primary violators, as do lawyers.
                                        But it is not true, as Senator Hatch said before, that it is as easy
                                     to get someone as a primary violator as it is as an aider and abet-
                                     ter and my testimony gives an example, at least one example,
                                     where it is very clear the wrongdoing is enormous, but whether it
                                     can be characterized—it happened to be a lawyer in that case, but
                                     if it had been an accountant, whether a court really could find that
                                     that was primary violator versus aiding and abetting is unclear. No
                                     decision on that matter exists.
                                        So there are still many situations that could be called aiding and
                                     abetting that offer substantial assistance, which is the standard for
                                     aiding and abetting—you have to have substantial assistance—that
                                     could not be called primary violations, and so there is a whole
                                     interconduct that is no longer available for anyone to go after ex-
                                     cept the SEC, and again, the SEC has a different mental standard
                                     than they had before to show.
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. Senator Feinstein, if I could briefly comment——
                                        Senator FEINSTEIN. My time has expired. Would you allow Mr.
                                     Schatz to respond?
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Of course.
                                        Mr. SCHATZ. First, assuming that the press reports are correct,
                                     I have little doubt that, given that there were audited financial
                                     statements here, that Arthur Andersen’s conduct would be deemed
                                     to be a primary violation.
                                        Second, with respect to your opening comments, I wish to point
                                     out that the Reform Act’s safe harbor provision explicitly does not
                                     relate to the company’s financial statements. So that is not a con-
                                     cern and it is not an issue that arises from the safe harbor.
                                        And third, and I think this is something that certainly I see in
                                     my practice with respect to aiding and abetting, the problem that
                                     you have here is that, obviously, it is very tempting to do some-
                                     thing in this case, but, for example, it is harder and harder to get
                                     conscientious people to serve on boards of directors, and when you
                                     have aiding and abetting liability and you employ joint and several
                                     liability when there is not knowing misconduct, it is going to be-
                                     come ever increasingly difficult to get conscientious people to serve
                                     on boards.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Thank you.
                                        Senator FEINSTEIN. Mr. Raynor, I think, wanted to respond.
                                        Mr. RAYNOR. Mr. Chairman, may I comment?
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Go ahead, Mr. Raynor.
                                        Mr. RAYNOR. On the last, on Mr. Schatz’s comment, I think
                                     boards of directors in America are pretty much country clubs of a
                                     lot of wealthy and powerful people and I do not think that there
                                     is any labor shortage there.
                                        But in terms of your specific question, the 1995 legislation pro-
                                     tects companies and executives and law firms from private litiga-




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000063   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 64 ===
                                                                                      60

                                     tion. We have got to remember who that private litigation is. That
                                     is retirees. That is hospital workers and hotel workers and garment
                                     workers and electricians who now control litigation, no longer the
                                     lawyers. We are the plaintiffs, and so they are protected from us
                                     and I think that that needs to be repealed.
                                        Senator FEINSTEIN. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Senator Feingold?
                                        Senator FEINGOLD. Mr. Chairman, thank you for scheduling the
                                     hearing. I do think that the Judiciary Committee has an important
                                     role to play in determining what changes in the law are necessary
                                     in the light of the horrible collapse of such a large and influential
                                     company. Like other members of the committee, I do think that the
                                     bankruptcy code is very implicated in the Enron failure.
                                        As we all know, and as the chairman said, the bankruptcy re-
                                     form bills have been sent to a conference committee. The Enron sit-
                                     uation calls for some hard thinking by that committee and I, for
                                     one, am very grateful that that bill is not already law in the form
                                     that it was passed so that we can perhaps correct some of these.
                                        For example, as the chairman said, and it certainly has been
                                     demonstrated through the tremendous leadership of my colleague,
                                     Senator Kohl, one provision of the bill that is squarely implicated
                                     by the debacle is the homestead exemption. Should some of Enron’s
                                     executives be forced into bankruptcy by civil judgments that they
                                     defrauded investors or employees, we will perhaps see them, as
                                     Senator Kohl explained, sheltering as much of their ill-gotten gains
                                     as they can in multi-million-dollar homes, which will then be pro-
                                     tected under the State of Texas homestead exemption.
                                        I certainly want to point out that I think that the characteriza-
                                     tion by the ranking member of what the House bill would do in this
                                     regard is incorrect, that, in fact, those provisions in the House bill
                                     do not prevent the ability of these individuals to abuse this proce-
                                     dure. A bankruptcy reform bill that does not contain limits on the
                                     abuse of the homestead exemption is a fraud on the American peo-
                                     ple.
                                        Now, another provision of the bill in which Enron has shown a
                                     spotlight is Section 912, the asset securitization, which again the
                                     ranking member referred to in his remarks, and I have to respect-
                                     fully disagree with him again. This section is a deeply misguided
                                     effort to shield from the scrutiny of the bankruptcy courts trans-
                                     actions that move certain assets off the books of a company so that
                                     they cannot be reached by other creditors. Now, if this provision is
                                     included in the final bill, whether Enron literally was engaged in
                                     this practice or not, it will encourage questionable transactions
                                     such as those that appear to have led to Enron’s demise. So I be-
                                     lieve that Section 912 simply must be deleted from the bankruptcy
                                     bill.
                                        Mr. Chairman, let me also describe a change to the bankruptcy
                                     code that I plan to introduce to try to address the calamities suf-
                                     fered by the employees and the retirees of Enron who saw their re-
                                     tirement savings evaporate as the stock value of the company
                                     plummeted. Under current law, claims that the company breached
                                     its fiduciary duty under ERISA in its management of retirement
                                     plans are only an unsecured debt in the Enron bankruptcy. What
                                     that means in practice is that the employees probably will not get




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000064   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 65 ===
                                                                                      61

                                     anything from the company, even if the company broke the law,
                                     and that is not right.
                                        So I will introduce legislation to give the employees’ claims for
                                     breach of fiduciary duties equal status in the bankruptcy and equal
                                     claims to the assets of the company with the secured lenders. If
                                     this rule is enacted, Enron’s employees will have a seat at the
                                     creditors’ table in the bankruptcy and perhaps they will get some
                                     satisfaction.
                                        Just as important, in the future, the market will monitor compa-
                                     nies to determine whether they are meeting their fiduciary obliga-
                                     tions in administering their retirement plans. I think it would be
                                     logical for prospective lenders to require, then, as a condition of
                                     lending some certification or assurance that the company’s retire-
                                     ment plans actually pass legal muster. In effect, the credit market
                                     will then help provide effective enforcement of the borrowing com-
                                     pany’s fiduciary obligations to its employees and retirees.
                                        I look forward to discussing this proposal with my colleagues and
                                     I hope that we might consider it in the committee promptly.
                                        Now, I was interested in the testimony from Mr. Schatz that can
                                     be summarized, I think, by saying that the Private Securities Liti-
                                     gation Reform Act played no role whatsoever in creating the cli-
                                     mate in which the Enron scandal occurred and will not inhibit
                                     those injured by Enron or its accomplices from being fairly com-
                                     pensated. I am not sure, but I thought I perceived Professor Koniak
                                     squirming a bit when she heard that and I would like to give her
                                     an opportunity to respond.
                                        Ms. KONIAK. The biggest problem with the Private Securities Re-
                                     form Act is not that it makes it difficult, which it does, for some
                                     defrauded investors to recover. The biggest problem is that it takes
                                     away the deterrents, particularly from professionals who under-
                                     stand how to avoid direct knowledge and can put themselves in a
                                     situation of plausible deniability, which makes it very difficult to
                                     show direct knowledge, and, therefore, have a license to act reck-
                                     lessly. When you have professionals with a license to act recklessly,
                                     you will get this situation.
                                        If I might just comment on Mr. Schatz’s remark in answering
                                     Senator Feinstein about how the Andersen lawyers were definitely
                                     primary violators here, I could not agree more, but they will not
                                     have enough money to pay everybody and there are many other ac-
                                     tors who have skirted the line between primary violator and aiding
                                     and abetting who did substantial help in allowing this to happen
                                     and were also not just—you should not just be legislating with this
                                     crisis in mind but with the next one in mind.
                                        And so I disagree in that sense with the importance of changing
                                     back to the rule we had for 30 or 40 years, so this argument about
                                     unintended consequences, we know that lawyers lived, law firms
                                     prospered.
                                        Senator FEINGOLD. Thank you, Professor. Thank you, Mr. Chair-
                                     man.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Thank you.
                                        Senator Cantwell?
                                        Senator CANTWELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and in the inter-
                                     est of time, if I could enter a longer statement into the record, I
                                     would appreciate that.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000065   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 66 ===
                                                                                      62

                                        Chairman LEAHY. Of course.
                                        Senator CANTWELL. Clearly, the State of Washington has been
                                     greatly impacted by this Enron crisis and we have heard today
                                     from our Attorney General, who has talked about ratepayers who
                                     have suffered from perhaps price manipulation and ongoing inves-
                                     tigation, as well as individual shareholders in our pension fund and
                                     how that pension fund has been impacted.
                                        I would like to followup on a question in regard to the pension
                                     suit. Laws that were passed in the 1990’s have limited the statute
                                     of limitations in this type of suit to 3 years, and yet almost half
                                     of the losses suffered by our pension fund are due to investments
                                     in Enron that are outside the statute of limitations. This obviously
                                     restricts our pension holders and what we will be able to recoup.
                                        General GREGOIRE. Yes. In fact, for Washington State, our claim
                                     in the case is for approximately $50 million when, in fact, our
                                     losses are in excess of $100 million. But because of the statute of
                                     limitations, we are not able to make that claim.
                                        Second, when they made their restatement, they went back as
                                     far as 1997, but because of the statute of limitations, that is not
                                     included, despite the fact they admit that they were wrong in what
                                     they said to the public. They misinformed the public in 1997 and
                                     the years subsequent to it. So I think the statute of limitations is
                                     a real concern to all of us.
                                        Senator CANTWELL. So how do you think we should best address
                                     that?
                                        General GREGOIRE. I think the statute of limitations actually
                                     ought to occur from when it is known or should have been known.
                                     I think that is a much more accurate reflection of what the statute
                                     of limitations ought to be, as opposed to starting when they actu-
                                     ally began their defrauding.
                                        The other statute of limitations problem that we have as a result
                                     of the PSLRA is with respect to those who aid and abet, in my
                                     opinion. That is the 1-year statute of limitations. If you have a stay
                                     of discovery that lasts beyond a year, then the plaintiffs are unable
                                     to get any information that could lead to a filing against a lawyer
                                     or against an accountant, despite the fact they were incapable be-
                                     cause of the stay of discovery of getting access to that information.
                                     That, too, should be told once that lawsuit is brought. That is a
                                     very troubling aspect of the PSLRA.
                                        Senator CANTWELL. Following up on that discovery of documents,
                                     does the 1995 Act deal with accountants’ preservation of docu-
                                     ments?
                                        General GREGOIRE. Well, what happens as a practical matter is
                                     when accountants do their signature on the financial document for
                                     the company, they then destroy within 1 year all underlying docu-
                                     ments that they used in the preparation of that statement. That,
                                     in this case, with respect to Enron, means that all documents held
                                     in the possession of Arthur Andersen have more likely than not
                                     been destroyed, and I mean destroyed in the normal course, not
                                     just in shredding, from 1997, 1998, and 1999. Again, they need to
                                     retain those documents, particularly when you have a stay of dis-
                                     covery and the statute of limitations that you do under the PSLRA.
                                     Plaintiffs’ counsel are put at a tremendous disadvantage, like us in
                                     our bringing our lawsuit.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000066   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 67 ===
                                                                                      63

                                        Senator CANTWELL. Mr. Chairman, as somebody who has been
                                     an executive officer of a company, I think that these are very im-
                                     portant issues to address, as well as how they relate to those re-
                                     forms that we have implemented. I know Mr. Schatz in his testi-
                                     mony spoke highly of these provisions, and yet we cannot just sim-
                                     ply say that they had nothing to do with Enron or that Enron was
                                     not affected by it. Clearly, our Attorney General is having a chal-
                                     lenge getting the documents and information that we need.
                                        Madam Attorney General, I would like to point out, as well, that
                                     in your FERC investigation, which is in addition to the pension
                                     fund suit that we have the same challenges of getting our hands
                                     on documents and information. In fact, I think one of our utilities
                                     has been slapped with a restraining order to prevent it from dis-
                                     closing the terms of their Enron contract. This is a critically impor-
                                     tant issue for us.
                                        I had to leave the hearing, Mr. Chairman, to attend the Energy
                                     Committee, where the FERC general counsel was testifying, and
                                     where he reiterated FERC’s commitment to investigate and said
                                     that they were in the process of determining what documents need-
                                     ed to be collected before the Commission could make a final deci-
                                     sion that the investigation could move forward. Attorney General
                                     Gregoire, do you want to comment on what kind of documents in
                                     that case we need?
                                        General GREGOIRE. Well, just last June, I testified here in the
                                     Senate, and at that point, Enron indicated that they would fully co-
                                     operate. We ended up in document discovery taking that issue to
                                     the State Supreme Court in California, which said that the State
                                     attorneys general were entitled to document discovery. Despite
                                     that, on January 16, we brought a motion in California court
                                     against Enron specifically to be held in contempt for failure to com-
                                     ply with that order. And finally, on January 31, they gave us our
                                     first document discovery, a year after we made our first request.
                                        Again, that kind of failure to disclose, failure to cooperate with
                                     a law enforcement investigation, I think probably could have un-
                                     veiled some of this some time ago, not just with regard to the en-
                                     ergy crisis but the collapse of Enron that we see that has led to
                                     the shareholders’ suit, as well.
                                        Senator CANTWELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see my time has
                                     expired.
                                        Chairman LEAHY. Thank you, Senator.
                                        We will put statements in the record for all members. We will
                                     leave the record open until the end of the day for that.
                                        I am going to recess for a few minutes. We obviously have a roll
                                     call vote on. Senator Edwards will be recognized next. If he comes
                                     back from his vote, he can take the gavel.
                                        This has been a fascinating panel and I will state more of my
                                     thanks to all of you, but thank you very much.
                                        [Recess from 12:03 p.m. to 12:37 p.m.]
                                        On the basis that many are called, et cetera, et cetera, I under-
                                     stand from staff that the Senators who had to go over to vote are
                                     now double-teamed into other schedules and will not be coming
                                     back. As a result, we will wrap up this hearing.
                                        Could I suggest this to each of the witnesses. If you go back over
                                     your testimony and you find that you want to elaborate on a point,




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000067   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06602   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 68 ===
                                                                                      64

                                     feel free to do so. This is not a game of ‘‘gotcha’’ in this committee.
                                     At least, that is not the way I run committees. We want to educate
                                     the Judiciary Committee and the staff. So if you see things that
                                     you wish you had said, note that as an addendum for the record
                                     and it will be included in the record. If you find that you stated
                                     a fact or a citation wrong and want to change that—I doubt if any-
                                     body on this panel would, but, in fact, sometimes we get some that
                                     would—you are allowed to do that.
                                        I will also hold the record open for 24 hours for Senators to add
                                     any further statements, including if Senators from other commit-
                                     tees wish to.
                                        Some of you have been here before and you know how chaotic it
                                     can get. We in the Senate are trying to build a record here, and
                                     I am in the Judiciary Committee, for some of the issues that come
                                     before us, whether it is securities legislation, to the extent that we
                                     are involved, criminal matters, for which we are always involved,
                                     or the bankruptcy conference which is now underway. The things
                                     you have said will be involved in that.
                                        I think all Americans—again, this is not a partisan issue—all
                                     Americans are distressed by what has happened with Enron. As I
                                     said earlier, you cannot legislate away greed. Unfortunately, greed
                                     is always there. You can, however, take legislative steps to punish
                                     those whose greed tramples on others and make others suffer. It
                                     is one thing when Michael Douglas gets a well-deserved Oscar for
                                     his role as Gordon Gekko, where he spoke of ‘‘greed is good.’’ That
                                     was a movie. There are no Oscars being given out to the people at
                                     Enron or at Arthur Andersen nor should they get one.
                                        I thank you very much and we stand in recess.
                                        [Whereupon, at 12:40 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
                                        [Submissions for the record follow.]
                                        [Additional material is being retained in the Committee files.]
                                                                   SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

                                            Statement of Hon. Maria Cantwell, a U.S. Senator from the State of
                                                                      Washington
                                        Thank you, Chairman Leahy for holding this hearing and for inviting my home
                                     state’s Attorney General, Christine Gregoire, to testify before the committee today
                                     on behalf of the people of Washington state.
                                        Mr. Chairman, working people in Washington state—including our teachers, po-
                                     lice, and firefighters—lost over $100 million dollars as their pension fund’s invest-
                                     ment in Enron collapsed.
                                        Attomey General Christine Gregoire has taken a leadership role in filing a class-
                                     action lawsuit on behalf of investors defrauded by Enron.
                                        In addition to her work on behalf of investors, she has played a key role in defend-
                                     ing ratepayers and consumers against unfair market manipulation by Enron.
                                        We are fortunate to have her with us today to give us the perspective of state
                                     Attorneys General.
                                        At its core, Enron was a make-believe company more worthy of a paperback novel
                                     than a business school textbook.
                                        But even as the details of how Enron defrauded its shareholders emerge, we are
                                     now learning of a new scheme to bilk ratepayers and line Enron’s pockets.
                                        Some of the very same people who have lost money in my state’s pension fund
                                     are now hit with a double whammy.
                                        Why? Because despite its collapse, Enron continues to earn hundreds of millions
                                     of dollars from over- inflated energy contracts which have resulted in massive rate
                                     hikes for consumers—including the very same people who lost money in my state’s
                                     pension fund.




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000068   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 69 ===
                                                                                      65
                                        I was visited by a representative of a utility in rural Washington state recently.
                                     This utility has been forced to raise its rates by about 40 percent in the last year.
                                     Customers visit its office daily—in tears—because they simply can’t pay their power
                                     bills.
                                        What is shocking is that even after its bankruptcy, Enron has charges this utility
                                     and others like it energy prices more than triple today’s market.
                                        Mr. Chairman, where there’s smoke there is usually fire, and when I hear that
                                     Enron has charged utilities triple current market rates, I naturally become ex-
                                     tremely suspicious.
                                        And in yet another blatant attempt to conceal its activities, Enron has actually
                                     slapped a restraining order on one Northwest utility, to prevent it from disclosing
                                     just how absurd the terms of its contract are.
                                        Last week the Energy Committee—on which I serve with Sen. Feinstein and oth-
                                     ers here today—heard testimony that Enron is only able to charge such high-prices
                                     for long-term contracts because it was able to manipulate prices in forward energy
                                     markets.
                                        The Federal government has an obligation to right this wrong for energy con-
                                     sumers in the West.
                                        That is why I called upon FERC Chairman Pat Wood to open an investigation into
                                     whether power prices in the West have been unjust and unreasonable as a result
                                     of alleged manipulation by Enron.
                                        Thank You.

                                                                               f

                                                         Statement of Lauren Pfeifle, Justice Department
                                        The Justice Department today released the following statement on the Enron in-
                                     vestigation:
                                        ‘‘The Justice Department sees no reason to appoint a special counsel to investigate
                                     the Enron matter. Our investigators have a duty and responsibility to enforce the
                                     criminal laws in this matter. Regulations call for the appointment of a special coun-
                                     sel when prosecution by the Department would both present a conflict of interest
                                     and serve the public interest.
                                        ‘‘Neither of these criteria exist for the Department of Justice in this case. No con-
                                     flict of interest exists. No person involved in pursuing this investigation has any
                                     conflict, or any ties that would require a recusal. Failing to carry out our duties and
                                     responsibilities in investigating this matter would not serve the public interest.’’
                                        On background, the regulation on ‘‘Grounds for Appointing a Special Counsel’’
                                     states: ‘‘The Attorney General, or in cases in which the Attorney General is recused,
                                     the Acting Attorney General, with appoint a Special Counsel when he or she deter-
                                     mines that criminal investigation of a person or matter is warranted and (a) that
                                     investigation or prosecution of that person or matter by a United States Attorney’s
                                     Office or Justice litigating Division of the Department of would present a conflict
                                     of interest for the Department or other extraordinary circumstances, and (b) that
                                     under the circumstances, it would be in the public interest to appoint an outside
                                     Special Counsel to assume responsibility for the matter.’’

                                                                               f

                                           Statement of Hon. Russell D. Feingold, a U.S. Senator from the State of
                                                                         Wisconsin
                                       Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for scheduling this hearing. It may seem like
                                     every committee in the Congress wants to get into the Enron act, but I do think
                                     that the Judiciary Committee has an important role to play in determining what
                                     changes in the law are necessary in light of this horrible collapse of such a large
                                     and influential company.
                                       I want to talk first about an area of the law that has not been addressed by the
                                     testimony today, but that I think is squarely implicated by the Enron failure—the
                                     bankruptcy code. As we all know, bankruptcy reform bills have been sent to a con-
                                     ference committee. The Enron situation calls for some hard thinking by that com-
                                     mittee.
                                       One provision of the bill that is squarely implicated by the Enron debacle is Sen-
                                     ator Kohl’s amendment dealing with the homestead exemption. Should some of
                                     Enron’s executives be forced into bankruptcy by civil judgments that they defrauded
                                     investors or employees, we will undoubtedly see hem sheltering as much of their ill-




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000069   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 70 ===
                                                                                      66
                                     gotten gains as then can in multi-million dollar homes, which will then be protected
                                     under the State of Texas’s homestead exemption. As I have said before, a bank-
                                     ruptcy reform bill that does not contain limits on abuse of the homestead exemption
                                     is a fraud on the American people.
                                        Another provision of the bill on which Enron has shone a spotlight is Section 912,
                                     asset securitization. This section is a deeply misguided effort to shield from the
                                     scrutiny of the bankruptcy courts transactions that move certain assets off the books
                                     of a company so that they cannot be reached by other creditors. If this provision
                                     is included in the final bill, it will encourage questionable transactions such as those
                                     that appear to have led to Enron’s demise. Section 912 simply must be deleted from
                                     the bankruptcy bill.
                                        Mr. Chairman, let me also describe an change to the bankruptcy code that I plan
                                     to introduce to try to address the calamity suffered by the employees and retirees
                                     of Enron who saw their retirement savings evaporate as the stock value of the com-
                                     pany plummeted. Under current law, claims that the company breached its fiduciary
                                     duty under ERISA in its management of the retirement plans are only an unsecured
                                     debt in the Enron bankruptcy. What that means in practice is that the employees
                                     probably won’t get anything from the company, even if the company broke the law.
                                     That’s not right.
                                        I plan to introduce legislation to give the employees’ claims for breach of fiduciary
                                     duties equal status in the bankruptcy. and equal claim to the assets of the company
                                     with the secured lenders.
                                        If this rule is enacted. Enron’s employees will have a seat at the creditor’s table
                                     in the bankruptcy and perhaps get some satisfaction. Just as important in the fu-
                                     ture, the market will monitor companies to determine whether they are meeting
                                     their fiduciary obligations in administering their retirement plans. I think it would
                                     be logical for prospective lenders to require, as a condition of lending, some certifi-
                                     cation or assurance that the company retirement plans pass legal muster. In effect,
                                     the credit market will help provide effective enforcement of the borrowing company’s
                                     fiduciary obligations to its employees and retirees.
                                        I look forward to discussing this proposal with my colleagues and I hope, Mr.
                                     Chairman, that we might consider this in the committee promptly, either as part
                                     of the bankruptcy conference or as separate legislation.

                                                                               f

                                           Statement of Hon. Charles E. Grassley, a U.S. Senator from the State of
                                                                           Iowa
                                        Thank you Senator Leahy for calling this hearing. I agree there are lessons that
                                     we can learn from Enron’s collapse, particularly with respect to accountability
                                     issues. I share in my colleagues’ outrage over these events, and truly feel for the
                                     workers and innocent investors who lost their jobs and life savings
                                        Government and Congressional investigators, as well as the media and legal pros-
                                     ecutors, are still hard at work trying to get at all the facts surrounding this case.
                                     But from what I read in the papers and from my staff’s own investigative work, the
                                     facts don’t look good. As efforts to uncover all the facts surrounding the Enron deba-
                                     cle proceed, there are legislative actions that we in Congress can take to ensure that
                                     similar corporate missteps, including fiduciary mismanagement, aren’t allowed to
                                     fester elsewhere
                                        There may be other cases of misconduct that we’ll need to learn more about. For
                                     example, what about the Global Crossing bankruptcy? Obviously something smells
                                     when you have the Democratic National Committee Chairman - who just happens
                                     to be a buddy of the Chairman of Global Crossing - ten a $100,000 stock investment
                                     into what’s been reported to be an $18 million mega-profit, while employees and
                                     shareholders are left holding the bag when the company goes bankrupt. Who knows,
                                     there may be more than one Enron out there ready to happen. Let me be loud and
                                     clear, corporations must get their shop and books in order even before we in Con-
                                     gress make changes to the laws. You know what the problems are, so fix them.
                                     Common sense needs to rule. If not, the integrity of our financial markets is in big
                                     trouble
                                        As the senior Republican member on the Finance Committee, I’ve focused on
                                     doing something about a number of tax and pension related problems that have
                                     been exposed by the Enron collapse. In fact, I’ve been working on legislation to
                                     tighten pension protections for working and retired Americans. The failure of Enron
                                     has been such a devastating blow to the shareholders, workers and retirees who in-
                                     vested in Enron stock




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000070   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 71 ===
                                                                                      67
                                        Furthermore, it’s a real issue when the top dogs can cash out their stock options,
                                     but employees are prohibited from doing so. According to news reports, top Enron
                                     officials were allowed to sell their shares before the stock value bottomed out, while
                                     rank-and-file employees were left out to dry. This behavior smacks of mismanage-
                                     ment and moral disregard for the loyal workforce and retired employees. This can-
                                     not happen again.
                                        I’m also drafting a legislative proposal that would help the IRS prevent tax cheats
                                     from shielding tax liabilities with the use of corporate tax shelters and other vehi-
                                     cles often used as tax-free havens. Enron may have used as many as 900 tax-haven
                                     subsidiaries to avoid taxes and mask financial debts. That’s disturbing, and under-
                                     scores the need for full disclosure of tax shelters so the IRS can better police their
                                     use. My investigative staff is getting to the bottom of this.
                                        Moreover, the Enron crash raises serious ethical questions about the roles of audi-
                                     tors and consultants, as well as inside and outside legal counsel who make represen-
                                     tations about a company’ s finances. In order for markets to work, there must be
                                     transparency and accuracy in a company’s books so that investors and shareholders
                                     can get the whole picture and make informed decisions. Complete and accurate in-
                                     formation is the foundation for a fair system, a system that Americans can have
                                     confidence in. People invest in stocks because they think they’ve gotten honest, open
                                     and full disclosure of a company’s financial condition. We need to reevaluate the
                                     rules eliminating conflict of interests in the work of auditors, consultants, analysts
                                     and lawyers, so that any report they produce is honest, accurate and transparent,
                                     and so the work is independent and hasn’t been tainted by inside interests. In addi-
                                     tion, we should make sure that the government regulators are not asleep at the
                                     switch. They need to be ready to crack down on those who cook the books and abuse
                                     the system. Ultimately, we need to preserve the integrity of the market system by
                                     safeguarding the integrity of information given to the public.

                                                                               f

                                           Statement of Hon. Herb Kohl, a U.S. Senator of the State of Wisconsin
                                        Thank you for calling this hearing on the lessons learned from Enron’s failure.
                                     It would be wise to anticipate the next chapter in this story. Where corporations
                                     go bankrupt, people follow. And the next Enron scandal might be right around the
                                     corner. Texas and four other states allow people who declare bankruptcy to keep an
                                     unlimited amount of equity in their home. So the executives who may be at fault
                                     will be able to use the bankruptcy code to escape personal responsibility. They will
                                     continue to live in multimillion-dollar mansions—even as their former employees
                                     struggle to find a new pay check or to cover the rent.
                                        Last week, we heard from the wife of Ken Lay who said that they might need
                                     to declare personal bankruptcy and sell their homes in Aspen. But Texas’ homestead
                                     law will allow them to keep an unlimited amount of equity in their 1 3,000-square-
                                     foot Houston penthouse—valued at $7.1 million. Enron’s former CFO, Andrew
                                     Fastow, has property and a house worth almost $3 million. Enron’s former CEO,
                                     Jeffrey Skilling, has a house worth $2.5 million. Under Texas law, if they declare
                                     personal bankruptcy, they keep their multimillion-dollar houses. Their creditors get
                                     nothing.
                                        While the nation is focused on their misdeeds, real people—more than 4,000 of
                                     them fired from Enron with 30 minutes notice—are looking for jobs and trying to
                                     pay the bills. Millions more have seen their pension funds and personal investments
                                     disappear before their very eyes. There is no justice in a system that puts thousands
                                     of people on the street without a job and wondering about the rent, but that helps
                                     perpetrators live in multimillion-dollar houses. That’s just wrong.
                                        The bankruptcy bill that the Senate passed and that is now in conference would
                                     fix this injustice. It would cap the homestead exemption at $125,000 in equity. It
                                     is a reasonable and common-sense solution. And to those who have disagreed with
                                     this proposition before, the Enron scandal should be enough to convince you.
                                        Mr. Chairman, let’s put this in perspective. No Enron executive has declared per-
                                     sonal bankruptcyyet. But you can be sure their attorneys are counseling them on
                                     how to do it. We’ve seen this before: Burt Reynolds, Bowie Kuhn, Paul Bilzerian and
                                     others too numerous to list all escaped their creditors and kept living like kings.
                                     Do we intend to let Enron executives add their names to this list?




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000071   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 72 ===
                                                                                      68
                                                                               f

                                            Statement of Hon. Jon Kyl, a U.S. Senator from the State of Arizona
                                         Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         On December 2, 2001, Enron Corporation filed the largest corporate bankruptcy
                                     in the history of America. Many thousands of investors across the country have seen
                                     their stock become worthless, and thousands of employees have lost both their jobs
                                     and their lifetime 401(k) retirement savings.
                                         In one way, Enron’s collapse demonstrates that no company can consider itself
                                     ‘‘too big to fail’’ in our free-market system; schemes like the ones we’ve been reading
                                     about simply won’t be sustainable forever. Yet the sudden bankruptcy of the seventh
                                     largest U.S. corporation raises questions about the federal government’s role and re-
                                     sponsibilities in a free market.
                                         Both Houses of Congress and the Departments of Justice, Labor, Commerce, as
                                     well as the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodities and Futures
                                     Trading Commission, have begun investigations to determine whether the company
                                     violated federal accounting standards, securities laws, and pension laws.
                                         Specifically, these investigations will seek to establish whether or not, through the
                                     use of accounting gimmickry and artifice, the company defrauded its investors by
                                     systematically failing to disclose financial liabilities that degraded the real value of
                                     company stock; and whether or not it harmed its employees by violating the federal
                                     pension statute, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), which re-
                                     quires employers to act as fiduciaries by managing employee retirement funds ‘‘ex-
                                     clusively for the benefit of plan participants and beneficiaries.’’
                                         To address the pension issues highlighted by Enron’s implosion, President Bush
                                     in his State of the Union Address called upon Congress to enact new protections
                                     so that 46 million American workers will have confidence that the collective $4 tril-
                                     lion they have invested for their retirement—a tremendous source of capital for the
                                     national economy—is available when they need it.
                                         The President has proposed to: 1) afford workers greater freedom to diversify and
                                     manage their own retirement funds; 2) require that senior corporate executives are
                                     held to the same restrictions as average American workers during trading
                                     ‘‘lockdown’’ periods; 3) ensure that workers see quarterly information about their in-
                                     vestments and their right to diversify, and 4) expand workers’ access to independent
                                     investment advice for which the employer would not be liable. (One of the major
                                     problems in the Enron case is employees who did not diversify their investments,
                                     but instead chose to put most or all of their 401 (k) contributions into Enron stock.
                                     Social Security presents a similar undiversified system, except that there is no
                                     choice.
                                         Since Enron’s failure, many who have defined retirement security in terms of So-
                                     cial Security, a single plan headed for bankruptcy which forces workers to invest
                                     in one financial instrument, U.S. Treasuries, have concluded that mandatory diver-
                                     sification is a wise investment strategy.) The Congress will also consider whether
                                     to implement a rule that I have supported which would bar accounting firms—such
                                     as Arthur Andersen, Enron’s accountant—from providing both auditing and con-
                                     sulting work for the same client. I believe such an arrangement creates an inherent
                                     conflict of interest. It is important to remember that a Certified Public Accountant’s
                                     first obligation is to the public, not the payor.
                                         These comments are offered in my capacity as a U.S. Senator and as a member
                                     of the legislative branch of government, a government in which the constitutional
                                     separation of legislative, executive, and judicial powers is scrupulously maintained.
                                     My purpose is not to influence the ongoing DOJ, Commerce, Labor, SEC or CFTC
                                     regulatory processes, or to anticipate the conclusions of any future judicial pro-
                                     ceedings.
                                         Rather, it is merely to offer my view on why Congress must take care to gather
                                     the facts and make whatever statutory changes are necessary to restore employee
                                     confidence in our retirement system and investor confidence in our capital markets.
                                     Because these investigations have just begun and may ultimately be resolved in
                                     criminal and civil courts, it is very important that Congress not prejudge the out-
                                     come.
                                         The congressional role of patient finder of fact is especially critical here. We may
                                     well end up legislating new protections, but we should not act in such a way that
                                     employers will be discouraged from offering 401(k) plans, an important benefit they
                                     voluntarily offer.
                                         Mr. Chairman, based on initial press accounts, I believe I am safe in saying that
                                     no employee or investor, no matter how sophisticated, could have known the full ex-
                                     tent of Enron’s obligations. Until firms are required to disclose completely informa-




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000072   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 73 ===
                                                                                      69
                                     tion about their obligations and liabilities, employees and stockholders will not
                                     know which firms are burdened by debts that don’t appear on balance sheets—debts
                                     that reduce the true value of the stock.
                                        We can assume that, if stockholders can’t reliably know the extent of corporate
                                     obligations, they will stop buying stock. If this happens, our capital markets will for-
                                     feit the public trust that allows them to function. Our economy will stagnate, our
                                     standard of living will decline, and the personal and business tax revenues nec-
                                     essary for vital government functions such as defense and law enforcement will be
                                     depleted.
                                        Those of us with an appreciation for free markets have a special burden to police
                                     capitalists who abuse their freedom; we must do all we can to restore confidence
                                     in the system that we advocate as the best in the world. Those who are convicted
                                     of wrongdoing must be punished to the full extent of the law.
                                        All Americans have a special interest in the healthy function of the markets. I
                                     agree with George Will that a properly functioning free-market system ‘‘is a complex
                                     creation of laws and mores that guarantee, among much else, transparency, mean-
                                     ing a sufficient stream—a torrent, really—of reliable information about the condi-
                                     tion and conduct of corporations. By casting a cool eye on Enron’s debris and those
                                     who made it, government can strengthen an economic system that depends on it.’’
                                        Mr. Chairman, I could not have said it better. I look forward to working with the
                                     Chairman, the Ranking Member of the Judiciary Committee, and all of my col-
                                     leagues in the Senate to take the steps needed to restore trust in a framework—
                                     namely, democratic capitalism—that has undeniably brought the most benefits to
                                     the largest numbers of people of any system ever devised.

                                                                               f

                                                                                    THE RETIREMENT SYSTEMS OF ALABAMA
                                                                                      MONTGOMERY, ALABAMA 36104–2150
                                                                                                           February 1, 2002
                                     The Hon. Jeff Sessions
                                     United States Senate
                                     495 Russell Senate Office Building
                                     Washington, DC 20510
                                        Re: Enron
                                        Dear Senator Sessions:
                                        As I am sure you know, the Retirement Systems of Alabama (RSA) manages and
                                     administers the retirement plans and funds for all public education employees and
                                     most state, county and city employees in the State of Alabama. RSA manages and
                                     invests approximately 26 billion dollars which is held in trust for the payment of
                                     Retirement benefits for approximately 280,000 active and retired public Employees.
                                        As prudent investment standards require, these funds are diversely invested in
                                     stocks, bonds, real estate and cash, Approximately 44% of our retirement fund as-
                                     sets are invested in stocks and approximately 85% of that is indexed to the S&P
                                     500, Midcap and Smallcap indexes and approximately 15% is actively managed Con-
                                     sequently, when the Enron ‘‘crash’’ occurred RSA suffered a $14 million loss on the
                                     sale of Enron stock, although RSA earlier realized trading gains amounting to $48
                                     million, and RSA is left with bonds for which we paid approximately $44 million
                                     and which are currently valued at approximately $9 million.
                                        Fortunately, because of the size of our investment trust, our conservative invest-
                                     ment strategy and the diversification of our investments, the Enron loss has not en-
                                     dangered our ability to pay benefits which our retirees have earned. Furthermore,
                                     because our Retirement plans are defined benefit plans, rather than defined con-
                                     tribution plans benefits are guaranteed as obligations of the RSA, as a stockholder
                                     and a bond holder, is a member of the classes in the numerous class action securi-
                                     ties fraud lawsuits which have been filed in Houston, Texas, against Enron, its offi-
                                     cers and Arthur Andersen. We have joined with the states of Georgia, Ohio and
                                     Washington in their effort to seek lead plaintiff status in that litigation. Unfortu-
                                     nately, it is generally believed that available assets of Enron and its officers and
                                     auditor will not be enough to provide meaningful relief to Enron’s many creditors
                                     and defrauded stockholders.
                                        It is my hope that: (1) those responsible for this fraud on investorsEnron officers,
                                     auditors, and any others who participated and contributed to this fraudwill be held
                                     accountable and sill be required to disgorge any personal wealth acquired in this
                                     nefarious enterprise as a strong deterrent to others, and (2) federal and state regu-




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000073   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 74 ===
                                                                                      70
                                     latory actions will be taken to diminish the chances of something like this ever hap-
                                     pening again.
                                       It is probably too late to help those who were defrauded by Enron and its officers
                                     but we should make every attempt to see that innocent investors are not defrauded
                                     in this manner and on this scale in the future.
                                            Sincerely,

                                                                                                            DAVID G. BRONNER
                                                                                                             Chief Executive Officer

                                                                               f

                                                                                        DUKE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW
                                                                                    DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 27708–0360
                                                                                                          January 24, 2002
                                     Senator Patrick Leahy
                                     433 Russell Senate Office Bldg
                                     United States Senate
                                     Washington, D.C. 20510
                                     Congressman F. James Sensenbrenner
                                     2332 Rayburn House Office Building,
                                     Washington, D.C. 20515–4909
                                        Dear Chairman Leahy and Chairman Sensenbrermer:
                                        I am very troubled by the January 23 letter delivered to you by a group of law
                                     professors opposed to section 912 of S.420/H.R. 333. The suggestion that section 912
                                     would encourage the types of off-balance sheet financing that Enron abused is mis-
                                     leading for two reasons. First, Section 912 addresses only securitization trans-
                                     actions, which are not the types of off-balance sheet financing that caused the prob-
                                     lems in Enron. Second, the problems in Enron do not appear to have been caused
                                     the problems in Enron. Second, the problems in Enron do not appear to have been
                                     caused by the creation and use of special purpose entities, per se, but rather by the
                                     off-balance sheet accounting treatment of such entities and their specially lobbied
                                     exemptions from the investment company act. Accounting treatment is governed ex-
                                     clusively by generally accepted accounting principles, promulgated by the Financial
                                     Accounting Standards Board and having nothing whatsoever to do with section 912.
                                     And the specially lobbied exemptions from the investment company act appear to
                                     apply only to Enron, so there well be no further similar abuses.
                                        Using the Enron debacle to oppose section 912 threrefore relies on a false analogy.
                                     I have taken the liberty of attaching a forthcoming law review article that analyzes
                                     section 912 in some detail. The article concludes that section 912 represents a public
                                     good and, if enacted, would foster significant economic benefits.
                                        Thank you for your consideration.
                                            Sincerely,

                                                                                                   STEVEN L. SCHWARCZ
                                                                     Professor of Law & Professor of Business Administration

                                                                               f

                                      Statement of Steven L. Schwarcz, Duke University School of Law, Durham,
                                                                  North Carolina
                                       I have been asked to testify on section 912 of S.420/H.R.333. My testimony is in-
                                     tended to supplement the letter and attached article that I sent to Senator Patrick
                                     Leahy and Congressman F. James Sensenbrenner on January 24, 2002, expressing
                                     concern over a January 23 letter delivered to them by a group of law professors op-
                                     posed to section 912.
                                       Section 912, as you know, would create a ‘‘safe harbor’’ under bankruptcy law for
                                     true sales of eligible assets in securitization transactions. My background includes
                                     both scholarly expertise and extensive practical experience in the fields of
                                     securitization and bankruptcy. Prior to joining the Duke faculty, I was a partner
                                     at two leading law firms, where I was principally engaged in representing creditors
                                     and debtors in bankruptcy cases and in structuring securitization transactions. I
                                     also taught courses in bankruptcy and securitization at Yale Law School and Co-




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000074   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 75 ===
                                                                                      71
                                     lumbia Law School. In 1996 I became Professor of Law at Duke University, where
                                     my areas of scholarship include bankruptcy and securitization. Among numerous
                                     works in these fields, I have authored the widely used Structured Finance, A Guide
                                     to the Principles of Asset Securitization (3d edition Jan. 2002).
                                        I believe that section 912 represents a public good and, if enacted, would foster
                                     significant economic benefits. Securitization is believed to be the most rapidly grow-
                                     ing segment of the U.S. credit markets. The Securities and Exchange Commission
                                     has characterized it as one of our country’s dominant means of capital formation.
                                     The most critical issue in a securitization is whether the transfer of eligible assets
                                     from a company to a special purpose vehicle (SPV) constitutes a sale under bank-
                                     ruptcy law, usually referred to as a ‘‘true sale.’’ True sale characterization is usually
                                     necessary for the securitization transaction to successfully attract outside investors.
                                        The law governing true sale characterization, however, is muddled and ambig-
                                     uous. As a result, many otherwise viable securitization transactions cannot be done.
                                     Furthermore, even viable securitization transactions generate excessive transaction
                                     costs, mostly involving lengthy legal opinions on the issue of true sale characteriza-
                                     tion. Section 912 recognizes that these transaction costs are wasteful. It would mini-
                                     mize these costs by permitting true sale issues to be promptly resolved by exam-
                                     ining the transactional documentation. Moreover, section 912 should provide a basis
                                     to do away with the present need in many securitization transactions for a two-tier
                                     structure. This would allow the benefits of securitization to be extended to middle-
                                     market companies.
                                        There are no overriding policy reasons that would favor the current state of legal
                                     ambiguity on true sale characterization. Opponents of section 912 essentially argue
                                     that its safe harbor would provide participants in securitization with an ordinate
                                     degree of protection and immunity from the normal operation of the bankruptcy sys-
                                     tem at the expense of other creditors and debtors that seek to reorganize under the
                                     shelter of the bankruptcy laws. Those arguments, however, raise the larger question
                                     of whether securitization is efficient and fair. I believe, and have argued at length,
                                     that it is. Securitization merely replaces financial assets with cash. Unsecured credi-
                                     tors have the same amount of unencumbered assets to levy against after the
                                     securitization as they did before the securitization.
                                        Some may argue that securitization nonetheless could hurt creditors where the
                                     cash received is wasted by the company originating the securitization. But one can-
                                     not assume wasteful behavior simply because a company sells assets for cash. In
                                     fact, given the scrutiny imposed by rating agencies—section 912 requires that at
                                     least one nationally recognized, Securities and Exchange Commission-approved rat-
                                     ing agency, such as Standard & Poor’s or Moody’s, has rated at least one class of
                                     the SPV’s securities to be investment grade—securitization may present fewer op-
                                     portunities for wasteful behavior than other financing methods.
                                        Nonetheless, securitization, just like any other sale of assets by a company, may
                                     become suspect if implemented when the company is on the brink of bankruptcy.
                                     The potential for such suspect actions, however, is not unique to securitization
                                     transactions. The same issues would arise, for example, if on the eve of bankruptcy
                                     a company sold, or borrowed money by encumbering, a factory or equipment and
                                     similarly sought to dissipate the sale or loan proceeds. Such questionable uses of
                                     proceeds are more appropriately addressed by the existing network of preference
                                     and fraudulent conveyance laws.
                                        Moreover, securitization increases overall value by providing a new source of fi-
                                     nancing, the capital markets, whose rates are systematically lower than the rates
                                     at which many companies commonly borrow. So long as the added transaction costs
                                     are less than the interest saved by using securitization instead of secured financing,
                                     there is a net gain.
                                        This begs the question, however, why the capital markets should be prepared to
                                     fund securitization transactions at a lower rate than secured financing. It’s because
                                     a securitization based on a ‘‘true sale’’ effectively can separate the source of payment
                                     of the SPV’s securities from the risks associated with the company originating the
                                     transaction, largely eliminating the need for investors to monitor the original com-
                                     pany’s financial condition. Although the risks associated with servicing and col-
                                     lecting the eligible assets still necessitate some monitoring, these risks are borne
                                     by specialists who are in the business of precisely assessing and absorbing such
                                     risks.
                                        I acknowledge that—all other things being equal—the safe harbor for
                                     securitization proposed in section 912 to some extent would act counter to the bank-
                                     ruptcy goal of debtor rehabilitation. That’s because the safe harbor would prevent
                                     a court from re-characterizing a securitization ‘‘sale’’ as a secured loan even though,
                                     in a bankruptcy reorganization case, eligible assets consisting of a business’s receiv-
                                     ables are often a prime source of collateral for debtor-in-possession financing. But




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000075   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 76 ===
                                                                                      72
                                     other things are not equal. For example, the proceeds of the securitization may have
                                     provided liquidity to help a debtor stave off an earlier bankruptcy filing or could
                                     allow sufficient liquidity to help the company avoid bankruptcy altogether. The safe
                                     harbor also would help to preserve reasonable commercial expectations that insure
                                     efficiency and predictability in the marketplace. Furthermore, this all must be
                                     viewed in perspective: most companies that engage in securitization transactions do
                                     not end up in bankruptcy; in contrast, the possibility that these transactions could
                                     be undone in bankruptcy casts a shadow over all securitization deals. On balance,
                                     I therefore favor the safe harbor of section 912.
                                        This result is sensible and, indeed, parallels the regulatory safe harbor similarly
                                     instituted by the Securities and Exchange Commission, after extensive study, in its
                                     Rule 3a-7 in order to promote securitization transactions.
                                        Finally, section 912, which is limited to securitization transactions, would not en-
                                     courage the kinds of abuses that occurred in Enron. Those problems were caused
                                     by Enron’s manipulative use of special purpose entities, capitalized by Enron stock,
                                     in order to (a) sell assets, at inflated profits, enabling Enron to recognize the in-
                                     flated profit for financial statement purposes, and (b) sell assets that would be fall-
                                     ing in value, in order to book the sale proceeds and avoid having to later write-down
                                     asset value. These are accounting, not bankruptcy law, failures. Moreover, a com-
                                     pany originating a securitization transaction would be prevented by federal securi-
                                     ties law from capitalizing the SPV with company stock. Section 912 therefore would
                                     not cause Enron-style abuses.

                                                                               f

                                       Statement of Hon. Jeff Sessions, a U.S. Senator from the State of Alabama
                                        Every director and officer of a corporation owes his corporation and its share-
                                     holders a very high legal duty—a duty of loyalty.1 This duty of loyalty is owed to
                                     all of the stockholders of the corporation and is of paramount importance if there
                                     is to be a true open and transparent capital market.
                                        The duty of loyalty requires that officers or directors not engage in self-dealing
                                     transactions. Enron’s own report released this past week, indicated that directors
                                     and officers of Enron may have engaged in such self-dealing transactions, thereby
                                     breaching their duty of loyalty. These officers breached their duty by setting up
                                     partnerships where Enron invested 97% of the capital needed (some of it in debt)
                                     for the partnership while the other partners—who were Enron officers—only in-
                                     vested 3%. This type of arrangement is allowable under Generally Accepted Ac-
                                     counting Principles.
                                        It appears these partnerships worked to the direct advantage of the minority part-
                                     ners—the Enron officers. While Enron was able to hide the debt incurred to start
                                     the partnerships off its corporate balance sheet, yet still being liable for the debt,
                                     the other partners were making millions. Enron’s own report states ‘‘[m]any of the
                                     most significant transactions apparently were designed to accomplish favorable fi-
                                     nancial statement results, not to achieve bona fide economic objectives or to transfer
                                     risk.’’ Engaging in these types of transactions by corporate officers is a breach of
                                     the duty of loyalty that the officers owed to Enron and it stockholders. If these alle-
                                     gations are true, the officers and directors must be held responsible.
                                        Furthermore, it appears that Enron insiders made millions by unloading their
                                     stock in the months leading up the collapse of this Fortune 100 company. The insid-
                                     ers apparently used their knowledge of inside material information to make their
                                     money while others held on to their Enron stock and lost millions. A corporate in-
                                     sider has a duty under Federal securities law to not trade on material non-public
                                     information. The insider has a duty to ‘‘abstain or disclose.’’ This means the insider
                                     must either disclose the information or abstain from trading.
                                        If Enron insiders have engaged in these transactions, they should and will be held
                                     accountable and liable to the public for their illegal actions. It is a shame that many
                                     Americans trusted this company to be honest in its accounting practices only to dis-
                                     cover that Enron’s books were a financial ‘‘house of cards.’’
                                        Even the State of Alabama has felt the effects Enron’s fall. The Retirement Sys-
                                     tem of Alabama, which held investments in Enron, has lost approximately $50 mil-
                                     lion in stocks and bonds on Enron. This retirement fund is for teachers and other
                                     state employees of Alabama. Additionally, there are several other state retirement

                                       1 See Marciano v. Nakash, 535 A.2d 400,403 (Del.1987) (citing Guth v. Loft, Inc., 5 A.2d 503
                                     (Del.1939)). See also WILLIAM A. KLEIN AND JOHN C. COFFEE, JR., BUSINESS ORGANI-
                                     ZATION AND FINANCE: LEGAL AND ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES, 162–65 (6th ed.1996).




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000076   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 77 ===
                                                                                      73
                                     funds that have lost millions as a result of Enron’s bankruptcy—not to mention the
                                     countless others who held investments in Enron, including Enron’s own employees.
                                     If these losses were due to fraud, those responsible must be held accountable.
                                        The key to American economic progress has been a confidence on the part of in-
                                     vestors that the financial data they receive is honest. This confidence should and
                                     can be restored. I believe there are problems with our accounting system that must
                                     be corrected.
                                        I also believe that the retirement funds of individuals employees are of immense
                                     importance and great care must be taken to avoid huge financial disasters that
                                     could place in poverty an entire family. I will support reforms to make these plans
                                     more secure.
                                        It is important that the investigators and investors get to the bottom of what
                                     transpired at Enron over the past several years. There should be a full investigation
                                     that will be fair and equitable to the innocent investors. If innocent investors have
                                     been defrauded by this company or its executives then they should and will recover
                                     under our system of justice. Congress must carefully examine Enron’s fall and de-
                                     cide if the rules need to be changed.

                                                                               f

                                      Statement of Hon. Strom Thurmond, a U.S. Senator from the State of South
                                                                    Carolina
                                        Mr. Chairman:
                                        Thank you for holding this timely hearing on the collapse of Enron Corporation.
                                     I hope that today’s witnesses will give us a clearer understanding of what happened
                                     at Enron and how we can protect American investors from future business calami-
                                     ties. The bankruptcy of this giant corporation has serious implications for our econ-
                                     omy, and we should examine closely the business and regulatory culture that led
                                     to its downfall.
                                        I am particularly troubled by the devastating losses that many Enron employees
                                     suffered because their retirement savings were heavily invested in the company’s
                                     stock. These unfortunate events have shown us the importance of pension reform,
                                     and I applaud President Bush’s plan to protect the hard-earned retirement savings
                                     of our Nation’s workforce. We should follow the President’s lead and develop policies
                                     that would provide employees with more freedom in determining how to invest
                                     money in their 401(k) plans. Congress should also pass legislation that makes it un-
                                     lawful for corporations to prohibit their employees from selling company stock while
                                     at the same time allowing senior executives to do so. As we have seen from recent
                                     press reports, it appears that Enron’s upper-level management sold their stocks
                                     when it became apparent that the company was in trouble. However, the company’s
                                     lower-level employees did not have the same opportunities or even enough informa-
                                     tion to know that their retirement savings were in jeopardy.
                                        Our economic system thrives on the full disclosure of information to investors.
                                     Clearly, Enron succeeded for some time in hiding the true state of the company from
                                     investors, including its own employees. According to press reports, Enron was able
                                     to hide millions of dollars of debt in supposedly independent businesses that were
                                     in reality controlled by Enron executives. Not only were millions of dollars in debts
                                     hidden by these ‘‘outside’’ businesses, but the profits attributed to them were in-
                                     flated. According to the Wall Street Journal, Enron acknowledged in November that
                                     it had erroneously reported $600 million in earnings since 1997. Soon after this rev-
                                     elation, when investors became aware that the company indeed troubled, the com-
                                     pany went bankrupt.
                                        There appear to be many factors that contributed to this investor deception. We
                                     should examine them thoroughly. While Congress should not react in a knee-jerk
                                     fashion, we must review several aspects of our current financial system
                                        that may have been factors in the Enron collapse. First of all, I am concerned
                                     about the conflicts of interest that arise for analysts employed by Wall Street firms.
                                     While they offer advice to clients on whether to buy or sell a particular company’s
                                     stock, their firms may also provide lending services to the same company. While the
                                     lending side of the business is supposed to be walled off from the brokerage side,
                                     there have been allegations leveled that analysts are often discouraged from offering
                                     honest assessments of a corporation’s performance.
                                        Second, Congress should also examine the practice that consulting firms, such as
                                     Arthur Anderson, have of providing consulting and auditing services to the same cli-
                                     ent. The potential for abuse is readily apparent. This is particularly so because the
                                     consulting side of the business is more lucrative than the auditing side. Several con-




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000077   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06621   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC

=== PAGE 78 ===
                                                                                      74
                                     sulting firms and businesses have already made public their intentions to separate
                                     auditing and consulting services, and I find this to be an encouraging development.
                                       Moreover, I hope that our witnesses today will discuss accounting reform in gen-
                                     eral. While some of Enron’s practices appear to have violated accounting standards,
                                     others may have been set up in conformance with current standards. I believe that
                                     Congress should prohibit accounting gimmicks from hiding the true state of a cor-
                                     poration’s financial standing. Investors should not be deceived by trickery. Rather,
                                     they should have an abundance of accurate information available to them.
                                       While regulation of the markets should be limited, we must ensure that basic pro-
                                     tections exist to protect shareholders and retirement savings. We should allow the
                                     market to operate unhindered, but in order to do so we must not sanction unethical
                                     and deceptive behavior. The market should not encourage immoral behavior, and it
                                     is our responsibility to take steps to help root it out. Ethical standards should be
                                     no different on Wall Street than on the Main Streets of towns and cities across this
                                     Nation.
                                       In addition to the concerns that I have discussed, legislative proposals have been
                                     advanced that would amend our laws on securities fraud. I will gladly consider mak-
                                     ing reasonable changes to current laws, but I do not want Congress to react un-
                                     wisely in the face of political pressure. It is important to keep in mind that those
                                     who may have committed wrongdoing in this case can be prosecuted under current
                                     law. Additionally, shareholders who have been injured may bring civil suits to re-
                                     cover their losses. Our current system does not allow those who break the law to
                                     go unpunished or to reap the benefits of their fraudulent activities. However, that
                                     being said, we should examine all proposals that may discourage future Enron-type
                                     debacles.
                                       Some Wall Street observers have called for the repeal of certain provisions of the
                                     Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. We should be very careful regard.
                                     The PSLRA was the result of a bipartisan effort and was intended to place reason-
                                     able limitations on liability exposure in securities litigation. For example, under the
                                     PSLRA, an individual cannot bring a civil action against someone who has aided
                                     and abetted a securities fraud. Aiders and abettors would typically include profes-
                                     sionals who were not direct violators of the law but who facilitated the commission
                                     of the fraud, such as attorneys and accountants. Although an injured person may
                                     not sue the aider or abettor, the Securities and Exchange Commission may bring
                                     a civil action against the wrongdoer. This system prevents the filing of multiple,
                                     harassing lawsuits meant to go after the deep pockets of professionals but allows
                                     for the government to sue those who have truly aided and abetted I do not think
                                     that we should repeal this section of the Act and open the floodgates to unlimited
                                     lawsuits. However, there are some minor changes that could offer a great benefit.
                                     We should make the SEC a more meaningful enforcer. Currently, the SEC can bring
                                     civil actions against aiders and abettors if the person knowingly helped in the fraud-
                                     ulent activity. However, the ‘‘knowingly’’ standard provides incentives for lawyers
                                     and accountants to look the other way while inappropriate behavior is occurring. We
                                     should consider adding a ‘‘recklessness’’ standard, thereby eliminating any safe har-
                                     bors for those who intentionally ignore fraudulent behavior.
                                       Another suggested change to the PSLRA that concerns me is the elimination of
                                     the securities exemption under the racketeering laws. As part of the PSLRA, Con-
                                     gress prevented civil RICO claims from being brought in securities fraud cases. This
                                     reform was enacted because Congress understood that the broad language of the
                                     RICO statute permitted actions to be brought in circumstances that did not involve
                                     organized crime. Because of this broad language, RICO claims were commonly made
                                     in securities fraud cases and commercial litigation. These claims provided major in-
                                     centives for defendants to settle because of the possibilities of treble damages under
                                     the RICO statute. We should be careful about re-opening the doors to abuse of RICO
                                     claims. If minor changes in the law would be adequate, we should not undo impor-
                                     tant reforms just for the sake of appearances.
                                       Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this important hearing. I hope that this
                                     committee will conduct a reasonable inquiry into the activities that led to Enron’s
                                     all. We should develop sensible policies that encourage corporate responsibility and
                                     ethical behavior. At the same time, Congress should not rush to make unnecessary
                                     and harmful changes in the law. We should pursue a course that will discourage
                                     corporate dishonesty and punish those who violate the trust of investors. Yet we
                                     must not overreact and hamper the market’s ability to deliver strong economic
                                     growth. I look forward to hearing the testimony of our witnesses today.

                                                                                      Æ




VerDate Mar 21 2002   14:07 May 19, 2003   Jkt 84416   PO 00000   Frm 000078   Fmt 06633   Sfmt 06011   C:\HEARINGS\84416.TXT   SJUD4   PsN: CMORC
