
=== PAGE 1 ===
                                                                                  S. HRG. 107–464

   PROTECTING THE PENSIONS OF WORKING
AMERICANS: LESSONS FROM THE ENRON DEBACLE




                                   HEARING
                                         BEFORE THE


  COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION,
        LABOR, AND PENSIONS
       UNITED STATES SENATE
                ONE HUNDRED SEVENTH CONGRESS
                                       FIRST SESSION

                                                ON




EXAMINING THE IMPACT OF THE COLLAPSE OF ENRON CORPORATION
 ON ITS 401(k) PENSION PLAN INVESTORS AND THE DEPARTMENT OF
 LABOR’S ROLE IN ENFORCEMENT AND REGULATION UNDER THE EM-
 PLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT (ERISA), FOCUSING ON
 RELATED PENSION PLAN REFORM PROPOSALS


                                    FEBRUARY 7, 2002


Printed for the use of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions




                                            (
                           U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
   77–706 PDF                         WASHINGTON : 2002

            For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
         Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800
                 Fax: (202) 512–2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402–0001

=== PAGE 2 ===
     COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR, AND PENSIONS
                 EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER J. DODD, Connecticut         JUDD GREGG, New Hampshire
TOM HARKIN, Iowa                         BILL FRIST, Tennessee
BARBARA A. MIKULSKI, Maryland            MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
JAMES M. JEFFORDS (I), Vermont           TIM HUTCHINSON, Arkansas
JEFF BINGAMAN, New Mexico                JOHN W. WARNER, Virginia
PAUL D. WELLSTONE, Minnesota             CHRISTOPHER S. BOND, Missouri
PATTY MURRAY, Washington                 PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
JACK REED, Rhode Island                  SUSAN M. COLLINS, Maine
JOHN EDWARDS, North Carolina             JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, New York         MIKE DeWINE, Ohio
                J. MICHAEL MYERS, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
                  TOWNSEND LANGE MCNITT, Minority Staff Director



                                     (II)

=== PAGE 3 ===
                                          C O N T E N T S

                                                       STATEMENTS

                                           THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 2002
                                                                                                                                Page
Kennedy, Hon. Edward M., Chairman, Committee on Health, Education,
  Labor, and Pensions, opening statement ...........................................................                              1
Gregg, Judd, a U.S. Senator from the State of New Hampshire, opening
  statement ..............................................................................................................        3
Harkin, Tom, a U.S. Senator from the State of Iowa, prepared statement ........                                                   4
Roberts, Pat, a U.S. Senator from the State of Kansas, prepared statement ....                                                    5
Hutchinson, Tim, a U.S. Senator from the State of Arkansas, prepared state-
  ment ......................................................................................................................     6
Boxer, Barbara, a U.S. Senator from the State of California, Jon Corzine,
  a U.S. Senator from the State of New Jersey, Ken Bentsen, a Representa-
  tive in Congress from the State of Texas ...........................................................                            8
Dodd, Christopher J., a U.S. Senator from the State of Connecticut, prepared
  statement ..............................................................................................................       17
Chao, Elaine, Secretary, U.S. Department of Labor, prepared statement ..........                                                 25
Warner, John W., a U.S. Senator from the State of Virginia, prepared state-
  ment ......................................................................................................................    43
Lacey, Steven E., Portland General Electric Employee, Salem, OR; Jan
  Fleetham, former Enron Employee, Bloomington, MN; Karl V. Farmer,
  former Polaroid Employee, Lawrence, MA; James Prentice, Chairman, Ad-
  ministrative Committee, Enron Corporation Savings Plan; Alicia Munnell,
  Peter F. Drucker Chair in Management Sciences, Boston College, Boston,
  MA; and Dallas Salisbury, President and Chief Executive Officer, Employee
  Benefit Research Institute, Washington, DC .....................................................                               58
     Prepared Statements of: ...................................................................................
         Steven E. Lacey .........................................................................................               61
         Jan Fleetham .............................................................................................              64
         Karl V. Farmer ..........................................................................................               68
         Alicia H. Munnell ......................................................................................                73
         Dallas L. Salisbury ....................................................................................                80

                                                                (III)

=== PAGE 4 ===

=== PAGE 5 ===
PROTECTING THE PENSIONS OF WORKING
 AMERICANS: LESSONS FROM THE ENRON
 DEBACLE

                 THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 2002

                                           U.S. SENATE,
 COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR, AND PENSIONS,
                                                Washington, DC.
  The committee met, pursuant to notice, in Room SD-106, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Edward M. Kennedy (chairman of the
committee) presiding.
  Present: Senators Kennedy, Dodd, Mikulski, Bingaman,
Wellstone, Reed, Edwards, Clinton, Gregg, Enzi, Hutchinson, War-
ner, Bond, and DeWine.
            OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR KENNEDY
   The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order, please.
   We have a number of very important events, one of which is the
prayer breakfast which a number of our colleagues have attended,
and they will be returning as we start to move through the hear-
ing. Then, we have a vote just after 10 and another at noon. So
we will be interrupted, unfortunately, but that is the way that life
is.
   At the outset, I will make an opening statement, then ask Sen-
ator Gregg to make what comments he would, and then move to
our Senate colleagues and then to Congressman Bentsen.
   We are here today to learn lessons from the Enron debacle so
that we can strengthen America’s pension system and protect
America’s workers.
   At Enron, executives cashed out more than $1 billion of stock
while Enron workers lost more than $1 billion from their 401(k) re-
tirement plans. Thousands of Enron workers lost virtually all of
their retirement savings. Enron executives got rich off stock options
even as they drove the company into the ground and systematically
misled workers about the true financial condition of the company.
   Sadly, Enron is not just an isolated tale of corporate greed. In-
stead, the Enron debacle reveals a crisis of corporate values. In
America, people who work hard all their lives deserve retirement
security in their golden years. It is wrong—dead wrong—to expect
Americans to face poverty in retirement after decades of working
and saving. Enron has shown us that workers today do not have
true retirement security.
   The emerging details of the Enron scandal reveal a shocking
abuse of corporate power that left workers powerless to protect
                                 (1)

=== PAGE 6 ===
                                 2

themselves. Executives like those at Enron should not put their
own short-term gain ahead of the long-term interests of workers
and shareholders. They must not be rewarded for doing so. Above
all, the Enron debacle demonstrates the urgency of reforming
401(k) plans which are now the bedrock of America’s pension sys-
tem.
   I commend President Bush for proposing legislation to provide
fair notice for workers before any lockdown and to end age restric-
tions on the sale of company matching stock.
   But these first steps only address the tip of the iceberg in terms
of protecting workers’ retirement security. The President’s proposal
does nothing to respond to the core issue—the need for investment
diversification to protect workers at Enron and other companies
across the United States. When it comes to protecting the hard-
earned retirement dollars of America’s workers, we should not set-
tle for half measures.
   At Enron, workers were systematically misled by Enron execu-
tives about the financial situation of the company. For years,
Enron, like many other companies, pushed its workers to buy com-
pany stock with their own 401(k) contributions. As a result, Enron
workers had more than 60 percent of their 401(k) assets in Enron
stock. They were turned into captive investors who could not sell
their stock when they needed to or wanted to. Workers at many of
America’s leading companies face similar risks because they are
overinvested in company stock. At Proctor and Gamble, for exam-
ple, workers have over 90 percent of their 401(k) assets in company
stock.
   Until the bitter end, Enron executives continued to tout Enron
stock to workers in a series of emails. On August 14, CEO Kenneth
Lay told workers that he ‘‘never felt better about the prospects for
the company.’’ On August 27, Lay predicted to workers a ‘‘signifi-
cantly higher stock price.’’ And on September 26, Lay called Enron
stock ‘‘an incredible bargain.’’ Even as they promised the moon,
Lay and others were cashing out their stock for $1 billion.
   Enron is not an isolated example. The retirement security of
workers at many other major corporations has been similarly un-
dermined. At Lucent, the company’s stock dropped from a peak of
$45 to $6 last August. Lucent’s workers lost millions because they
were overinvested in company stock. At Polaroid, workers were re-
quired to invest in company stock and barred from selling until
they retired. As Polaroid went bankrupt, the workers lost virtually
their entire retirement savings.
   A generation ago, Congress took action to safeguard pensions in
response to an Enron-like debacle at Studebaker. These protections
for defined benefit plans included diversification requirements and
Government insurance. As many companies have abandoned the
traditional defined benefit pension plans, 401(k) plans have become
the bedrock of America’s pension system. Today 401(k)’s offer few
if any of these safeguards for workers’ retirement security; 401(k)
plans are not professionally managed, they are exempt from diver-
sification standards, and they are not backed by insurance.
   In the wake of Enron’s collapse, Americans across the spectrum
now recognize that a successful free enterprise economy depends on
a framework of laws and institutions to make it work. Enron ex-

=== PAGE 7 ===
                                   3

ecutives were some of the leading cheerleaders for deregulation, ar-
guing against any kind of Government oversight. The results are
now in, and it is clear that this approach leaves America’s workers
high and dry.
  Above all, the Enron debacle shows that we need a top to bottom
review of 401(k) plans. But we must do more to protect the retire-
ment security of workers. We must take concrete steps to foster the
diversification of workers’ 401(k) plans. Companies should be re-
quired to adequately insure their pension plans and to give work-
ers a voice in overseeing pension plans. We must guarantee that
workers receive complete and accurate information to make their
investment decisions and make clear that executives cannot give
workers incomplete or misleading information to affect their stock
purchases.
  I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today and moving
forward on legislation to reform America’s pension system.
  Senator Gregg?
              OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR GREGG
   Senator GREGG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Today we are taking up one of the areas that has been raised rel-
ative to the Enron situation. There has been an immense amount
of hyperbole on the issue of Enron, but when we get past the circus
and take away the screen, we find two major public policy issues.
   The first public policy issue goes to the issue of accounting and
the question of transparency and the accuracy of accounting sys-
tems and the integrity of our accounting process.
   The second issue goes to the issue of pensions and especially the
investment in and ownership of company stock by employees.
   Ironically, in the Enron situation, the first issue, the integrity of
the accounting system and transparency, affected the second issue
rather dramatically because, as we have read, there have been dra-
matic losses in the value of the Enron stock. But had there been
accurate and forthright accounting in place, the stock probably
would have never reached the values that it was alleged to have
attained, and the issue of losses here would be significantly dif-
ferent.
   As we move down this road of determining what we should do
to reform our pension system, which is the topic of this hearing, I
think we need to be careful. We need to be sure that we do not end
up throwing the baby out with the bath water.
   Literally millions of Americans have seen their avenue to wealth
being their participation in their company’s stock. The number of
companies that have aggressive stock plans and the number of
rank-and-file employees who have benefited from those are mil-
lions—the clerk who works at a checkout counter at a Safeway
store; the person who manages the women’s apparel section of a
Wal-Mart store; the individual who sells appliances in a Sears
store; the salesperson for a pharmaceutical company. These indi-
viduals, after years of hard labor for the corporations that they
work for, end up retiring with significant wealth—in fact, in some
instances, hundreds of thousands and even millions of dollars
worth of wealth.

=== PAGE 8 ===
                                 4

   We do not want to set up a system here which dramatically chills
that opportunity for American workers to participate in their true
future, in their future in the American dream, their participation
in capitalism.
   So as we look at the issue of diversification, which is an impor-
tant issue, and as we look at the issue of vesting, which is an
equally important issue, we need to be concerned with the question
of whether Enron is an aberration or whether this is a systematic
failure. Looking at that question, I believe we should look across
the structure of corporate America, look at companies like
Raytheon, for example, in Massachusetts, which has set in place a
stock ownership plan which allows for immediate vesting, look at
companies like Bank of Boston, Bay State Gas, Biogen, Houghton
and Miflin, L.S. Serratt, New England Power, Staples, Stone and
Webster—the list goes on and on of companies that have turned
over a significant portion of the value of the assets of the corpora-
tion to their workers through various forms of stock incentive
plans—and be sure that we do not end up, as a result of actions
taken by a Congress, which is running before the media, chilling
the rights of stockholders who are workers to have access to that
form of wealth.
   So let us take a look at what happened with Enron and then let
us make decisions which are based on logic and which are going
to continue to promote the expansion of wealth amongst rank-and-
file employees in America and not end up taking actions which will
cut off their access to that form of wealth.
   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
   We will include in the record statements of Senators Harkin,
Roberts and Hutchinson.
   [The prepared statements of Senators Harkin, Roberts and
Hutchinson follow:]
            PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR HARKIN
   I thank the Chair for holding this hearing. There is a strong
need to round out everyone’s knowledge of what went so horribly
wrong for Enron pension holders, and what kind of remedies we
can enact in Congress to prevent another tragedy.
   Enron and pension reform isn’t about politics. It’s about Iowa
families like the Heilands. I recently received a letter from Sheri
Heiland. Sheri shared with me the story of how Enron’s duplicity
cost her parents their pension.
   Sheri’s father worked at Northern Natural Gas in Redfield for 30
years before passing away in 1979. Those decades of hard work
earned him a good pension. But when Enron bought out Northern
Natural Gas that companies stock was transferred into Enron
stock.
   As Enron’s stock plummeted, Sheri’s mother, a 77 year old widow
living alone in Penora, lost much of her retirement savings. In her
letter, Sheri told me that her mother trusted Enron and Ken Lay
‘‘to be honest and above board.’’ Now, Sheri’s mother can no longer
afford to repair her home, making it more difficult for her to con-
tinue living on her own.
   Families like the Heilands are why we need to act immediately
to protect worker pensions. We don’t yet know if Enron broke any

=== PAGE 9 ===
                                 5

laws, but they clearly undertook a series of actions that under-
mined their workers retirement and emptied the pensions. That’s
why I believe that our pension protection legislation should empha-
size the creation and preservation of employee pension plans that
are secure, transparent and fair.
   That means prohibiting a company’s accountants from also audit-
ing employee pension plans; requiring companies to carry insur-
ance to cover employee pension losses due to company fraud; estab-
lishing an Office of Pension Protection at the Department of Labor
to act as an advocate for pension holders and provide genuinely un-
derstandable information on things that really matter to a pension
plan participant.
   We should also require that ‘‘blackout’’ or ‘‘lockdown’’ periods,
where stock may not be traded, affect company executives the same
way they affect other employees, so that executives like Ken Lay
cannot unload their stock, while his employees lost both their jobs
and their life savings. And when executives do dump stock those
actions should be reported in a timely manner, not a month or a
year later when the damage has already been done.
   And the federal government shouldn’t provide tax breaks to com-
panies that fail to provide employees diversified portfolios. Some
companies, like Enron, encourage their employees to be heavily in-
vested in their companies stock. The United States Government
subsidizes 401(k) plans for a reason—to provide employees with a
retirement plan that should be unlikely to crash.
   I believe the Congress and the president must make clear—in
both actions and words—that a worker’s pension is not a corpora-
tion’s private piggy bank. While most employers do right by their
workers, we must protect workers and their pensions from the Ken
Lays of the world. I look forward to working with President Bush
and my colleagues on this committee to make these needed pension
reforms. I thank the chair.
           PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROBERTS
   Mr. Chairman: Thank you for calling this hearing to consider the
important issue of ensuring the security of American workers’ re-
tirement plans.
   In the aftermath of Enron, Congress has a responsibility to as-
sure America’s workers that we are taking the necessary steps to
protect and preserve their retirement assets. We are here today to
begin the process of gathering the facts surrounding the Enron
case, examining current pension practices and determining what
steps Congress can and should take to safeguard worker’s retire-
ment savings.
   It is important for us to keep in mind, as we hear testimony
today, that we don’t yet have all the facts in the Enron case. I com-
mend Secretary Chao and the Department of Labor for moving
quickly to investigate Enron’s retirement savings plan. It is impor-
tant that we allow this investigation to continue to determine to
what extent Enron violated its fiduciary responsibility to its em-
ployees and ascertain the facts surrounding the loss of Enron work-
er’s retirement plans before we take legislative action to alter pen-
sion law.

=== PAGE 10 ===
                                  6

   The case of Enron has brought to light many issues about cur-
rent pension law that merit review. A key issue is giving workers
the freedom to diversify their retirement accounts. While employ-
ees should retain the option of investing in employer stock, they
must also be allowed other investment options in a more timely
manner. We must ensure parity between corporate executives and
workers during blackout periods and require that employers accept
fiduciary responsibility for their employees retirement savings dur-
ing blackout periods. Employees must have accurate information
and have access to investment advice about their retirement plans
and investment options. As we consider ways to strengthen and
protect the private pension system, we must not restrict workers
ability to make their own investment decisions about their retire-
ment plan.
   Voluntary employer-sponsored pension plans, like 401(k) plans
are a valuable way for more than 42 million Americans to save for
retirement. As we review pension law, we must be careful that any
Congressional action does not jeopardize worker’s retirement sav-
ings by discouraging employers from providing retirement savings
plans.
   I want to thank my colleagues who have already proposed
changes to current pension law. I am confident that these, along
with President Bush’s proposal to safeguard American workers’ re-
tirement savings will give us an opportunity for a thorough exam-
ination of what measures are necessary to protect and preserve
workers’ retirement plans, empower workers to make their own in-
vestment decisions, and encourage companies, both large and
small, to continue offering retirement plan benefits to their employ-
ees.
   Again, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for calling today’s hearing.
          PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR HUTCHINSON
  • What brings us here today is a tragic loss of thousands of peo-
ple’s retirement security. For anyone who has been watching the
story of the failure of Enron unfold, it is obvious that there is plen-
ty of blame to go around. The company executives, the auditors, the
board, lax regulators, and the pension plan administrators have all
come under scrutiny as numerous investigations, conducted by fed-
eral, state and private entities, seek to uncover the truth.
  • In this Committee, we have a narrow focus on what is by far
the most heartbreaking aspect of the bankruptcy: over twenty thou-
sand individuals invested in Enron retirement plans which held
significant shares of company stock, a stock which depreciated in
value by 98.8% in 2001. The plan sustained $1 billion in losses.
  • Such a catastrophic loss begs a culprit. Whether one exists,
whether our laws are strong enough to punish any culprits and
whether restoration will be available for those who have lost their
retirement savings are certainly questions I hope to look into
today.
  • But the members of this Committee are also very aware that
the culprit may be flaws in the system of laws we oversee. We hope
that today’s witnesses can help us understand what flaws may
exist and how they contributed to the Enron crisis.

=== PAGE 11 ===
                                  7

  • But before we jump into possible legislative solutions, many of
which could have a detrimental affect on worker retirement plans,
we must take the time to allow investigators to report their find-
ings. We need to know how our system failed before we can fix it
without doing possibly more damage. Let us remember that these
investigations are only a few weeks into their work and that the
complexity of the record-keeping at Enron took all the lawyers on
Wall Street years to decipher.
  • We must also remember that millions of Americans are partici-
pating in retirement plans and reaping enormous benefit from
them. The success of private pension plans has transformed worker
retirement in America. Today, because of these plans, the majority
of retirees can experience the comfortable retirement that was once
available only to the very well to do.
  • Last weekend I met with a company in Arkansas which has
provided an extremely successful Employee Stock Ownership Pro-
gram since 1975. Almost one thousand employees and retirees are
benefiting from the program. They wanted to meet with me out of
concern that we in Washington would seize on a political issue and
pass laws preventing their kind of plan.
  • And, of course, my home state of Arkansas has many stories
of employees who have made substantial retirement nest eggs
through their companies 401(k).
  • We must get to the bottom of the Enron issue, but we must
make sure that we preserve the best parts of our private retire-
ment system. One of these is the ability of individuals to make
their own choices, based on their own situation, when investing for
retirement. The President has submitted a plan which not only pre-
serves this right, it enhances it. Under the President’s proposal,
workers could no longer be locked into a portfolio filled with com-
pany stock. Rather, employees would be allowed to sell company
stock and diversify into other investment options once they have
participated in a 401(k) plan for three years.
  • Workers need to be empowered to make choices and to get the
best information possible when investing. Our current laws in-
tended to protect workers retirement funds actually prevent them
from obtaining affordable financial advice. I would support amend-
ing this law to allow employers to provide their workers with ac-
cess to professional investment advice as long as the advisers fully
disclose any fees or potential conflicts to the plan participants and
strict safeguards are in place to ensure that workers receive advice
solely in their best interests.
  • Today I hope to focus on what went wrong at Enron, what the
Department of Labor is doing and can do to help those injured em-
ployees, and who will be held responsible for this failure. If reforms
are needed in the system, I hope this committee will fully debate
the issues, gather information from the experts and fully explore
legislative remedies. I want to thank Secretary Chao for coming to
testifying here today, as well as all of the panel members. I look
forward to your testimony. Thank you Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Our first panel includes Senator Barbara Boxer,
Senator Jon Corzine, and Representative Ken Bentsen. We will
hear first from Senator Boxer and Senator Corzine and then from
the Congressman.

=== PAGE 12 ===
                                  8

  Senator Boxer has a long history of working to find ways to pro-
tect workers and their 401(k)’s, and Senator Corzine has a unique
experience with the financial markets as the former co-chair and
CEO of Goldman Sachs.
  They will explain how their bill, The Pension Protection and Di-
versification Act of 2001, S. 1838, will protect workers by limiting
the amount of employer stock each worker may hold and encourag-
ing diversification of investment plan assets. We look forward to
hearing from them.
  Senator Boxer?

STATEMENTS OF HON. BARBARA BOXER, A U.S. SENATOR
 FROM CALIFORNIA; HON. JON CORZINE, A U.S. SENATOR
 FROM NEW JERSEY; AND HON. KEN BENTSEN, A REP-
 RESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM TEXAS
   Senator BOXER. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, ranking
member Gregg, and other members of the committee. It is nice to
be here.
   Senator Corzine and I are going to divide our testimony. I will
be brief in giving an overview, and he will get into the specifics,
and then we will answer your questions.
   Mr. Chairman, this is an issue—protecting 401(k)’s—that has
touched many Americans deeply and profoundly. I personally—and
I know that I speak for Senator Corzine, who will put it in his own
words—want to give voice to those Americans. We want them to
have faith and trust in the future.
   Let me give you three quick examples. Edith Thompson has a
401(k) pension plan with $84,000 of employer stock. After employer
bankruptcy, her investment was worth $8,000.
   Bernice Pines’ 401(k) plan held $88,000 in her employer stock.
After company bankruptcy, Bernice’s investment was worth $9,000.
   Woodrow Moose Isaacs lost $57,900 that was in his 401(k); most
of that money was in employer stock.
   These were not Enron employees. They were employees from
Carter Hawley Hale, which went bankrupt in 1991, and from Color
Tile, which went bankrupt in 1996. And Senator Gregg, you talked
about retail clerks. The two women were retail clerks, grandmas,
who worked for The Emporium, which was a wonderful department
store owned by Carter Hawley Hale. And when they came to see
me, all they said was, ‘‘We want to have money to take our
grandkids out on the weekend for dinner.’’ Their whole life was
about that, and all of that vanished.
   So this is not about running before the media. This is not about
a one-time problem. This is a problem that has shown up to us
very clearly since 1991.
   So I think the time has come to do something about it, and of
course, I say to Senator Gregg, not to undermine the 401(k) plans,
but rather to give them strength and durability.
   Less than 2 months ago, the Commerce Committee on which I
serve heard from an Enron employee, Ms. Janice Farmer, who had
built up $700,000 in her 401(k) plan. She saw it plummet to
$20,000. This is what she told the committee: ‘‘Sometimes at night,
I do feel real bitter over what I have lost, because it was a big part

=== PAGE 13 ===
                                 9

of my future, and I do not know how I am going to handle the fu-
ture now. All I can do is hope and pray that I do not get sick.’’
   So it has been tragic, and I know that we have all heard these
voices, and we have all seen these faces.
   In 1996, I wrote The 401(k) Pension Protection Act. It called for
a 10 percent limit in company assets across individual plans. It
was pummeled. It was pummeled. If I might say, every economic
interest came forward and said it was a bad idea.
   Eventually, we did get it passed in a very watered-down fashion
in The Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, which in its final version as
it was accepted said that an employer cannot force an employee to
spend that employee’s money on more than 10 percent of employer
stock. That was weak, and it did not serve to save anybody here.
   So I can truly say that if my bill had passed—and I am not sure
it was perfect, and we could have compromised it to 20 percent or
30 percent or 40 percent of employer stock—we would not have
these Enron people in the position they are in. That is all I could
say.
   So now I am privileged to be working with Senator Corzine, who
has so much experience in the business end of the financial world.
I was a stockbroker in the 1960’s. He was an investment banker
in recent years. I had small, individual clients. His career was far
different. But having both worked in the financial world, we both
feel in our hearts and know in our minds this lesson: Never put
all your eggs in one basket, especially in a retirement account
where, if something goes wrong, you simply do not have the time
to rebuild your retirement, your hopes, and your dreams.
   This is our guiding principle: Any bill worthy of our support
must prevent another Color Tile, another Carter Hawley Hale, an-
other Enron; otherwise, what is the point?
   Humbly, we think our bill does it. There may be other bills that
do it which we will support as well.
   Let me just show you quickly a chart that shows you that limits
on retirement plans are not new. They have been in effect since
1974, Mr. Chairman, and you were on this committee when you
supported, as did every Member of the Senate and the House is my
understanding, a 10 percent limit on defined benefit plans. We just
show you the language, and I will not take the time to read it. But
there it is. It is set in stone. It has been there since 1974, and it
has worked very, very well.
   The point is that we want diversification because we know that
that means your risk is limited—and after all, when you are deal-
ing with retirees, you are dealing with a group of people who do
not have time to recover. That is the major point.
   So we do not think that this is so controversial. It was not con-
troversial 30 years ago. Ours is a 20 percent limit. We do not think
it is controversial today.
   So again, the message from us is that a cap on company assets
is consistent with sound, time-tested financial principles, and it
will stop another Enron from happening, and it will protect Amer-
ican workers and their retirement.
   Now it is my privilege to turn to Senator Corzine.
   Senator CORZINE. Thank you, Senator Boxer, Mr. Chairman, and
ranking member Gregg, and to my colleagues, thank you for this

=== PAGE 14 ===
                                  10

opportunity to talk about something that I care deeply about and
think I may be able to add some insights on.
   This is really about a simple principle of protecting Americans’
retirement savings through a simple principle that everyone that
I know in the world that I came from for 30 years bought into—
diversification. Lack of diversification in 401(k) plans was the prob-
lem revealed by the Enron debacle as it relates to the 401(k) issue,
and that is what our Pension Protection and Diversification Act ad-
dresses.
   The importance of diversifying one’s portfolio, Mr. Chairman, is
a fundamental principle of finance. Virtually every professional ad-
visor, money manager, or student of finance that I have ever
bumped up against speaks about it. Nobel Prizes have been award-
ed to those who have advocated this principle—I worked with one
of them, Fisher Black, at Goldman Sachs—and a whole series of
folks who have argued over and over about the value of diversifica-
tion.
   No company, no matter how established or how successful, is as-
sured of eternal or continued success. Last year alone, 255 of
roughly 3,000 public companies filed for bankruptcy—big ones,
small ones, all kinds of companies. And by the way, it is not just
an issue of bankruptcy. Volatility and price performance of the
stock is just as important an issue, as we saw with regard to
Lucent, in protecting retirees’ pension plans.
   We live in an uncertain world. It is an uncertain world, and it
makes no sense to invest too great a portion of one asset in a single
company, particularly when we are talking about retirement sav-
ing. That is why we limit even sophisticated financial participants
like banks to lend no more than 10 percent of their capital in sur-
plus to one company. We think it is in the public interest to make
sure that we do not have over-concentrations in sophisticated fi-
nancial institutions. The same really goes for securities firms and
insurance companies. If we believe that such diversification re-
quirements are appropriate for sophisticated financial firms, for the
life of me, I do not think I can understand why we leave ordinary
investors exposed to such inordinate risk.
   We just had 2 days of hearings on financial literacy in the Bank-
ing Committee, where we heard witness after witness, fact after
fact, about the poor State of financial literacy in this country. I en-
courage the members of the committee to review some of that data.
   In addition, the risks of concentrating assets in one company are
substantially magnified for the people who work at a company. It
is bad enough to lose your job, but it is worse if you lose your re-
tirement savings at the same time, and it can be devastating, as
we saw with a number of the folks at Enron.
   This is something, though, that does not have to go to bank-
ruptcy to have those kinds of problems occur. The chairman men-
tioned Lucent, which is from my home State. Actually, the price
over 18 months went from $85 to $6, and we have numbers of cases
where market loss as opposed to just bankruptcy or fraud or what-
ever have caused these problems.
   Ultimately, Mr. Chairman, Enron is not the only company in
which employees have invested large portions of assets. I think
many of you have seen this chart. The chart shows how pervasive

=== PAGE 15 ===
                                 11

this problem is even among some of America’s most respected busi-
nesses. At different points in time, they all look like good invest-
ments, but prices go up and down as markets change through time.
   And in fact, Mr. Chairman, for companies with 5,000 or more
employees—and I want to stress this—this is really a large com-
pany problem as opposed to a small business problem—company
stocks account for 43 percent of total retirement assets for compa-
nies with 5,000 employees or more. I do not know of a single port-
folio advisor, financial advisor, who would tell anybody to have 43
percent of their portfolio in one stock. In this case, we see from 94
percent down to 63, and Enron was the best of the lot here, at 57,
and this is a rank ordering.
   Mr. Chairman, in the past, Congress has recognized this broad
interest, as Senator Boxer talked about. ERISA rules were at 10
percent. That passed unanimously in the Senate and the House.
But we developed a loophole as it relates to 401(k)’s, and that puts
at risk the retirement security of millions of Americans, 42 million
exactly, in the 401(k) programs.
   The bill that Senator Boxer and I propose eliminates at least a
part of that special exemption for 401(k)’s and narrows its scope,
and we put a 20 percent limit with respect to company-held stock
for employers. By the way, we do not apply this to stocks that are
already—there will be transition rules—it is only to the invest-
ments in company stock, and it does not go at building up wealth.
I am a big fan of 401(k)’s and the kinds of defined contribution
plans that are in place across this country. Mr. Chairman, a 20
percent diversification requirement would have prevented—would
have prevented—the kinds of human tragedies we have seen
among Enron employees. And I think that is the question you have
to ask—how are we going to get at stopping or preventing the
kinds of problems it came from?
   The Federal Government has had a longstanding role in protect-
ing investment programs. This is not a paternalistic program. We
should let people invest as they want with their own private mon-
eys. There is nothing that we are arguing that is different than
that. But there is a difference with retirement moneys. When many
workers come to invest in company stock, they go into meetings,
and there is both implicit and explicit pressure to invest in their
company. Employees are enticed by well-intentioned employer
matches to bias their commitments, biases that are substantially
underwritten by tax subsidies by the public.
   Second and perhaps most important, if an individual wants to in-
vest in his own company or the employer wants to encourage it,
there are other ways to do that—stock purchase programs, options,
or just outright investment. No one is telling anyone how to invest
his or her own money. We are talking about tax-subsidized retire-
ment programs. And by the way, those tax subsidies are very real.
We have seen estimates of $60 billion a year to $90 billion a year,
and the President’s budget this year alone said there was $330 bil-
lion over the next 5 years. It is in the President’s budget. That is
more than we spent last year on our entire defense budget. So it
is a substantial taxpayer subsidization that is involved in creating
the kinds of biases that we see in the programs.

=== PAGE 16 ===
                                 12

   Mr. Chairman, let me make it clear that I believe subsidizing
savings to promote retirement is a good thing. I am not arguing
that we should not be in defined contribution plans. We just should
not be subsidizing risky investment strategies. It bears repeating
that if people want to risk all of their investment dollars by placing
all their investments in the employer, that is fine—with their own
money—but they should not do it on the dime of the taxpayer, as
we are subsidizing through our 401(k) programs.
   Mr. Chairman, remember that when individuals make risky in-
vestment retirement bets, social costs go up as well as the tax sub-
sidies. We will end up with charity care, Medicaid, and other kinds
of support programs when people do not have adequate retirement.
So I think it is important that we think about this in a comprehen-
sive context, not just simply with those $330 billion of tax sub-
sidies.
   Let me also respond to the claim that if our bill is enacted, fewer
companies will contribute to the employees’ 401(k). We have heard
this doomsday scenario, and it tries to scare people away from the
thought. The fact is you have cash matches as well as stock
matches, and employers get the same tax deduction, the same tax
treatment, the same reporting treatment for cash matches as they
do with their employer stock. What they are really interested in is
the free cash flow—I will get into the detail of that at some other
time. But this is not about how a company is going to be treated.
   And probably most important, employers want to maintain
meaningful retirement plans because of competitive pressures in
the marketplace. If you do not offer a 401(k), and other companies
do, you will not be able to hire the best employees, retain them,
and motivate them—and that is what this is all about in a competi-
tive labor market. I think it is important that we not lose track of
the fact that there is more likelihood in my view that if these
401(k)’s are properly managed, properly structured, you will get
more employers offering and, more important, you will get more
employees participating in them, because we do not have the kinds
of problems that we saw at Enron, Lucent, or a whole series of
other employers.
   This is not hyperbole. This is just sound investment management
practice.
   To sum up, Mr. Chairman, Congress’ top priority should be to
protect the retirement security of ordinary workers. To do that, we
must close this loophole which allows 401(k)’s to be concentrated,
as we are suggesting here, to ensure that no taxpayer is forced to
subsidize gambling on risky investments, but most important, to
prevent the type of personal tragedies that we saw at Enron and
many other companies.
   Mr. Chairman, retirement security in America can be a lot bet-
ter. It has some effective points, but it could be a lot better. We
need to reform our system. I think the President has made some
positive first steps. I think our bill will do more to make sure that
we do not have another Enron. We support the idea of flexibility.
We like the idea of making sure that financial advice can be given
to employees—independent financial advice. We like the initiatives
with regard to lockdowns. But if we do not deal with the fun-
damental principle of diversification, we will not have solved the

=== PAGE 17 ===
                                 13

problem that existed at Enron, we will not have solved the problem
that occurs with companies that have changed financial conditions,
whether bankrupt, bad business plans, or market volatility.
  I think the key question that all of us have to ask when we look
at this question is: Would this reform have protected the retire-
ment savings of Enron employees? Would it protect the savings of
some of these companies that have 75 percent? Unless we can an-
swer that question in the affirmative, I do not think we have really
dealt with reform.
  I thank you for your attention.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  That was an excellent and very compelling presentation. Usually,
we do not ask our Senate colleagues questions, but I just want to
ask a quick one of Senator Corzine. You mentioned that the defined
benefit program is limited to 10 percent. As I understand it, mu-
tual funds are limited to 5 percent. At Goldman Sachs, J.P. Mor-
gan, Lehman, and the principal financial investment houses of this
country, is there a limitation in that respect?
  Senator CORZINE. I think, Mr. Chairman, you are talking about
what individual companies would put on rules inside their own
companies for diversification.
  The CHAIRMAN. Yes.
  Senator CORZINE. I happen to be a trustee to a foundation at a
major university in this country, and we have a 3 percent limit.
These are—not myself, but others—sophisticated financial folks
who look at diversification and putting caps that will spread out
the risks that are associated with investing, so that if one particu-
lar asset goes down, you have a good opportunity to have other as-
sets doing well.
  The CHAIRMAN. Let me ask you a final question. How do you re-
spond to the statement that this is denying the freedom of individ-
uals to be able to make choices about their own retirement?
  Senator CORZINE. Mr. Chairman, if an individual wants to in-
vest, no one is telling him how to invest. But when we have $330
billion, as the President has indicated in his budget, supporting
401(k) pension programs, I think the public has a right to say that
we ought to do that in conformity with sound investment prin-
ciples.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Gregg?
  Senator GREGG. Following up on that thought, are you saying
that the employees at Abbott Labs, Pfizer, Anheuser Busch, Coca-
Cola, General Electric, Texas Instruments, Williams, McDonald’s,
Home Depot, Duke Energy, Textron, Kroeger, and Target are suf-
fering and are being ill-treated by their corporations?
  Senator CORZINE. I think they are put at risk that they might
not fully appreciate. If you went back to 1997, 1998, or 1999 and
asked employees at Enron if they were exposed to the kinds of risk
that they thought they were going to be exposed to—or at Lucent,
which was not a case of potential misinformation or fraudulent re-
porting practices—you would find people saying that these are
great companies. A number of those companies, by the way, in the
last 3 years or 5 years, have lost value in their stock net on net.
Some of them have, some of them have not. We could give you that
information.

=== PAGE 18 ===
                                 14

   Senator GREGG. I would like to find a company in the last 3
years that has not lost value in its stock. I guess my point here is
why shouldn’t the employee, once his stock is vested, once he has
reached the vesting requirements—and the date of vesting is I
think a very legitimate issue in this debate—but once it is vested,
why shouldn’t the employee have the opportunity to continue to ac-
cumulate, instead of being told that they can only accumulate 20
percent?
   Senator CORZINE. Because when the American public is putting
as much investment into these programs, which we are through tax
subsidies both for the employee and for the employer, I think we
have reason to ask, just as we did with ERISA, to have sound fi-
nancial principles, diversification principles, followed in how peo-
ple’s retirement savings are managed.
   Senator GREGG. Isn’t the subsidy here that you talk about—
which is significant, there is no question about that—isn’t that sub-
sidy one of the driving forces that causes corporations to want to
use its stock to incentivize its employees to expand their retire-
ment? In other words, one reason they are putting stock in instead
of cash—and we can go through that, as you said, but it may take
a while—one reason they are putting stock in instead of cash is be-
cause there are significant tax advantages to them which they use
to benefit their employees. I mean, the end result of this $330 bil-
lion number that you are using is not that it is coming out of the
taxpayers’ pockets, which it is—the end result is that it is ending
up going into the employees’ pockets in the form of an expansion
of their ownership in stock in companies. And I guess it gets back
to my question, which is——
   Senator CORZINE. Senator, that is great as long as that value
holds over a 30-year period, but anybody who follows stock prices
over a period of time, even for many of these great companies,
knows that those prices go up and down substantially over a long
period of time.
   Senator GREGG. But why do you feel that you should say to
someone in a company—let us take Wal-Mart as an example—you
do not have Wal-Mart up there—let us take Abbott Labs as an ex-
ample. Somebody has worked for Abbott Labs for 30 years. They
have a vested plan, so they have the right to sell that stock if they
want to. And every year, they get more of that stock, but they have
decided as part of their retirement structure that they do not want
to sell the stock because they like the company they work for. Why
should we arbitrarily say to them that you have got to sell the
stock no matter what you do? Even if you are working for this com-
pany, and you like the company, and you see the future of this
company, and you know that you are going to retire with a million,
possibly multiple millions, even though you are just working on the
line for these people, you have still got to sell that stock and buy
something else which may go up or down. It is not just that com-
pany that might go up and down; whatever they invest in might
go up and down.
   Senator CORZINE. You are challenging the whole principle of di-
versification, Senator Gregg, because the idea of——
   Senator GREGG. What I am challenging is the principle of why
we as a Congress should arbitrarily demand diversification, why

=== PAGE 19 ===
                                 15

we should not allow the employee who has the vested asset to
make that decision versus our arbitrarily saying ‘‘You must diver-
sify.’’
   Senator CORZINE. Diversification is accepted by anyone that I
know in the financial services industry or academia or any other
place that people talk about investments as a principle that both
reduces risk and improves performance. People have won Nobel
Prizes proving that.
   Senator GREGG. I appreciate——
   Senator CORZINE. But the point is that the American public is
spending $330 billion over the next 5 years, according to at least
this information in the budget——
   Senator GREGG. To expand retirement benefits.
   Senator CORZINE [continuing]. To expand retirement. Why should
we be encouraging behavior that is contrary to the fundamental
principle of sound investment?
   Senator GREGG. Well, I thought one principle of investment was
that you allowed the investor to make the decision.
   Senator CORZINE. We are not telling investors what to do with
their own money.
   Senator GREGG. This is their money. Once it is vested, it is their
asset. They can make the decision or not.
   Senator CORZINE. We are not telling investors in retirement pro-
grams which are sponsored by the Federal Government how to in-
vest outside of——
   Senator GREGG. Yes, you are. You are saying they cannot invest
in the company they work for over 20 percent.
   Senator CORZINE. We are saying that we should be following
sound principles——
   Senator GREGG. No. You are telling them you cannot own more
than 20 percent of the company that you work for, even though you
have the option of owning it under your present plan.
   Senator CORZINE. They have plenty of opportunity in stock bo-
nuses, option plans, and other things where they can invest in the
company.
   Senator GREGG. Well, maybe they do not, maybe they do not.
What about if they only have an ESOP?
   Senator CORZINE. Well, this deals with 401(k)’s, as you know.
   Senator GREGG. Well, how do you make this argument with an
ESOP?
   Senator CORZINE. In fact, I think many of the ESOPs are too con-
centrated. We dealt with the 401(k) problem that is the problem at
Enron. Circumstances change, and I think that when the public is
making the kind of investment that we are making in encouraging
the retirement savings, we have a right to say that we ought to fol-
low sound financial principles.
   You could not find a financial advisor to sit here and recommend
to anyone that they should have 64 percent or 75 percent or 94 per-
cent of their stock.
   Senator BOXER. May I respond very quickly to this point?
   The CHAIRMAN. Yes.
   Senator BOXER. If you look at your own plan, Senator, as I have
looked at ours here in the Federal Government, we have a good
plan here. We have a thrift savings that is like a 401(k) in addition

=== PAGE 20 ===
                                 16

to our defined benefit plan—or at least some of us do; if you are
in the old system, you do not have that opportunity—but a lot of
us are on that, and a lot of our employees are. We do not say that
you can take all that money and put it in one stock. You have op-
tions. You can either put it in the——
   Senator GREGG. That is because we cannot buy stock in the Fed-
eral Government.
   Senator BOXER [continuing]. If I could finish, sir—you either put
it in the C Fund, you put it in the F Fund, you put it in the G
Fund. A lot of companies do that, and they do it very well.
   I think the important point for us to consider here is why not
make sure that the people who are in these funds have the security
that we have. And I will say this——
   Senator GREGG. Well, if they worked for the Federal Govern-
ment, it would be little different, Senator.
   Senator BOXER [continuing]. And I will say this—and why not
make sure that the people, the hard-working people who come be-
fore this committee I am sure and come before ours, and you see
the look in their faces, the stunned look in their faces, have that
basic sense that the same principles that apply to the hotshots on
Wall Street and their firms, and the biggest foundations in the
country, that in fact we are out there saying we are going to have
those sound principles in the 401(k)’s. We did it in ERISA for the
defined benefit. I never heard you or any other Senator try to
change that rule. Maybe you are going to change it. There, you are
only allowed 10 percent of the company’s money in those defined
benefit plans.
   Senator GREGG. Well, of course, as the Senator knows, the de-
fined benefit plan is significantly different from a defined contribu-
tion plan.
   Senator BOXER. In any event, I hope you will consider these
facts.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Dodd?
   Senator DODD. I will just thank the chairman, and obviously, we
will get into this in some length—and I will ask unanimous consent
to have a statement included in the record—but I am just curious
in following this point. I met with a couple of CEOs the other day
who were talking about this issue, and one of them suggested that
rather than putting a cap percentage-wise, the idea would be that
if you allowed—or, insisted, rather, not allowed, but insisted—that
these benefit plans and their investments be made independently
so that there would be a requirement that the employees would
deal with outside independent investors rather than the pressures,
Jon, that you talked about that are inherent here, implicit or other-
wise, that you plow these resources back into the company.
   I am just curious about your view of that as a way of—I do not
think anyone would recommend, as you point out, that someone
have 30, 40, 50 percent of their retirement tied up in a single stock,
whether it is their own company’s or someone else’s; I do not think
you would last very long—but the idea of having independent advi-
sors advising employees about where their retirement funds ought
to be located. I might not be articulating that as well as I can, but
do you understand the point I am making?

=== PAGE 21 ===
                                 17

   Senator CORZINE. I certainly believe that independent financial
advisor elements, which I think there is a general consensus——
   Senator DODD. Does that exist today? Does that happen?
   Senator CORZINE. It does with some companies. It is not manda-
tory, and often, it is just a sheet of paper, and you check off what-
ever you are going to have, and often it is done with employers pre-
senting the case of how effective the company is. So I think there
are enormous built-in explicit and implicit biases that encourage
employees to do the matches, and it is definitely to the advantage
of the employer to have the cash flow and the reported earnings
format that comes from employees putting their stock in the 401(k)
of the employer.
   [The prepared statement of Senator Dodd follows:]
             PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR DODD
   Good morning. Thank you Mr. Chairman for calling this impor-
tant hearing. Details of the Enron collapse are intricate and com-
plex. Senior executives, board of directors, accountants, and hidden
subsidiaries are at its core. The essence of this failure amounts and
appears to be the gross negligence of the people who ran the com-
pany and the people they hired to help run the company. They
spun a web of deceit.
   Thousands of Enron employees dedicated their lives to the com-
pany. They believed in their employer’s leadership and honesty.
During the last couple of months I have heard various accounts of
employees who have worked for Enron for more than 20 years.
They spoke of how happy they were to be a part of the Enron team,
how they believed in who they were working for. And from one
month to the next, these sentiments were shattered.
   The leaders of this company told their employees that the com-
pany was sound and strong even while they were being confronted
with the reality that the company was heading towards bank-
ruptcy. They insisted to the rank and file employees that every-
thing was fine, and that the company stocks would return to an up-
ward trajectory. They said this even though most senior executives
of the company had in their possession a memo from Sherron Wat-
kins, an Enron Vice President, warning that questionable account-
ing practices could bring about the Company’s downfall. Once they
realized that their foundation was starting to give way, when bank-
ruptcy was a very big possibility, they said nothing and did nothing
to protect their employees. When the truth finally did come out, the
hard working employees at Enron were deserted, and their finan-
cial futures shipwrecked. Since 1997 Enron overstated its earnings
by $567 million, so it should not be surprising that the employees
thought their retirement savings were secure at Enron.
   I don’t know what will be done for them, their only true remedy
is in the courts, but we have an obligation as the law making body
of this nation to make sure that pensions and retirement funds are
protected from wrong doings. Many of the laws governing employee
pensions today were enacted more than 25 years ago at a time
when workers had much less control over their retirement savings.
Congress has an obligation to identify any problems in the law that
may have contributed to this deplorable situation.

=== PAGE 22 ===
                                18

   Our colleagues in the Senate and the House have submitted a
number of constructive proposals, and I look forward to learning
more about them. I note that Secretary Chao is also here to talk
about the pension system and the Administration’s ideas. It is an
honor to have you with us Madame Secretary. I would also like to
take this time to welcome the employees and former employees of
Enron and the pension experts. I look forward to hearing all of
your testimony, so that we can move forward in taking action to
protect our retirement savings system. Thank you.
   The CHAIRMAN. I want to thank our two colleagues very much,
and we look forward to hearing now from Congressman Bentsen—
yes, Senator Wellstone.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Mr. Chairman, before we hear from the
Congressman, I just want to be clear that a number of us would
love to get into this discussion, and we thank you for being here.
We just know that we have many more people who are going to tes-
tify.
   Senator BOXER. Well, we will talk.
   Senator WELLSTONE. We will talk. Thank you.
   Senator DODD. Let me just say, too, Mr. Chairman, in all can-
dor—and we welcome you, Congressman, as well over here on the
Senate side—but I just want to say what a pleasure it is to have
Jon Corzine, who does bring—we all come from different back-
grounds—but to have someone who comes out of the investment
community as a background is tremendously helpful. On the Bank-
ing Committee, Senator Corzine and I are working on a number of
different ideas as well, but it is tremendously helpful to have your
background and knowledge. You bring real value to this debate and
discussion in the Senate.
   Senator GREGG. And it is a pleasure to have Senator Boxer.
   The CHAIRMAN. Here we go down the line.
   Senator BOXER. Thank you, Judd.
   Senator WELLSTONE. And Senator Dodd and Senator Kennedy,
for the record, actually, a long time ago, I taught Senator Corzine
everything he knows about the financial world. I just want that to
be clear.
   [Laughter.]
   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
   Congressman Bentsen, we are glad to have you, too. We know
that you represent so many of those who have been affected by this
in the district, so welcome.
   We are going to have a vote in just a few moments in any event,
so we will excuse our colleagues, who are always welcome, and rec-
ognize the Congressman.
   Senator BOXER. Thank you.
   Senator CORZINE. Thank you.
   Mr. BENTSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator Gregg, and
members of the committee.
   First of all, let me thank you for having this hearing and also
let me thank you for allowing me to testify and give you a couple
of ideas I have in response to the Enron debacle.
   I would say at the outset that there was discussion of ERISA,
which passed in 1974, and I think ERISA came about in 1974 in
part because of abuses that were occurring with respect to employ-

=== PAGE 23 ===
                                  19

ees under the old pension scheme at the time. And I think if you
go back to the 1930’s, when Congress passed the Securities and Ex-
change Act and the Investment Company Act and the Glass-Stiegel
Act, FDR at the time talked about the need to level the playing
field for all investors. And I think coming out of Enron we also see
a similar situation right now.
   I think you have to be from Houston, TX to understand just how
devastating this is to our community and to the thousands of em-
ployees who have not only lost their jobs from a company that they
put their hearts and souls into, but have lost their savings and
their life’s dreams.
   Over the last few weeks, I have met with a number of former
employees—in fact in anticipation of the former CEO Ken Lay tes-
tifying before one of the committees I sit on in the House, I met
with a number of them last week—and over and over again, you
heard these employees say ‘‘We trusted them.’’ But I think that in
this last week, that trust has truly been tested, and as they look
at what is left of their savings, there is not much left in trust there
as well.
   As one who has endeavored to expand greater pension savings,
I am outraged by what happened to Enron with respect to its em-
ployees and their savings, particularly when we see that executives
were bailing out with golden parachutes, and rank-and-file employ-
ees were locked into holding a worthless stock and watching it drop
when they could not get out.
   Last week, I was contacted by an Enron retiree, Charles
Presswood, who I believe is going to testify before this committee.
For 331⁄2 years, he worked in the field as a pipeline operator. On
October 1, 2000, he retired with over $1 million in his employee
stock ownership plan. He planned to travel the world and see
places he had never been to before, but found that because of the
irresponsible if not criminal acts of the mangers and directors at
Enron, he was robbed of that retirement. Now he has to figure out
how to make ends meet on Social Security and what is left of his
small pension.
   When asked why he held so much company stock in his account,
Mr. Presswood explained that: ‘‘When you are in the home stretch
of a race, and your horse has been six lengths ahead from the start,
why switch horses?’’ Why indeed. But that was certainly the senti-
ment of many employees.
   In early October, when they did want to get out of this stock like
other investors were doing, they were blocked from doing so. Enron
closed employee retiree accounts packed with stock, and shares
plummeted in late October and early November.
   When all was said and done, Enron Corporation’s 401(k) plan
lost about $1 billion in value. During this lockdown, Enron employ-
ees could only watch in horror as their company stock fell from
$30.72 cents per share at the close of trading on October 16 to
$11.69 a share on November 19.
   Many employees complained that notice was given internally
over the company’s email. Mr. Presswood, who was no longer on
the internal company network because he was a retiree, received
a letter dated October 8, postmarked October 10, notifying him of
the October 16 lockdown—clearly insufficient notice.

=== PAGE 24 ===
                                 20

   I have introduced one piece of legislation, H.R. 3509, in the
House, The Retirement Account Protection Act, which would pre-
vent employers from unilaterally issuing a lockdown of company
stock sales and enhancing notice requirements for such action.
Under my bill, employers could only proceed with a lockdown at
the explicit direction of the Secretary of Labor.
   I have spent a little bit of time around the financial markets—
nothing like the Senator—but the fact is that I cannot think of any
instance where an institutional investor would have their assets
and would be precluded from trading in and out of their assets and
certainly not with the fiduciary taking some financial responsibility
to hold them harmless. But under current pension law, fiduciaries
are able to freeze accounts, and employees are the ones left holding
the bag.
   I think the Senator would agree, as one who has been in the
markets, that we have the financial technology available today in
order to switch accounts and switch benefit managers so as not to
have to lock someone out for 2 weeks.
   I would also say to the committee that this is not something
unique to Enron. We just read that Global Crossing, another com-
pany which has gone into bankruptcy, had a similar lockdown pe-
riod over this time.
   We could pass this bill this year and stop what I believe is, if
not an abusive practice, certainly an outmoded and outdated prac-
tice.
   There is another issue that I think is terribly important, and
that has to do with the legal status of employees and their 401(k)
accounts, because under the current Bankruptcy Code, employees
with 401(k) accounts that lose value have no priority status. This
is true even if they can prove that they were knowingly misled by
the fiduciary. And as the result of a 1999 Federal District Court
decision in Montana dealing with the bankruptcy of Morrison
Knudsen, Morrison Knudsen was able to extinguish any claims
from the 401(k) holders as they emerged from bankruptcy, but even
given the fact that the employees were asserting the claim that
they were knowingly misled as to the financial condition. We
should not allow this to go forward.
   In the case of Enron, I have heard from numerous employees, as
I think most members of this committee have, who were told re-
peatedly—repeatedly—that the company’s prospects were never
better. They were told that the stock was undervalued. An email
that was sent out at the end of August granting new stock options
to employees from Mr. Lay, the CEO at the time, who had come
back after Skilling had left, said: ‘‘One of my highest priorities is
to restore investor confidence in Enron. This should result in a sig-
nificantly higher stock price.’’ This is from the fellow who put the
company together in the first place. And throughout all that time—
in fact, I think on September 26, it was stated that the stock’s fu-
ture was never better—but throughout all that time, Mr. Lay and
others were selling their stock back to the company and in effect
getting out of it.
   You heard testimony in the Senate yesterday from the benefits
manager, who said that she was notified in August that there were
potential problems, and we have heard other discussions from folks

=== PAGE 25 ===
                                 21

who say that deferred compensation plans were drained by current
employees, but not everybody was notified of it.
    To me, it seems that there is no question that somebody knew
something was going on, but the employees were not let in on this,
and as a result, they lost their savings. They deserve to have their
day in court. They deserve to have a seat at the bankruptcy table.
    My bill would allow employees to assert a claim under the Bank-
ruptcy Code that they were knowingly misled. If they could achieve
that claim, they would receive priority status in the same way that
employees would for back wages. It seems only fair, particularly in
a situation where the employees are the ones who are supposed to
determine how to invest their accounts under a defined contribu-
tion plan that is different from a defined benefits plan, that they
ought to have some rights.
    So I would ask the committee to consider as you move forward—
and I hope you move forward on some pension reform legislation—
to consider these types of rights, because quite frankly, we do need
to level the playing field so that employees are treated the same
as any other investor in the marketplace.
    I think the Senator would agree, because we have both been
around a number of institutional investors and other types of in-
vestors, that they would not stand 1 day for the type of treatment
that employees are given under 401(k) plans.
    Senator DODD. Quickly—because we have a vote on here, and I
heard your beeper go off as well, so there may be a vote in the
House—I am curious, Jon, and maybe you can answer this. The
President has argued for a 3-month period, and we are going to
hear from Elaine Chao shortly. I have heard others suggest that
that 3 months is totally unnecessary, that you could have a much
shorter period than that amount of time. And Congressman, you
pointed out that with the technology today, there is no reason for
it.
    Are there other reasons that you have a lockdown period that
makes some sense that others who have not worked in this field
should be aware of?
    Senator CORZINE. The only reason that I have heard that folks
need this time is that it is administratively impossible to get the
assets shifted from one place to another.
    Senator DODD. Do you need 3 months? In your view, then, it does
not need to be 3 months?
    Senator CORZINE. In my view, actually, with technology at the
state it is today and the requirements that people have, it could be
done in a matter of days.
    Mr. BENTSEN. If I might, Senator, two things. One, our bill gives
the Secretary the authority—a company can petition the Secretary
to get authority if there is a merger going on that would create a
problem. But second of all—and I am sure that Senator Corzine
has been involved with this—I structured a number of trust ac-
counts and things like that, where flow of funds was terribly impor-
tant, and had you not been able to hold the investors harmless for
risk to their funds, they would not invest.
    At the very least, if there has to be a period of time, somebody
should hold harmless the employees. The fiduciary should under-
write some of that risk one way or the other. And let me tell you,

=== PAGE 26 ===
                                22

if you figure out a way for them to underwrite the risk, they will
fix it like that; they will find the computer guy who can make it
work.
   But we really ought to fix this. I commend the President for say-
ing that during a lockdown period—if I understand his proposal
correctly—managers should not be able to sell their stock. Well,
what is good for the goose is good for the gander, and we ought to
fix that.
   Senator DODD. Just quickly—because again, getting a law
passed—to what degree does flexibility exist today? We saw the list
of various corporations here with significant stock being held by
employees. To what extent does the flexibility exist under existing
law for a lockdown period to be much briefer than we saw in the
Enron case, or even the one suggested by the President?
   Mr. BENTSEN. I think you would have to check with counsel, but
based upon my counsel, we believe that there really is no law on
this, so I do not know whether the Secretary of Labor has authority
under ERISA to impose restrictions on this or not.
   Senator DODD. OK. I need to make the vote, and Senator Ken-
nedy will return shortly, so we will take a 5-minute recess while
we finish the vote and then pick up after that.
   I thank both of you, and Ken, thanks immensely, and our best
to your constituents in Houston as well.
   Mr. BENTSEN. Thank you.
   Senator DODD. The committee will stand in recess for 5 minutes.
   [Recess.]
   The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
   We want to welcome the Secretary of Labor and thank her for
joining us this morning on this very important issue. I mentioned
to her last evening that just before retiring, I turned on my tele-
vision to get the news, and there was the Secretary in her appear-
ance for a very long and extended day yesterday on this subject
matter. So she is representing the administration and the adminis-
tration’s position, and we want to thank her for her willingness to
come up here and appear herself before the committee, and we are
grateful to her for that.
   We want to thank you very, very much for joining us here today,
and we look forward to hearing what you have to say on this sub-
ject.
    STATEMENT OF HON. ELAINE CHAO, SECRETARY, U.S.
               DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
  Secretary CHAO. May I start?
  The CHAIRMAN. Yes.
  Secretary CHAO. Good morning, Chairman Kennedy, Senator
Gregg, and members of the committee.
  I appreciate the opportunity to appear before the committee
today to discuss the President’s plan to protect workers’ retirement
security. We are here today not just because a major American cor-
poration is alleged to have engaged in serious financial misconduct,
although that is troubling enough, nor are we here today only be-
cause the collapse of this company essentially wiped out the hard-
earned savings of many of its employees, although that is even
worse.

=== PAGE 27 ===
                                  23

   We are here because these developments have threatened the
credibility of our private retirement system, and we need to act de-
cisively to restore the shaken trust of America’s workers.
   I know a little bit about the impact on people when public con-
fidence in an institution starts to erode. Ten years ago, I was
brought in by the board of United Way of America to be its new
president and CEO at a time of immense upheaval. Public con-
fidence in this venerated institution had plummeted, and contribu-
tions had fallen off.
   Because of this experience, I knew then, as I know now, that we
needed to act quickly and responsibly in this case to restore work-
ers’ confidence in the security of their retirement plan.
   The truth is a vast majority of businesses are responsible about
how they administer their employees’ retirement plans. Many com-
panies actually take pride in the fact that their workers stay for
years, do well financially, and retire securely. This is not purely al-
truistic. It is good business to care about your workers and try to
keep them by offering attractive, secure retirement packages.
   Nevertheless, high-profile corporate bankruptcies have provoked
a crisis of confidence among hardworking Americans, and we need
to address it.
   A recent cover story in Business Week asked this question: ‘‘Can
you trust anybody anymore?’’ For the sake of our private, voluntary
retirement system, the answer to that question must be yes, and
the President’s retirement security plan will make that answer yes
by giving workers the choice, confidence, and control that they need
over their retirement savings, the choice to invest in their savings
in a way that benefits and works best for their families and them-
selves, the confidence in their investment choices that comes from
getting reliable and professional financial assistance, and the same
degree of control over their investments that any other worker en-
joys from the top floor to the shop floor.
   Over the last 20 years, there has been a revolution in the way
that people plan and save for their retirement. Through 401(k) pro-
grams and plans, workers at every income level are being given the
right to make their own decisions about their financial future. That
right has opened up the potential for a better quality of life for mil-
lions of Americans. But like every other increase in freedom, it will
also introduce new risk.
   The same Enron stock that gave thousands of rank-and-file
workers a nest egg beyond their wildest dreams also nearly ruined
the retirement savings of many other workers later on.
   We believe that one of the keys to reducing such risk is to give
people even more rights, not less, to give them more choices rather
than take choice away. That is why the President’s plan will give
workers a right that the employees of Enron did not have, and that
is the right to sell company stock contributed by an employer to
their 401(k) program after a maximum 3-year period.
   For most people, diversification is crucial to reducing risk over
the long-term. We will give workers the right to make that choice.
After all, it is their money, they earned it, they sacrificed to save
it, and they should have the right to decide how to invest it.
   For that same reason, Washington should not be allowed to dic-
tate to workers how much company stock they can own. It may be

=== PAGE 28 ===
                                  24

tempting to go down this route in the wake of recent business fail-
ures, but this would actually restrict workers’ rights instead of ex-
panding them. It would deny workers the right to make their own
decisions with their own money, based on their own families’ needs
and goals.
   Arbitrary restrictions on Americans’ financial choices would not
be progress and would not necessarily make people’s retirement
savings any safer. All it would do is turn back the clock.
   At the same time, we all know that freedom of choice cannot en-
sure retirement security all by itself. Workers need to have con-
fidence in the decisions that they make, and that comes from get-
ting reliable and accurate financial information. For this reason,
the President’s plan will encourage employers to give their workers
access to professional financial assistance, just like all the rich peo-
ple have.
   As we know, the last year or so has been tough sledding for the
average individual investor, and most people simply do not have
the time or the inclination to become experts on managing financial
portfolios, even their own. They have jobs to go to, they have chil-
dren to take care of, they have school activities to support and bills
to pay.
   Especially in these uncertain economic times, people are in des-
perate need of help as they try to chart their financial futures. So
in the same way that we provide retirement benefits through em-
ployers, we could also extend high-quality financial assistance
through employers in a way that safeguards the workers who re-
ceive these benefits. Just as ERISA currently provides, we would
require investment advisors to act solely—solely—in the interest of
employees. And my Department will aggressively pursue anyone
who violates this sacred trust.
   Advisors would also be required to disclose any conflicts of inter-
est they may have and any fees they may earn in recommending
particular investments. Employers themselves will be held respon-
sible for choosing an appropriate investment advisor and keeping
close watch on the programs for their employees. At the Depart-
ment of Labor, we are committed to rigorous enforcement of the
standards of trust prescribed by law. We are expanding our out-
reach efforts to let workers know what their rights are, what infor-
mation they should be getting, and how to raise concerns about
self-dealing by financial advisors.
   Our response to the recent collapse of Polaroid is a case study
of how we can and should defend workers’ benefits. We opened an
investigation of Polaroid before it even declared bankruptcy, based
on complaints received by our regional office. We are investigating
every angle to protect workers and their families and pursue any
breaches of fiduciary responsibility.
   Our benefits advisors immediately reached out to Polaroid em-
ployees and retirees to help them understand what their rights are
and to get the assistance that they need.
   As you know, Mr. Chairman, it is a very, very sad and tough sit-
uation, but we will do all that we can to help those who have been
harmed, because we recognize that what we do in cases like this
will strengthen the confidence of others to prepare for retirement.

=== PAGE 29 ===
                                         25

   Finally, people need to have some assurance of control over their
retirement savings regardless of whether they are a senior execu-
tive or a rank-and-file worker. They need to have ample oppor-
tunity to make investment changes before a blackout period is im-
posed. They must be guaranteed that their employers will be held
to the highest standards of conduct, that employers will act pru-
dently and solely in their interest during blackout periods. And
workers have got to be assured that everyone, from the CEO on
down, will have to abide by the same set of restrictions.
   The President’s plan will achieve this by requiring that workers
be notified a full 30 days in advance before a blackout period. Our
proposal will forbid corporate officers from selling or purchasing
any company stock while workers are prohibited from trading in
their 401(k) plans during the same blackout period.
   We will also amend ERISA to clarify in no uncertain terms the
fiduciary responsibilities and accountability of employers during
blackout periods.
   Taken together, these measures proposed by the President will
give workers the choice, confidence and control they need to protect
their savings and plan for a decent retirement, the choice to make
their own decisions, the confidence that comes from getting good in-
formation and accountability, and a level playing field that gives
workers control over their retirement savings.
   As the President stated in his State of the Union Address: ‘‘A
good job should lead to security in retirement.’’ We know at the De-
partment of Labor that retirement security is our job. In 2001
alone, we conducted nearly 5,000 employee benefit investigations,
obtained 76 indictments and 49 convictions, and recovered $662
million on behalf of aggrieved beneficiaries.
   Just like with Polaroid, we were on the ground investigating
Enron before it even declared bankruptcy and reaching out to
workers who needed help.
   Whatever kind of retirement plan an employee may have, wheth-
er it be a 401(k) or a corporate or a union pension plan, our goal
is to protect all hardworking Americans so they can look to their
retirement with confidence and with hope.
   Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for giving me the opportunity
to address this subject today. We look forward to working with this
committee to ensure greater retirement security for all Americans.
   [The prepared statement of Secretary Chao follows:]

                     PREPARED STATEMENT OF ELAINE L. CHAO
Introductory Remarks
  Good morning Chairman Kennedy, Ranking Member Gregg, and Members of the
Committee. Thank you for inviting me here today to share information about the
Department’s role in enforcement and regulation under the Employee Retirement
Income Security Act (ERISA). Over the past 28 years, ERISA has fostered the
growth of a voluntary, employer-based benefits system that provides retirement se-
curity to millions of Americans. I am proud to represent the Department, the Pen-
sion and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA), and its employees, who work
diligently to protect the interests of plan participants and support the growth of our
private pension and health benefits system.
  This Administration is very concerned about the impact of the Enron bankruptcy
on its workers and retirees. On November 16, 2001, the Department of Labor began
an investigation to determine whether violations of ERISA may have taken place.

=== PAGE 30 ===
                                         26
The Department also is assisting affected Enron workers, informing them of their
rights and options with respect to health and retirement benefits.
  The Department also has been working diligently to evaluate current law and reg-
ulations, and has consulted extensively with the President’s domestic and economic
policy teams on how to improve and strengthen the pension system.
  Although some reforms are necessary, we should not presume that the private
pension system is irreparably ‘‘broken.’’ In fact, the private pension system is a
great success story. Just two generations ago, a ‘‘comfortable retirement’’ was avail-
able to just a privileged few; for many, old age was characterized by poverty and
insecurity. Today, thanks to the private pension system that has flourished under
ERISA, the majority of American workers and their families can look forward to
spending their retirement years in relative comfort. Today, more than 46 million
Americans are earning pension benefits on the job. More than $4 trillion is invested
in the private pension system. This is, by any measure, a remarkable achievement.
  As employers move toward greater use of ‘‘’defined contribution’’ retirement plans,
such as 401(k) plans, we must nurture and protect employee choice, confidence and
control over their investments. I welcome this opportunity to work with the Health,
Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee, and recognize the leadership you pro-
vide in protecting workers’ pension assets, in raising necessary questions about the
Enron situation and similar cases, and formulating policy to strengthen this coun-
try’s retirement system.
  My testimony will describe ERISA’s background and regulatory framework; the
trend towards greater use of ‘‘defined contribution’’ retirement plans and what that
means for employers and employees; the Department’s role in enforcing ERISA and
providing assistance to employees and their families; the Department’s actions re-
garding the Enron bankruptcy; and the President’s Retirement Security Plan to im-
prove our current laws to ensure retirement security for all American workers, retir-
ees and their families.
ERISA
   The fiduciary provisions of Title I of ERISA, which are administered by the Labor
Department, were enacted to address public concern that funding, vesting and man-
agement of plan assets were inadequate. ERISA’s enactment was the culmination
of a long line of legislative proposals concerned with the labor and tax aspects of
employee benefit plans. Since its enactment in 1974, ERISA has been strengthened
and amended to meet the changing retirement and health care needs of employees
and their families. The Department’s Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration
is charged with interpreting and enforcing the statute. The Office of the Inspector
General also has some criminal enforcement responsibilities regarding certain
ERISA covered plans.
   Under ERISA, the Department has enforcement and interpretative authority over
issues related to pension plan coverage, reporting, disclosure and fiduciary respon-
sibilities of those who handle plan funds. Additionally, the Labor Department regu-
larly works in coordination with other state and federal enforcement agencies in-
cluding the Internal Revenue Service, Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the Se-
curities and Exchange Commission. Another agency with responsibility for private
pensions is the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, which insures defined-benefit
pensions.
   ERISA focuses on the conduct of persons (fiduciaries) who are responsible for op-
erating pension and welfare benefit plans. Such persons must operate the plans
solely in the interests of the participants and beneficiaries. If a fiduciary’s conduct
fails to meet ERISA’s standard, the fiduciary is personally liable for plan losses at-
tributable to such failure.
Trends in Pension Coverage
   There are two basic categories of pension plans—defined benefit and defined con-
tribution. Defined benefit plans promise to make payments at retirement that are
determined by a specific formula often based on average earnings, years of service,
or other factors. In contrast, defined contribution plans use individual accounts that
may be funded by employers, employees or both; the benefit level in retirement de-
pends on contribution levels and investment performance.
   Over the past 20 years, the employment-based private pension system has been
shifting toward defined contribution plans. The number of participants in these
plans has grown from nearly 12 million in 1975 to over 58 million in 1998. Over
three-fourths of all pension-covered workers are now enrolled in either a primary
or supplemental defined contribution plan. Assets held by these plans increased
from $74 billion in 1975 to over $2 trillion today.

=== PAGE 31 ===
                                         27
   Most of the new pension coverage has been in defined contribution plans. Nearly
all new businesses establishing pension plans are choosing to adopt defined con-
tribution plans, specifically 401(k) plans. In addition, many large employers with ex-
isting defined benefit plans have adopted 401(k)s and other types of defined con-
tribution plans to provide supplemental benefits to their workers.
   Most workers whose 401(k) plans are invested heavily in company stock have at
least one other pension plan sponsored by their employer. Just 10 percent of all
company stock held by large 401(k) plans (plans with 100 or more participants) was
held by stand-alone plans in 1996; the other 90 percent was held by 401(k) plans
that operate alongside other pension plans, such as defined benefit plans covering
the same workers.
   Although there has been a shift to defined contribution plans, defined benefit
plans remain a vital component of our retirement system. Under defined benefit
plans, workers are assured of a predictable benefit upon retirement that does not
vary with investment results.
   The trends in the pension system are a reflection of fundamental changes in the
economy as well as the current preferences of workers and employers. The move-
ment from a manufacturing-based to a service-based economy, the growth in the
number of families with two wage earners, the increase in the number of part-time
and temporary workers in the economy, and the increased mobility of workers has
led to the growing popularity of defined contribution plans.
   Employers’ views have similarly changed. Increased competition and economic vol-
atility have made it much more difficult to undertake the long-term financial com-
mitment necessary for a defined benefit pension plan. Many employers perceive de-
fined contribution plans to be advantageous while workers have also embraced the
idea of having more direct control over the amount of contributions to make and
how to invest their pension accounts.
   Emerging trends in defined contribution plans and workers’ job mobility make it
increasingly important that participants receive timely and complete information
about employment-based pension and welfare benefit plans in order to make sound
retirement and health planning decisions.
Employer Securities Under ERISA
   The investment of pension funds in the securities of a sponsoring employer is spe-
cifically addressed by ERISA. ERISA generally requires that pension plan assets be
managed prudently and that portfolios be diversified in order to limit the possibility
of large losses. Indeed, under ERISA, traditional ‘‘defined benefit’’ pension plans are
generally allowed to invest no more than 10 percent of their assets in employer se-
curities and real property. However, ERISA includes specific provisions that permit
individual account plans like 401(k) plans to hold large investments in employer se-
curities and real property, with few limitations.
   As a separate matter, employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs) are eligible indi-
vidual account plans that are designed to invest primarily in qualifying employer
securities. Congress also has provided a number of tax advantages that encourage
employers to establish ESOPs. By statutory design, ESOPs are intended to promote
worker ownership of their employer with the goal of aligning worker and employer
interests. They are statutorily required to hold at least 50 percent of their assets
in employer stock. On average, ESOPs held approximately 60 percent in employer
securities in 1996.
   The legislative history of ERISA provides us with some of the rationale behind
these exceptions to the rules regarding diversification. First, Congress viewed indi-
vidual account plans as having a different purpose from defined benefit plans. Also,
Congress noted that these plans had traditionally invested in employer securities.
   In 1997, Congress amended ERISA to limit the extent to which a 401(k) plan can
require workers to invest their contributions in employer stock. The rule generally
limits the maximum that an employee can be required to invest in employer securi-
ties to 10 percent. The rule, however, does not limit the ability of workers to volun-
tarily invest in employer stock. Furthermore, the rule does not apply to employer
matching contributions of employer stock or ESOPs.
   Recent data indicates that 401(k) plans holding significant percentages of assets
in employer securities tend to be very large, though few in number. Currently, al-
most 19 percent of all 401(k) assets, or about $380 billion, is invested in company
stock. The distribution of holdings of employer securities is very uneven, however,
with most 401(k) plans holding very small amounts or no employer stock. Fewer
than 300 large plans (those with 100 or more participants), or just one percent of
all 401(k) plans, invested 50 percent or more in company stock in 1996.
   Because the plans heavily invested in company stock tend to be very large (with
an average of 21,000 participants), the number of workers affected and the amount

=== PAGE 32 ===
                                         28
of money involved are substantial. In 1996, just 157 plans held $100 million or more
in company stock. Together, these plans covered 3.3 million participants, and held
$61 billion in company stock.
   A great deal of the 401(k) money invested in company stock is under the control
of workers. When participants can choose how to invest their entire account and
company stock is an option, participants invest 22 percent of assets overall in com-
pany stock. However, when employers mandate 401(k) plan investments into em-
ployer stock, workers choose to direct higher portions of the funds they control into
employer stock. In these plans, participants direct 33 percent of the assets they con-
trol into company stock.
   If a 401(k) plan provides workers with the right to direct their account invest-
ments, and the plan is determined to have complied with section 404(c) of ERISA,
then plan fiduciaries are relieved of liability regarding the consequences of partici-
pants’ investment choices. The Department’s Section 404(c) regulations are designed
to ensure that workers have meaningful control of their investments. Among other
things, employees must be able to direct their investments among a broad range of
alternatives, with a reasonable frequency, and must receive information concerning
their investment alternatives.
PWBA Actions: Immediate Response to Enron
   We are bringing to bear our full authority under the law to provide assistance to
workers affected by situations such as the recent Enron bankruptcy.
   The Department of Labor has made a concerted effort to respond rapidly to situa-
tions such as Enron. In these circumstances, there are two aspects to our efforts:
to help the workers whose benefits may be placed at risk and to conduct an inves-
tigation to determine whether there has been any violation of the law.
   On November 16, 2001, over two weeks before Enron declared bankruptcy, the
Department launched an investigation into the activities of Enron’s pension plans.
Our investigation is fact intensive with our investigators conducting document
searches and interviews. The investigation is examining the full range of relevant
issues to determine whether violations of ERISA occurred, including Enrons treat-
ment of their recent blackout period.
   Blackout periods routinely occur when plans change service providers or when
companies merge. Such periods are intended to ensure that account balances and
participant information are transferred accurately. Blackout periods will vary in
length depending on the condition of the records, the size of the plan, and number
of investment options. While there are no specific ERISA rules governing blackout
periods, plan fiduciaries are obliged to be prudent in designing and implementing
blackout periods affecting plan investments.
   In early December, it became apparent that Enron would enter bankruptcy. Be-
cause the health and pension benefits of workers were at risk, we initiated our rapid
response participant assistance program to provide as much help as possible to indi-
vidual workers.
   On December 6 and 7, 2001, the Department, working directly with the Texas
Workforce Commission, met on-site in Houston with 1200 laid-off employees from
Enron to provide information about unemployment insurance, job placement, re-
training and employee benefits issues. PWBA’s staff was there to answer questions
about health care continuation coverage under COBRA, special enrollment rights
under HIPAA, pension plans, how to file claims for benefits, and other questions
posed by the employees. We also distributed 4500 booklets to the workers and
Enron personnel describing employee benefits rights after job loss, and provided
Enron employees with a direct line to our benefit advisors and to nearby One-Stop
reemployment centers. These services were made available nationwide to other
Enron locations.
   PWBA regularly works throughout the country to assist employees facing plant
closings, job loss or a reduction in hours, and subsequent loss of employee benefits.
Our regional offices make it a top priority to offer timely assistance, education and
outreach to dislocated workers.
   I am pleased to announce that we have just activated a new Toll Free Participant
and Compliance Assistance Number, 1–866–275–7922 for workers and employers to
make inquiries regarding their retirement and health plans and benefits. The Toll
Free Number is equipped to accommodate English, Spanish, and Mandarin speaking
individuals. Callers will be automatically linked to the PWBA Regional Office servic-
ing the geographic area from which they are calling. Benefits Advisors will be avail-
able to respond to their questions, assist workers in understanding their rights or
obtaining a benefit, and assist employers or plan sponsors in understanding their
obligations and obtaining the necessary information to meet their legal responsibil-
ities under the law. Callers may also access our publications hotline through this

=== PAGE 33 ===
                                          29
number or they may access them on the PWBA website. Some of the publications
available are: Pension and Health Care Coverage—Questions & Answers for Dis-
located Workers, Protect Your Pension, Health Benefits Under COBRA, and many
more. Workers and employers may also submit their questions or requests for as-
sistance electronically to PWBA through our website, www.askpwba.dol.gov.
   PWBA Benefits Advisors also provide onsite assistance in conjunction with em-
ployers and state agencies to unemployed workers—conducting outreach sessions,
distributing publications, and answering specific questions related to employee bene-
fits from workers who are facing job loss. In fiscal year 2001, we participated in on-
site outreach sessions for workers affected by 140 plan closings. So far this year,
we have participated in 106 rapid response events reaching nearly 40,000 workers.
   The Rapid ERISA Action Team (REACT) enforcement program is designed to as-
sist vulnerable workers who are potentially exposed to the greatest risk of loss, such
as when their employer has filed for bankruptcy. The new REACT initiative enables
PWBA to respond in an expedited manner to protect the rights and benefits of plan
participants. Since introduction of the REACT program in 2000, we have initiated
over 500 REACT investigations and recovered over $10 million dollars.
   Under REACT, PWBA reviews the company’s benefit plans, the rules that govern
them, and takes immediate action to ascertain whether the plan’s assets are ac-
counted for. We also advise all those affected by the bankruptcy filing, and provide
rapid assistance in filing proofs of claim to protect the plans, the participants, and
the beneficiaries. PWBA investigates the conduct of the responsible fiduciaries and
evaluates whether a lawsuit should be filed to recover plan losses and secure bene-
fits.
   Our investigation of Enron was begun under REACT. Because I do not want to
jeopardize our ongoing Enron investigation, I cannot discuss the details of the case.
Without drawing any conclusions about Enron activities, I will attempt to briefly de-
scribe what constitutes a fiduciary duty under ERISA, how that duty impacts on
investment in employer securities, the duty to disclose, and the ability to impose
blackout periods.
   Determining whether ERISA has been violated often requires a finding of a
breach of fiduciary responsibility. Fiduciaries include the named fiduciary of a plan,
as well as those individuals who exercise discretionary authority in the management
of employee benefit plans, individuals who give investment advice for compensation,
and those who have discretionary responsibility for administration of the pension
plan.
   ERISA holds fiduciaries to an extremely high standard of care, under which the
fiduciary must act in the sole interest of the plan, its participants and beneficiaries,
using the care, skill and diligence of an expert—the ‘‘prudent expert’’ rule. The fidu-
ciary also must follow plan documents to the extent consistent with the law. Fidu-
ciaries may be held personally liable for damages and equitable relief, such as
disgorgement of profits, for breaching their duties under ERISA.
   While a participant or beneficiary can sue on their behalf of the plan, the Sec-
retary of Labor can also sue on behalf of the plan, and pursue civil penalties. We
have 683 enforcement and compliance personnel and 65 attorneys who work on
ERISA matters. In calendar year 2001, the Department closed approximately 4,800
civil cases and recovered over $662 million. There were also 77 criminal indictments
during the year, as well as 42 convictions and 49 guilty pleas.
President Bush’s Plan
   Less than one month ago, President Bush formed a task force on retirement secu-
rity and asked me, Treasury Secretary O’Neill and Commerce Secretary Evans to
analyze our current pension rules and regulations and make recommendations to
ensure that people are not exposed to losing their life savings as a result of a bank-
ruptcy. In his State of the Union speech, the President reiterated his commitment
to improving the retirement security of all Americans.
   The President’s Retirement Security Plan, announced on February 1, would
strengthen workers’ ability to manage their retirement funds more effectively by
giving them freedom to diversify, better information, and access to professional in-
vestment advice. It would ensure that senior executives are held to the same restric-
tions as American workers during temporary blackout periods and that employers
assume full fiduciary responsibility during such times.
   Under current law, workers can be required to hold company stock in their 401(k)
plans for extended periods of time, often until they reach a specified age. Workers
lack the certainty of advance notice of blackout periods when they cannot control
their accounts, lack access to investment advice and lack useful information on the
status of their retirement savings. The President’s Retirement Security Plan will
provide workers with confidence, choice and control of their retirement future.

=== PAGE 34 ===
                                         30
   The President’s plan would increase workers’ ability to diversify their retirement
savings. The Administration believes employers should continue to have the option
to use company stock to make matching contributions, because it is important to
encourage employers to make generous contributions to workers’ 401(k) plans. How-
ever, workers should also have the freedom to choose how they wish to invest their
retirement savings. The President’s Retirement Security Plan will ensure that work-
ers can sell company stock and diversify into other investment options after they
have participated in the 401(k) plan for three years.
   The President is also very concerned about blackout periods, and the Retirement
Security plan suggests changes to make blackout periods fair, responsible and trans-
parent. Our proposal creates equity between senior executives and rank and file
workers, by imposing similar restrictions on senior executives’ ability to sell em-
ployer stock while workers are unable to make 401(k) investment changes. It is un-
fair for workers to be denied the ability to sell company stock in their 401(k) ac-
counts during blackout periods while senior executives do not face similar restric-
tions with regard to the sale of company stock not held in 401(k) accounts. Because
the oversight of stock transactions of senior executives may go beyond the jurisdic-
tion of the Department of Labor’s regulation of pension plans, I will work with the
appropriate agencies to develop equitable reform.
   The President’s Retirement Security Plan ensures that workers will have ample
opportunity to make investment changes before a blackout period is imposed by re-
quiring that they be given notice of the blackout period 30 days before it begins.
Although employers regularly give advance notice of pending blackout periods, an
explicit notice provision will give workers assurance that they will know when a
blackout period is expected.
   As my testimony stated, ERISA may limit the liability of employers when workers
are given control of their individual account investments. The President’s Retire-
ment Security Plan would amend ERISA to ensure that when a blackout period is
imposed and participants are not in control of their investments, fiduciaries will be
held accountable for treating their workers’ assets as carefully as they treat their
own. Of course, employees would still have to prove that the employer breached a
fiduciary duty in order to seek damages.
   The President’s plan calls on the Senate to pass H. R. 2269—the Retirement Secu-
rity Advice Act—which passed the House with an overwhelming bipartisan majority.
We believe it is important to promote providing professional advice for workers. The
bill would encourage employers to make investment advice available to workers and
allow qualified financial advisers to offer advice if they agree to act solely in the
interests of the workers they advise. Partnered with the proposed increased ability
for workers to diversify out of employer stock, investment advice services will be
more critical than ever.
   Finally, the Administration recognizes that workers deserve timely information
about their 401(k) plan investments. To enable workers to make informed decisions,
the President’s Retirement Security Plan will require employers to give workers
quarterly benefit statements that include information about their individual ac-
counts, including the value of their assets, their rights to diversify, and the impor-
tance of maintaining a diversified portfolio. As Secretary of Labor, I would be given
authority to tailor this requirement to the needs of small plans. Again, in combina-
tion with investment advice and the ability to diversify, quarterly, educational bene-
fit statements will give workers the tools they need to make sound investment deci-
sions.
Conclusion
  The private pension system is essential to the security of American workers, retir-
ees and their families. While the current scrutiny is appropriate and welcome, we
must strengthen the confidence of the American workforce that their retirement
savings are secure. The challenge before us today is to strengthen the system in
ways that enhance its ability to deliver the retirement income American workers de-
pend on. We must accomplish this without unnecessarily limiting employers’ will-
ingness to establish and maintain plans for their workers or employees’ freedom to
direct their own savings. The President’s Retirement Security Plan strikes just such
a balance.
  We look forward to working with members of this Committee in continuing this
discussion and in developing ways to achieve greater retirement security for all
Americans.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Madam Secretary, for
your statement.

=== PAGE 35 ===
                                 31

   We will follow a 6-minute rule so that all of our members will
be able to ask questions.
   First of all, Madam Secretary, on another subject but one of
great importance to this committee, and that is on the ergonomics
rule, we have invited you—we sent you a letter some weeks ago,
giving you several days for possible hearing. This is a matter of
enormous importance to this committee. You indicated that you
were going to have some proposals at the end of last year, and we
have not had those. It is a matter of urgency, and I do not know
what you will be able to tell us about your availability to the com-
mittee so that we can have some discussion about where the ad-
ministration is on that subject matter.
   Secretary CHAO. This is a very important topic. I, as Secretary
of Labor, have devoted more time to this subject than any other
Secretary of Labor. We had hoped to have an announcement on
this issue by the end of the year. Certain events toward the latter
part of last year slowed down that timetable.
   I am hopeful that we will be able to move quickly on this. As I
mentioned, I have spent more time on this issue than any other
Secretary, so I hope that we will move quickly on this.
   The CHAIRMAN. We had asked for you to appear on the 28th, and
there was a conflict, and we suggested February 11, 14, and 26. If,
after today—we are glad to see you today, and we want you to
come back——
   Secretary CHAO. I am always glad to be here. I will take a look
at the dates.
   The CHAIRMAN [continuing]. But as you have pointed out, it is a
matter of enormous importance and consequence, and we want to
work with you on that matte, so we hope that you will be able to
find some time for us.
   I listened carefully to your presentation. You talked about the
importance of diversity and diversification as crucial to reducing
risk. You talked about the freedom of individuals to be able to
make decisions and choices about the resources. We had some ex-
cellent testimony earlier today from Senator Corzine and Senator
Boxer and Congressman Bentsen, but particularly with regard to
Senator Corzine about what happens in the major financial houses
and money managers in this country who spend their lives manag-
ing resources, managing funds and how they, as prudent money
managers, in mutual funds set a limitation of 5 percent; the major
companies, Goldman Sachs, Lazzard Freres, and J.P. Morgan all
have similar kinds of limitations, when they have absolutely com-
plete, overwhelming information with trained professionals, people
who give their lives to money management because they know the
importance of diversification in order to protect their investors.
   We are now talking about retirement security, which is of very,
very special value. In the Corzine proposal, people will obviously
have flexibility to be able to invest their resources in the stock of
a company, completely freely, without any kind of interference if
they want to. But when talking about retirement security, the
value of retirement security which is so important to families, the
fact that we as a matter of national policy underwrite that, any-
where from $60 to $100 billion a year in terms of taxpayer funds,
to encourage retirement security, why doesn’t it make sense to

=== PAGE 36 ===
                                 32

have some kind of limitation and expect that we set the minimum
standards as those who are dealing with money management es-
tablish basic safety programs in terms of giving the assurance to
American workers that their retirement funds are going to be as
protected as they can be?
   Secretary CHAO. The professional money managers are basically
managing other people’s money, and we are basically talking about
the difference between a defined benefit plan and a 401(k).
   The defined benefit plan does not give workers choice or control.
The 401(k) plan, which is what we are talking about right now,
gives workers choice and control in that it is their money; they
make the choice as to how to invest it, and they have control as
to what investment they want to go into.
   A lot of rich people have access to professional financial advice,
and we believe that workers should have that right as well. So we
are saying in the President’s proposal that workers be given the
right to make their own decisions, but they will be empowered to
have better information and be supported by professional advisors.
But it is their money—the 401(k) plan is different from the defined
benefit plan because it is their money.
   The CHAIRMAN. Well, Mr. Corzine points out that it is the rich
people who are investing in these mutual funds and using the in-
vestment houses; it is not the people who are earning the minimum
wage. The wealthy people are the ones who use the money man-
agers.
   Would you be in favor of raising the 10 percent limitation on the
defined benefit program?
   Secretary CHAO. I think that is currently in the law, and to open
it up at this time probably——
   The CHAIRMAN. Why not? Why not change that as well?
   Secretary CHAO. Because the 10 percent applies only to the de-
fined benefit plan.
   The CHAIRMAN. Why not free that up as well?
   Secretary CHAO. Because the defined benefit plan is not
controlled——
   The CHAIRMAN. But do you want to change that? Why not go for
freedom all the way, then?
   Secretary CHAO. Because the defined benefit plan does not give
workers the control. They cannot make their own decisions.
   The CHAIRMAN. But I am asking you should we give them that
control, why not give them that control?
   Secretary CHAO. Well, the choice is in the 401(k) plan. They are
two different programs.
   The CHAIRMAN. But why not give them the control in the other
as well? Why not eliminate—why not say let us give all workers
control and go back to where we were evidently in the Studebaker
case, where people lost their retirement.
   Secretary CHAO. In a lot of Fortune 500 companies where you
have a 401(k), 90 percent of those plans are actually backed up or
have the defined benefit plan as well. The defined benefit plan, as
I mentioned before, does not allow workers the flexibility to make
their own investments. The 401(k) plan does. The 401(k) plan is
the workers’ money; they have saved it over the years, and they

=== PAGE 37 ===
                                  33

have a choice as to what investment it goes into. The defined bene-
fit plan does not offer that option.
   So when somebody else is managing your money, and you do not
have any choice as to what investment that money can go into,
whoever is managing it should have some restrictions; they have
got to have some restrictions as to what they can do, and part of
that is security for the workers.
   The CHAIRMAN. This will be my final question. Secretary Chao,
outside of the fact of the sale, the lockdowns, and some notification,
I do not see how you could give any assurance to any Enron work-
er, or certainly to anyone from Polaroid in my own State, or from
Lucent Technologies, that they would not have lost their retirement
as well if they had stayed in those companies.
   Secretary CHAO. I do not think Government can guarantee eco-
nomic success of any kind, and clearly, what we are trying to do
here——
   The CHAIRMAN. You do not think we have some responsibility to
minimize that risk, in any important way?
   Secretary CHAO. Of course, we do, and that is what we want to
do here. We want to preserve for workers their freedom of choice
and also control over their own investment portfolios, and under
some of the other plans mentioned, they were never in control of
it in the first place; outside people were controlling it, so therefore,
these outside people should have some restrictions. But for 401(k)’s,
these are totally within the control of an individual worker. That
individual worker should retain the right to control his or her own
investment decisions. It is their right. They may or may not want
to exercise it, but it is their right.
   The CHAIRMAN. You are not suggesting that any worker can
choose any stock they want in a 401(k), are you, because employers
make those decisions, don’t they?
   Secretary CHAO. No. Most 401(k) plans—you are talking about
the employer matching portion. There are two parts to 401(k)’s.
   The CHAIRMAN. I understand, I understand.
   Secretary CHAO. One part is the employee contribution——
   The CHAIRMAN. The matching, yes, I understand that.
   Secretary CHAO [continuing]. And that, they can choose whatever
they want, depending on what the company offers.
   The CHAIRMAN. The company offers it.
   Secretary CHAO. Yes.
   The CHAIRMAN. So it is not completely open choice.
   Secretary CHAO. Most 401(k) plans have a tremendous array of
mutual funds and different stocks that employees can go into. I
think that what you are saying is the match in company stock.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Gregg?
   Senator GREGG. I do think it is important to clarify this dif-
ference between a defined contribution plan and a defined benefit
plan, because there is some confusion, and for the layperson to un-
derstand it is difficult because it is a complex issue. But when you
get right down to it, the bottom line is this—the defined benefit
plan guarantees you a return; basically, you are going to get so
much in your retirement under a defined benefit plan. Under a de-
fined contribution plan, basically, you are competing in the market-

=== PAGE 38 ===
                                  34

place, and you may get more, you may get less, depending on how
the marketplace does with the assets that you have.
   So the logic behind the ERISA rules relative to the defined bene-
fit plan is tied to the fact that it is basically an annuity. You basi-
cally have to get a return to the employee when he or she retires
of ‘‘x’’ number of dollars, and in order to accomplish that, you have
got to make certain investment decisions which are traditional to
annuity-type activities. That is why there is a difference here.
   Secretary CHAO. May I also add one other thing, Senator? Mobil-
ity is very important. Nowadays, workers move around a great
deal. So under a defined benefit plan, if they leave early, prior to
their retirement, they will not get very much.
   Thank you.
   Senator GREGG. Defined benefit plans have unfortunately fallen
off the favorability charts, which is too bad. We have got to come
up with systems to reinvigorate them. But the difference in the in-
vestment structure hides the fact that the results are entirely dif-
ferent, and the intent of the results are entirely different.
   In my viewpoint, as I said in my opening statement, this issue
comes down first to accounting. Obviously, if you do not have accu-
rate accounting, you can be defrauded as an employee, and that is
what happened at Enron; people were told their stock was worth
$90, and it was probably worth $9, because the accounting firms
did not give accurate numbers to the marketplace, and the market-
place did not value the stock accurately.
   But the second issue that I think it comes down to is vesting.
When does the stock that the company delivers to you as part of
your employment—when do you get control over that stock and
then have the freedom to make the decision to sell the stock or to
hold the stock? That should be your right to make that decision.
If you work for Wal-Mart, and Wal-Mart makes up 50 percent of
your assets because that is what you wanted, you should be able
to do that, but you should have the information to do that, which
is the point of the President’s plan. But second, the issue of when
do you get that right to free up that stock and make a move with
it is the issue.
   I have been toying with the concept of—there are legitimate rea-
sons why a company and why management and why employees
enter an agreement which says you have got to work for 3 years
before you get the right to the asset. There are obviously legitimate
reasons for keeping people interested in their jobs. So immediate
vesting would obviously, in my opinion, fundamentally chill the
willingness of corporations to participate by giving you extra assets
for working longer for them.
   But still, couldn’t there be a middle road here—and I would be
interested in your thoughts on what the chilling effect of this would
be—if you were to say that when a corporation delivers you stock
as part of your 401(k), you still have 3 years before you own that
asset, but during that 3-year period, you have the right to dispose
of that asset. In other words, you can make a choice during those
3 years to sell that stock, the proceeds of which would go into the
account, which would continue not to be yours until you had
worked for 3 years, but you might change it over to another stock,
or you might put it into cash. But you would have the right during

=== PAGE 39 ===
                                 35

that 3-year period to actually dispose of the corporation’s stock, al-
though you would not actually own the asset which you had moved
it into until the 3 years was over.
   Would that address this issue—it would obviously address the
issue of the employee being locked into his stock—but would it
have an unusually chilling effect on corporations being willing to
participate in this type of structure and being willing to put their
stock up?
   Secretary CHAO. I have three answers. One, I think there will be
a chilling effect, because number one, we want to encourage em-
ployers to compensate their employees, and employer stock is an
option; so we want to encourage that.
   Senator GREGG. This would not limit their ability to do that.
They could still put stock in.
   Secretary CHAO. Having said that, let me also say that vesting
is a schedule that Congress has mandated. Basically, last year, the
Congress reduced vesting from 5 years to 3 years, and that is
how——
   Senator GREGG. This would not change the vesting.
   Secretary CHAO. But that is how I think our proposal came up
with 3 years. Also, interestingly enough, I believe Senator Boxer
and Senator Corzine’s bill talks about allowing diversification 90
days after vesting, so that would be within 90 days after, we be-
lieve, the 3 years. So I think it is even longer than our proposals.
But we want to work with you on this.
   Senator GREGG. My point is that if a corporation can still match
with their stock, but once that match occurs, the individual has the
right to dispose of the stock but they do not own the asset until
the 3 years has run, is that going to have a negative impact on cor-
porations using their stock as part of the match?
   Maybe it is, maybe it is not, but I see it as a way of resolving
this issue of ending up being tied up in a corporation’s stock as an
employee until you are free as a result of vesting rules.
   Secretary CHAO. Well, Senator, let us talk further about that,
then.
   Senator GREGG. I appreciate your time. Thank you.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Dodd?
   Senator DODD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Welcome, Madam Secretary, to the committee.
   Secretary CHAO. Thank you.
   Senator DODD. I missed your opening statement, and I sort of
wish we could bring Jacob Javits back, having written the ERISA
legislation. Senator Kennedy often says that we would like to have
him come back because this is a terribly complex area of law, and
obviously, there is a great deal of frustration, obviously felt pri-
marily by those who have lost so much in the last number of
weeks, and I think frustration as well by people who want to do
something about it, and in the desire to do something about it, ob-
viously, when we are dealing in the area of pensions and retire-
ment plans, we need to be careful, and I think that is a worthwhile
note.
   We have an awful lot of people who have our money well-in-
vested today—$4 trillion invested in private pension systems—46
million Americans are earning pension benefits on the job. So as

=== PAGE 40 ===
                                 36

we move forward here, I think all of us want to make sure that
we are not going to create a bigger problem than the one we are
trying to solve.
   I am curious about what rights and powers you have today under
existing legislation. We are talking about changing some of the
laws here. What I want to know is can you do some of these things
right now, without having to wait for Congress to act? For instance,
on these lockdown periods, I asked Jon Corzine the question—on
the notification, I think the President has said 1 month notification
prior to a lockdown occurring. Is there anything in the existing law
that would prohibit you from making that 6 weeks, or the period
of lockdown briefer—parity issues between employers and employ-
ees where, really, the sense of fairness is what highly offends peo-
ple, aside from the period of lockdown. It is the sense of outrage.
It is almost like the burning building where the owner got out, and
the rest of the doors were locked.
   Secretary CHAO. Absolutely.
   Senator DODD. So the sense of injustice, of telling people to in-
vest in this particular operation with one hand and on the other,
they are selling their own stock back to their own company as fast
as they can to cash out—that, as much as anything—obviously, the
loss of income is huge—but that sense of unfairness—the port-
ability issues.
   I want to know what you can do without necessarily waiting for
us. Why don’t you address that issue first—what is your flexibility
as Secretary of Labor in this area?
   Secretary CHAO. We did initially take a look at the possibility of
our acting on this administratively, understanding how complex
ERISA is. But these are such important issues that we felt it was
really important to wipe away any gray areas and to——
   Senator DODD. Is there a problem with parity, for instance? Why
is there any problem with treating the employer and the employee
alike on the issue of lockdown? Here, you had the employer selling,
and the employee could not.
   Secretary CHAO. We totally disagree with that, and that is why
the President——
   Senator DODD. Can you take care of that now? Do you have to
wait for us?
   Secretary CHAO. ERISA does not take care of stock options, for
example. The President feels very strongly about this point, that
there should be pension parity, and that during lockdown periods,
if workers cannot sell——
   Senator DODD. That is going to require a change of law to do
that.
   Secretary CHAO. Yes. But I understand your point, and will go
back and take a look to see what we can do administratively. But
we have taken a look at that, and we felt that, again, this is such
an important issue that we wanted to codify it into law.
   Senator DODD. Just briefly, some companies—I talked to a chief
executive officer of a major U.S. corporation—I will not mention the
name right now because I want to be careful that I do not misquote
him in some way—in his company, none of the employees can own
any stock in their retirement plans, any stock in the company they

=== PAGE 41 ===
                                  37

work for. He does not want them to do that because of the potential
liability.
   How often is that done, and do you think that his decision is a
wise one in light of what has happened?
   Secretary CHAO. I think his decision is a wise one, and I think
most CEOs are probably looking at their own companies to see how
they can encourage their employees to increase diversification and
decrease ownership of company stock.
   Senator DODD. What about independent advisors for retirement
plans that are not necessarily paid for by the company, so that the
sense of having investment decisions for retirement plans being
made independent of the resources of the company itself, so they
are free of potential pressures that might occur?
   Secretary CHAO. We think that workers and employees should
have access to good, reliable financial information so that they can
make wise investment decisions. As I mentioned before, lots of rich
people have it, so why can’t rank-and-file workers have it.
   So we want to give workers that right, and we want to make
sure that investment advisors, if they have any conflict of interest,
State so, and that if any fees are connected with the services that
they are offering, they State so as well.
   Senator DODD. But you think that just notice is enough—would
you prohibit it, so that if there is a conflict, if one is being paid by
the company itself to do that——
   Secretary CHAO. I think here is a balance as well. The fiduciary
responsibilities of ERISA are strong, and we are trying to make
them stronger with our current proposal. But the investment advi-
sors are supposed to act solely in the interest of their employees,
and we want to again shore that up and protect workers.
   Senator DODD. Finally, I know there is an investigation being
done by the Department of Labor about what happened here. Do
you have any sense that you can share with us now of when we
can expect to hear?
   Secretary CHAO. I have a great group of professionals, and I am
very proud of them. They are doing a great job. I am asking them
to conduct this investigation thoroughly, in a responsible fashion,
as quickly as possible, without compromising the integrity of the
investigation.
   Senator DODD. I appreciate that, but do you have any sense of
when we are talking about?
   Secretary CHAO. I hope soon.
   Senator DODD. Would that be June?
   Secretary CHAO. I hope not; I hope sooner than that—because
again—I have said this on many occasions—I am personally com-
mitted to helping these workers at Enron, and we want——
   Senator DODD. I do not expect you to put a date on it, but I am
just curious—so, sometime late winter, early spring is what you
would be looking at?
   Secretary CHAO. I am pushing as hard as I can.
   Senator DODD. OK. Thank you.
   Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Enzi.
   Senator ENZI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your hold-
ing his hearing. I am sorry that I had a conflict with the national

=== PAGE 42 ===
                                   38

prayer breakfast; that always falls on the first Thursday of Feb-
ruary every year. So I hope we can keep that on the calendar in
the future so we do not run into that conflict.
  For the past couple of days on the Banking Committee, on which
I also serve, we have been talking about financial literacy and have
had some tremendous witnesses who have pointed out some of the
things that we can do to make it more possible for every person in
America to protect their investments and, more important, for the
46 million Americans who have pensions to protect their pensions.
  Congress has worked these issues before, and I have always said
that a rule of legislating is that if it is worth reacting to, it is worth
overreacting to.
  One of the reasons why we have this problem right now is be-
cause Congress was afraid that if people owned stock in their own
company, and they heard some rumors about their company, which
might be just a notification that there is going to be a blackout pe-
riod, they would anticipate that something terrible was happening
and sell off their stock, and a massive selloff of the stock would
drive the price of the stock down, at which point the public is buy-
ing it up at bargain rates.
  We said we do not want that to happen to employees, so let us
keep them from being able to sell their stock off unwisely. Some-
times we can create problems that we do not anticipate.
  I have been an accountant. I am sorry that they are trying to
make that a bad profession at the moment. I am very proud of it,
and I think it provides transparency in information for people in
America and in fact around the world to be able to make good busi-
ness decisions. That does not mean there cannot be illegal acts that
are done, but there are a lot of good accountants out there who pro-
vide for the ERISA required accounting that is done. I used to do
that for a firm and have been through the ERISA audit. I have
been hearing about how maybe we should force companies to
change auditors every couple of years.One of the things that is al-
ready provided for in ERISA is a very extensive questioning if you
change auditors, because the implication is that if you change audi-
tors, you are doing it because you have found somebody who will
do accounting for you that you ought not be doing, so current law
under ERISA has a check to make sure that does not happen.
Maybe now what we are going to do is institute some questions on
the other side of the issue, and that might be a good idea, too, so
that we are getting the full story on the audit.
  I am concerned a little bit about the small businesses out there,
the start-up businesses, which can often become pretty big busi-
nesses in a hurry. One of their difficulties is having cash flow, and
so to provide for the retirement of their employees, they are provid-
ing a stock contribution in their defined contribution plan—almost
everybody goes with a defined contribution now, because a defined
benefit plan says that you are going to guarantee after retirement
a certain amount of retirement, and that is hard to do in this day
and age, and also, people have discovered that they can perhaps
make more than the defined benefit if they just invest their own
contribution. But under the defined contribution plan, some of
these small and medium businesses are giving their employees
company stock, and most of those people are involved in the start-

=== PAGE 43 ===
                                 39

up of the company as well, and they feel like they are keeping
track of what is happening in that business, and they are very
pleased with the growth.
   I am wondering what you think the reaction will be now, if we
tell them they have a very limited amount of that company stock
they can own.
   Secretary CHAO. As I said in my testimony, we want to encour-
age diversification, but it is a right of workers who are in 401(k)
plans to be able to make their own investment decisions as to what
stock they invest in, and we should be empowering them with good
information so that they can make wise decisions.
   Your point about small business is a very apt one. It is a concern,
and I hope that we will be sensitive to it.
   Senator ENZI. I do realize that most of the stock is held by em-
ployees of large companies; their sheer size results in them doing
that. In fact, I think the average size of one of these plans is about
21,000 participants, so we are not talking small business here, we
are talking big business.
   Secretary CHAO. Right, I understand.
   Senator ENZI. The new law would affect these people who—I
think you stated that in the 401(k) plans, just 10 percent of all
company stock is held by stand-alone plans?
   Secretary CHAO. No. This is in Fortune 500 companies.
   Senator ENZI. Yes, in the big companies.
   Secretary CHAO. Right.
   Senator ENZI. So the rule that we are talking about imposing
here, if it applies to big companies, may be a criterion that is al-
ready met?
   Secretary CHAO. We need to be sensitive to the impact on small
companies.
   Senator ENZI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Mikulski?
   Senator MIKULSKI. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and
Secretary Chao.
   First of all, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for holding
these hearings, and I ask unanimous consent that my statement go
into the record.
   I am pleased to be able to say to my colleagues that I am a spon-
sor of both the Boxer legislation and the Corzine legislation. I think
they go a long way in furthering the debate.
   Ms. Chao, I want to come to those involved in defined benefits,
and I do understand the difference between defined benefit and de-
fined contribution. There is another issue—I am seeing a crisis
here in pensions and health care benefits across the board. Let me
go to a trend that I am seeing where companies are filing for bank-
ruptcy, and part of the reason why they are filing is to begin the
process of abandoning their legacy cost.
   Secretary CHAO. Terrible.
   Senator MIKULSKI. It is terrible, and I am not saying that it is
malevolent.
   I want to go to the steel industry—and again, this is not finger-
pointing, this is pinpointing. Could you comment—first of all, we
know that in the manufacturing sector, which has been the heart
and soul of America and which by its very nature has a very clear

=== PAGE 44 ===
                                 40

defined benefit program, it had the benefit of advocacy of labor
unions who worked in the employees’ interests, and now, with the
excess capacity in the automobile industry, with the crisis facing
steel, so many of the steel companies are in bankruptcy, and some
are actually going into court under bankruptcy to be relieved of
their pensions and their health care responsibilities. Could you tell
us what the administration’s role is going to be in this? I am not
questioning motivation, but the outcome is that we will provide the
safety net under the pension guarantee for pensions, but there is
no guarantee for health care benefits, and we could end up with
38,000 steel workers without health care, we could end up with
them in a fixed pension—usually, they are frozen.
   So I just wonder, while we are looking at pension security, what
is the administration’s involvement in this, and also, are you look-
ing at—again, recognizing that we cannot stop anyone from filing
bankruptcy or whatever—what we are going to do about this trend
that seems to be cascading through America’s private sector.
   Secretary CHAO. Let me first say on the steel issue that this ad-
ministration has done more to highlight the very competitive in-
dustries that steel is in and has done more to try to help workers
than the previous administration.
   This administration starting last year has assembled a Cabinet-
level task force which has been in continual discussions with
unions and organized labor and with management in this industry
to try to find solutions. In fact, this administration petitioned for
the first time in well over 9 years before the International Trade
Commission on a 201 action, and the ITC has come out with some
study, and we are now in the process——
   Senator MIKULSKI. Ms. Chao, I want to acknowledge that, and I
want to say thank you. The administration has been quite mus-
cular on the issues——
   Secretary CHAO. They are continuing to work on this.
   Senator MIKULSKI. Right, but let us to go health and pensions.
Here, under the react team, the enforcement team that is supposed
to act in an expedited manner to protect the rights and benefits,
has that been activated for steel——
   Secretary CHAO. Yes.
   Senator MIKULSKI [continuing]. And where is the administration
heading on steel——
   Secretary CHAO. We have had national——
   Senator MIKULSKI [continuing]. I am sorry. I have 8,000 people
who are pretty vulnerable here.
   Secretary CHAO. I am concerned about that, too. We have had
react teams out. We have had national emergency grants that have
been available, obviously. But we want to keep these jobs there.
That is the most important thing. We want to have jobs available.
   So the administration continues to battle on in terms of fighting
for steel rights internationally, trade issues. There is currently
trade promotion authority combined with trade adjustment assist-
ance that is going through Congress, which is not yet passed by the
Senate——
   Senator MIKULSKI. Right, but let us talk about the legacy cost,
the legacy cost of health and pensions, because where I see it head-
ing is that we could end up holding the unfunded liability and it

=== PAGE 45 ===
                                 41

could go to pension guarantee, costing taxpayers buckets of bucks,
and at the same time, they will lose their health care benefits,
throwing them into the ranks of the uninsured.
   Secretary CHAO. I see.
   Senator MIKULSKI. I just wonder where we are on that. I want
to acknowledge what you have been doing on the jobs issue. It has
been outstanding, and I want to say thank you.
   Secretary CHAO. I think there—I am sorry.
   Senator MIKULSKI. I just want to say that I know what you are
doing on the jobs part, and I think it has been outstanding, and
I want to say thank you.
   Secretary CHAO. I think this is obviously an issue of continuing
concern, and I do not think any decision—they are still looking at
it. I think everyone is very concerned about this issue. The task
force is looking at this and other issues as well.
   Senator MIKULSKI. Do you have a direction and a timetable on
this?
   Secretary CHAO. I am not a main player in that task force, so I
do not have a good view, but obviously, it is an urgent issue, it is
a priority. We have had several other Cabinet officers who have
been involved in this as well since the very beginning.
   Senator MIKULSKI. Well, I really just want to reiterate——
   Secretary CHAO. I will carry that message back.
   Senator MIKULSKI [continuing]. First of all, the job issue, but
then, when we look at the pension issue, I am concerned not only
about the workers having a pension, but I am worried that the tax-
payers are going to have to shoulder the responsibility through
pension guarantee and then also, if so many people pre-Medicare
come onto the ranks of health care uninsured, the impact on local
health delivery as well as on those families will be catastrophic. I
mean, we could be heading for a Chernobyl here. We could be head-
ing for a capitalistic version of Chernobyl in which we have the
meltdown both in defined benefit and defined contributions of the
benefits that people thought they could have not being there. So
just know that I really think—Mr. Chairman, how much time do
I have left?
   The CHAIRMAN. Your time has expired.
   Senator MIKULSKI. OK. Thank you.
   [The prepared statement of Senator Mikulski follows:]
   (The prepared statement of Senator Mikulski was not available
at press time, however, documents are maintained by the Commit-
tee.)
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Warner?
   Senator WARNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Welcome, Madam Secretary. My office, like I think every office
on Capitol Hill, has simply been flooded with telephone calls and
correspondence, and I have found the time to take a number of
those calls myself and also to read a lot of the mail that is coming
in. It is only generated through people’s feelings. No one is telling
them to write this. They do it spontaneously. And there is one word
that comes out in all of this, and that is ‘‘disbelief.’’
   I can best characterize it by one wonderful grandmother who got
me on the phone and said, Now, listen here, Senator, we start in
life with the teaching of our parents. We then go into our edu-

=== PAGE 46 ===
                                 42

cational institutions from kindergarten through advanced degrees.
We are then, most of us, privileged to have our affiliation with
churches or synagogues, as the case may be. And then we have to
remain accountable to our own families, our spouses and our chil-
dren. How did these people just sidestep and abandon all of that
history of life’s teachings, as the allegations—and I repeat as a law-
yer—the allegations lay this fact on the basis of greed on a scale
unparalleled in the annals of America’s proud record of corporate
history.
   Now, that is just simple understanding. Folks out there under-
stand that. How did they suddenly turn their backs, so many of
them—if it had been one or two, but the allegations indicate it was
widespread.
   We have got to get down into the details, the Congress working
with the administration, and provide our constituents with those
answers.
   I also came up through the banking and corporate world to pub-
lic life many years ago, and I was a prosecutor of white collar crime
as a young lawyer. I think we have to very carefully here in the
Congress go through an enormous fact-finding procedure and not
be rushed, and then provide remedies and also oversee the respon-
sibilities of the executive branch to hold these individuals account-
able, to be in accordance with civil law and regulation or criminal
law and regulation.
   Furthermore, as we look at the legislation that Congress will be
considering, we have got to strike a balance between how much we
try to write into the new laws and regulations with regard to our
various investment plans and stockholders and companies and
strike a balance. We do not want to take away an individual’s ini-
tiative to save. We do not want to say to that individual, ‘‘You do
not have the sense to make your own decisions with regard to your
portfolio,’’ nor do we want to deprive that individual from seeking
such advice as he or she may desire from other experts.
   So we have got to hit a balance as we go along and do it very
carefully, because this situation in the eyes of my constituents has
shaken the foundations of our great capitalistic system which en-
ables so many to start small businesses to fulfill their dreams to
have large businesses or be a part of the mainstream of corporate
America.
   Just look at the number of individuals today who are stockhold-
ers compared to a decade ago, two decades, or three or four decades
ago, when it was virtually a rarity amongst our society.
   So I would just make those several observations. I wish you well.
This committee has strong leadership, and we will do our very best
to help you.
   Secretary CHAO. Thank you.
   Senator WARNER. I welcome any thoughts you might have on this
Senator’s observations, which basically reflect the views of these
wonderful calls and letters that I am receiving, which are expres-
sions from the heart—yes, anger, but that one word, ‘‘disbelief,’’ as
to how it could happen in America.
   Secretary CHAO. Well, as you mentioned, there are a number of
investigations going on, criminal investigations and civil investiga-
tions. We have an investigation at the Department of Labor which

=== PAGE 47 ===
                                  43

we initiated before the company went bankrupt. And you have my
personal commitment—I will take this investigation wherever it
goes, to whomever it takes. I am very concerned about helping
these workers and trying to recoup as much as I can on their be-
half, and the President is very concerned, which is why in his pro-
posal, he does talk about pension parity——
  Senator WARNER. I think that is essential.
  Secretary CHAO [continuing]. That during the blackout period, if
the workers are prohibited from selling, then so are the CEOs and
top executives.
  Senator WARNER. I thank you.
  Secretary CHAO. Thank you.
  Senator WARNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  [The prepared statement of Senator Warner follows:]
            PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR WARNER
   Mr. Chairman: The mail and telephone calls from concerned, con-
scientious constituents are just overwhelming. I listen to and read
their comments in addition to the daily media reports; with my
constituents, I share the utter disbelief at the growing list of alle-
gations of wrongdoing.
   I began my professional life in the U.S. Attorney’s office prosecut-
ing white collar crimes. That was followed by years of representing
banks and investment companies, so I have some basis of under-
standing of corporate America.
   Constituents from every state look at this situation and legiti-
mately ask how this could have happened. Now it is the respon-
sibility of Congress to provide not only answers, but remedies.
   Several constituents have asked me how people who have
reached the top levels of corporate America so readily abandoned
every basic principle of fairness and honesty that began with the
care and love of their parents, teachings they received from first
grade through their graduate degrees, the support of their churches
and synagogues, and the support of their families. How could they
have abandoned all their cherished American traditions and suc-
cumb to greed unparalleled in the history of corporate America?
   The United States free enterprise system is the envy of the
world. The opportunity in America to create small business that
can grow into big business is the very foundation of our capitalistic
system. In the minds of many, the Enron case shakes the very
foundation of our system.
   Consequently, Congress has the solemn duty to work with the
Administration to determine the factors which led to the collapse
of Enron and resulted in the largest bankruptcy in U.S. history.
   All resources of the Executive, Legislative and Judicial branches
of the federal government should see that these allegations are
fully and fairly reviewed. Where it is found that there has been a
violation of federal law, then there must be full accountability, be
it under criminal or civil due process.
   After the facts have been established, the Administration should
come forward with their legislative recommendation for consider-
ation along with the legislative proposals in Congress. That legisla-
tion must first deter any repeat of the situation we are now exam-
ining in the Enron case. Secondly, it must provide a balanced, I re-

=== PAGE 48 ===
                                  44

peat balanced, measure of protection to stock holders, lending insti-
tutions and others who support our free enterprise system through
the corporate structure.
   I say balanced because, to the extent we legislate protection,
Congress must be cautious not to unduly curtail the ability of com-
panies to offer such investment and retirement planning incentives
to their employees. Nor must we take action that would discourage
savings or unduly limit the judgement of individual employee stock
holders in making their own informed decisions.
   Congress will have to enact laws as it deems appropriate to en-
sure that this does not happen ever again. It is in this Committee’s
purview to determine what revisions are necessary in current pen-
sion laws to restore the confidence of the American worker and in-
vestor.
   An essential principle must be that of ‘‘pension parity’’ between
a company’s management as well as down to the newest employee
stockholder. The company’s CEO, as all top management, must ad-
here to the same restrictions during a lockdown or blackout period
when stock transactions are prohibited as the employee stock hold-
ers.
   To the fullest extent possible, disclosure of company financial
status and other data relevant to making an informed investment
decision is essential for individuals to have the freedom and ability
to make sound investment choices, and to seek the advice they de-
sire.
   Congress must act timely, but must not rush. For the present,
we should fairly and fully proceed with our fact finding mission. I
am committed to working with my colleagues to make the appro-
priate revisions to our laws and preclude this from ever happening
again.
   I welcome the witnesses.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Bingaman?
   Senator BINGAMAN. Thank you very much.
   Madam Secretary, thank you for being here. Let me start by say-
ing that I think there are some very useful and constructive pro-
posals and provisions in what you, the administration and the
President, have come up with.
   There is one area that I have concerns about, and that is on this
issue of investment advice. Currently, there are various prohibi-
tions against any investment advice being provided where there
might be a conflict of interest. I have introduced a bill with Senator
Collins and Senator Mikulski that also ensures that any invest-
ment advice that is given to employees is qualified and is independ-
ent, and that there not be a conflict of interest involved with the
person or the company that is providing that advice.
   As I understand your legislation, you say that conflicts can exist,
but they must be disclosed; investment advisors can have a conflict,
they just have to disclose it to the employee. And I am concerned
that that is not enough. I can remember when I started practicing
law, the senior member in the law firm, for whom I had great re-
spect, called me into his office and said, ‘‘We have one rule in this
firm, and that is if we identify a conflict of interest, we get out. We
do not satisfy our ethical needs by disclosing the conflict—we get
out.’’

=== PAGE 49 ===
                                 45

   I thought that was a pretty good rule, and I think it is a good
rule for us to try. If we are going to legislate in this area, if we
are going to provide a safe harbor which encourages employers to
assist their employees in getting investment advice, why don’t we
ensure that that investment advice be independent and not coming
from someone who has a product to sell, who has some ax to grind,
who has some conflict of interest.
   Secretary CHAO. We want workers to get the best advice possible.
I think we agree on that. The issue is how to do that. We are also
trying to balance between smaller companies who may not be able
to hire two different people, one to be the advisor, one to let us say
offer a portfolio of mutual funds or whatever. So we thought that
we could accomplish this balance by giving workers the knowledge
that if there indeed is any conflict of interest—and that need not
always be the case—but that if there were, they should know about
it, and the disclosure would help them; and if there are any fees
involved with a particular instrument, a mutual fund or whatever,
a particular stock, that the worker would be notified of that as
well.
   But it is a balancing act, so let us work together, and I want to
work with you on that.
   Senator BINGAMAN. So your position is that the requirement that
we have in our legislation, which I believe is 1677, the requirement
that the investment advice be independent and that there not be
some conflict—you think that that is not necessary?
   Secretary CHAO. No, because these fiduciaries are supposed to be
acting solely in the interest of the employees, and they are sup-
posed to——
   Senator BINGAMAN. But we have a lot of examples of fiduciaries
who were supposed to be acting in the interest of employees in re-
cent circumstances, and they did not do it.
   Secretary CHAO. Yes, there are bad actors, and we obviously need
to prosecute them firmly and aggressively. The issue is how do we
provide that advice. There would probably be some disincentive for
employers from offering that, or they cannot offer as good advice
as they could.
   Senator BINGAMAN. I think the problem is that you can not be
a bad actor and still believe that the investment product that your
company happens to sell is the best investment product that an
employee could possibly buy. So you are not violating some respon-
sibility; you are giving the best advice you can, but the truth is
your advice is colored by the fact that you have a conflict of inter-
est, that you get paid on the basis of how many of these employees
you persuade to invest in your company’s mutual funds.
   Secretary CHAO. These fiduciaries are personally liable for any
failures in their pension plans. If you are a fiduciary under ERISA,
you are personally liable. We want people to offer good advice.
They are supposed to act solely—not even in the best interest, but
solely in the interest of the employees, and we feel that if we let
people know that they have some outside interest, if we let them
know how much these funds cost and other relevant information,
they will make good decisions.
   Senator BINGAMAN. Well, I think we have a difference of opinion
here. I do not think that——

=== PAGE 50 ===
                                 46

   Secretary CHAO. Let us work together on it.
   Senator BINGAMAN [continuing]. I do not think that disclosing
the conflict is adequate. I had a good friend who used to say, ‘‘What
I am about to tell you is a secret, so if you repeat to anybody, be
sure and tell them it is a secret.’’ That disclosure was not adequate
for that circumstance. So I do not think that disclosing a conflict
of interest is going to be adequate. I think we should maintain the
current prohibition that exists in ERISA against conflict of interest
in providing this advice. At the same time, I encourage employ-
ers—I think we have come up with a way in the legislation that
we have introduced to accomplish more investment advice to em-
ployees, which I think is a very good thing.
   Secretary CHAO. And again, I will just quickly summarize. I
think the issue is that we are trying to make the balance, and if
some of the smaller employers had to go out and hire a number of
financial advisors, it would be more costly, and basically, workers
are going to have to assume that cost.
   Senator BINGAMAN. Well, it might turn out to be a very small
cost compared to what they wind up losing in their retirement ac-
counts.
   Secretary CHAO. Well, let us talk further about that.
   Senator BINGAMAN. Thank you.
   Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Bond?
   Senator BOND. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
   Madam Secretary, I want to congratulate you and thank you for
the preparation and the work that you did during this year to be
up to speed on this very important area of protecting pensions, be-
cause obviously, while no one could have foreseen the huge collapse
and the tragedy of Enron, your attention to the concerns and the
questions in this area have obviously put you in a position to be
able to respond.
   From my standpoint on the Small Business Committee, I would
say that 401(k) plans have given small businesses a tremendous
opportunity to provide their employees with a form of retirement
investment in a much more inexpensive manner than the tradi-
tional defined benefit plans. And I think that is a huge factor in
the growth in popularity of 401(k) programs over recent years. I
personally believe that defined benefit plans are better for the em-
ployee and the economy as a whole. We have the Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corporation to back up defaulting defined contribution
plans. We have huge problems in that area with defined benefit
plans. And we have Social Security, which is a defined benefit plan,
which has to be fixed. And we know that the problems with fixing
them are very difficult, so the fact that we have a defined contribu-
tion plan in the 401(k) with some problems I do not think in any
way suggests that we ought to move back solely to the defined ben-
efit plan.
   Although the tragic impact of Enron’s collapse has dominated the
news, I think we need to remember that there are many outstand-
ing success stories of employees who, with disciplined savings and
sound investing, have accumulated significant assets for their re-
tirement. These successes would not have been possible under tra-
ditional defined benefit plans.

=== PAGE 51 ===
                                 47

   But here, we have a huge problem of apparent wide-ranging mal-
feasance, misfeasance, nonfeasance—all the bad kinds of feasance
you can have—and this committee ought to look at it, and we ought
to decide whether the laws are adequate in terms of protecting pen-
sions. I believe our colleagues on the Banking Committee must look
at the accounting and disclosure, the accounting practices aspects,
the corporate responsibility assets. We ought to look there, but I
think the first effort is going to go on to the Department of Justice
to determine whether in fact there was criminal malfeasance, be-
cause you can pass all the laws in the world, but you need to en-
force those laws, and if that brings criminal penalties with it, then
that in itself should deter problems in the future.
   So obviously, it is not just this committee, but we need to look
in this committee at how we can structure pensions best. But I
would ask you first what is your feeling on the desirability of hav-
ing pensions in defined contribution plans as opposed to defined
benefit plans?
   Secretary CHAO. We support defined benefit plans, and we sup-
port defined contribution plans. They have served different pur-
poses. They are carried by different workers of different ages. Our
primary concern is that we are for the workers; we want to protect
their long-term retirement security.
   Senator BOND. Whether it is defined contribution or defined ben-
efit?
   Secretary CHAO. My concern is with the workers. I want to pro-
tect their long-term security.
   Senator BOND. As long as they are protected.
   Secretary CHAO. Right.
   Senator BOND. I think that as we look at the pension reforms,
we need to give the workers the flexibility and control over their
investment options which will enhance their ability to get advice
and reliable investment information and make their own deter-
minations. I think that the administration proposal to allow work-
ers after 3 years—is it 3 years that they would be able to divest
employer stock——
   Secretary CHAO. Congress made that the vesting period last year.
   Senator BOND [continuing]. All right. But do you think that is
soon enough to allow them—as soon as it vests, should they be able
to sell off some of that if they have too much of their stock in the
company?
   Secretary CHAO. The President’s plan supports diversification.
We think that is a wise move; we just do not think that that right
to make your own decision should be taken away from workers. We
want to encourage diversification.
   Senator BOND. I would agree with you that a worker may choose
to keep his or her money in the stock. He or she may have other
investments that balance it out, but they should be fully informed.
But if they want to get out, you are saying it is up to them.
   Secretary CHAO. It would be after vesting, and that is in the
Boxer and Corzine bill as well. I believe theirs says 90 days after
vesting; ours says 3 years, which is about the same time.
   Senator BOND. Ninety days?
   Secretary CHAO. Ninety days after vesting. Their proposals says
90 days after vesting.

=== PAGE 52 ===
                                48

  Senator BOND. And yours says——
  Secretary CHAO. Three years.
  Senator BOND. After the plan begins, or is that—is that 3 years
after vesting or——
  Secretary CHAO. No. It is not rolling; it is 3 years from the time
that an employee receives the stock—or, that they become eligible
to receive the stock. So it is actually not very much difference.
  Senator BOND. Because the vesting period is——
  Secretary CHAO. Employees will throughout their career with a
company receive stock all the time. So we are not saying that each
tranche of stock received at a particular time has to wait 3 years.
We are just saying 3 years from the——
  Senator BOND. After they begin putting stock into the employee’s
retirement.
  Secretary CHAO. Exactly.
  Senator BOND. They could divest the whole thing.
  Secretary CHAO. Right. That is for simplification purposes.
  Senator BOND. And Senator Boxer and Senator Corzine say any
time—okay. Thank you. So 90 days after vesting.
  Secretary CHAO. After vesting.
  Senator BOND. Thank you very much.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Wellstone?
  Senator WELLSTONE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I will move right along, because I know we have other witnesses
to hear from as well.
  First of all, Secretary Chao, I want to welcome you, but I do also
want to repeat what Senator Kennedy said at the beginning, and
you know where I am heading. It was really a year ago that you
said that you were going to have a plan as to what we can do about
repetitive stress injury, and I would encourage you to move forward
with that. We really want to work with you, and I would just tell
you that we have been asking for a staff briefing—as you know, I
chair the subcommittee with jurisdiction over this——
  Secretary CHAO. Yes, of course.
  Senator WELLSTONE [continuing]. And we have not even gotten
a staff briefing from the people at the Department of Labor. We
need to get that briefing, and I want to be as gentle but as em-
phatic about that as possible.
  Secretary CHAO. I understand, I understand.
  Senator WELLSTONE. Second, there was a piece in The Wall
Street Journal today, and the opening paragraph reads: ‘‘Enron
Corporation’s bankruptcy may have wiped out most of the retire-
ment savings of most of its workers, but one thing it did not take
away were the pensions of its most senior executives. Financial fil-
ings disclose that former Enron chairman Kenneth Lay for one
used a private partnership to protect millions of dollars’ worth of
executive pension benefits.’’
  Now, we are talking about pension parity. It does not sound like
there is any pension parity going on here. Should we do something
about that so that this cannot happen again?
  Secretary CHAO. That is certainly within the purview of Con-
gress. ERISA basically just takes care of the fiduciaries and the
trusteeships.

=== PAGE 53 ===
                                   49

   Senator WELLSTONE. And would it be your recommendation that
we take some action to make sure this kind of thing does not hap-
pen again?
   Secretary CHAO. I think that is a little above my pay grade.
   Senator WELLSTONE. I do not think it is above your pay grade.
   [Laughter.]
   Secretary CHAO. I am concerned about the workers and ERISA
and how we can ensure long-term retirement security.
   Senator WELLSTONE. I understand. With a twinkle in my eye, I
would just say that this does not do a lot for the morale of workers.
   Secretary CHAO. And that is why the President’s plan says that
there has to be pension parity.
   Senator WELLSTONE. OK. The third thing I want to do is get your
reaction—people are talking about some legislation, and I have in-
troduced a bill called The Retirement Security Pension Act. I just
want to run over a couple of things and get your reaction.
   At one point, you were saying that employees should have a
choice, and I agree, but Enron did not say a word to its employees
about diversification, and there were all sorts of pressures to in
fact invest in the company, and it did not seem like much of a
choice—this is their 401(k) plan, Enron’s description of it, and you
just do not find anything in here about the importance of diver-
sification or about the jeopardy that you might be in.
   So I want to first of all put in a strong word for full and accurate
disclosure. And then, the second thing that I want to mention is
that I think on the whole question of diversification, there is some-
thing that I want to mention here, because I think this was some-
thing that Senator Gregg was talking about as well.
   In our legislation, we have a mechanism to set limits, but we
take into account all of the retirement vehicles available to employ-
ees so that, for example, the 20 percent—so you would include both
the defined benefit and the defined contribution plans, in which
case, it is a little different, and it gives people more flexibility, and
frankly, I think it also gives an incentive to employers as well as
to employees. So we have the 20 percent threshold, but what we
want to take into account are all of the retirement vehicles that are
available, which I think makes it less stringent and gives it a little
bit more flexibility.
   Now, on the whole question of diversification and account access,
on the lockdown protections, no longer than 10 days and 30 days
advance notice of any lockdown. Senator Gregg was talking about
this. You talk about employee freedom of choice. It seems to me
that employees ought to be able to move out of company stock to
other investments after 1 year. I do not know why we have to wait
for 3 years. It seems to me that apart from vesting, if we really
want to talk about employees having choice, 1 year makes much
more sense, which is in fact what we talk about.
   Then, finally, Mr. Chairman—and I want to get your reaction to
this as well, Madam Secretary—on the whole question of account-
ability, I think we need to have tougher remedies. I am talking
about civil remedies. I think people ought to be able to take the
companies, and for that matter, others that have been parties to
this kind of fraud or whatever you want to call it, and be made
whole again in court. I think some of the actions that we have

=== PAGE 54 ===
                                 50

taken in the Congress in the last few years have made that less
possible. I think that that is a good disincentive for companies to
do this again to their employees. I think you have to have whistle-
blower protections. And frankly, on these different committees, I
think employees ought to be sitting there and ought to be part of
the decisionmaking, and they ought to therefore have more access
to information and say over what is going on.
   I wanted to get your overall reaction to some of the directions in
which we go in our legislation.
   Secretary CHAO. Senator, first of all, I want to emphasize that
I want to work with this committee.
   Senator WELLSTONE. I am sorry?
   Secretary CHAO. First of all, I want to emphasize that I want to
work with this committee.
   Senator WELLSTONE. I appreciate that.
   Secretary CHAO. This is a matter of great importance to me per-
sonally and also to the President. We want to move this issue along
and help workers.
   Let me just make a couple of comments. You have given me a
great deal of thought, and we will certainly take your comments
and study them. Let me just make a couple of comments first.
   First of all, on the 20 percent in terms of the overall portfolio,
while that is better, that is still, we believe, taking away the right
of workers to decide what they want to do.
   Senator WELLSTONE. And again, I would say what Senator
Corzine said—this is on the plans that the Federal Government is
providing support to. Employees have freedom of choice.
   Secretary CHAO. Right—because we are talking about 401(k)’s,
and 401(k)’s are again self-directed. So these workers have that
right.
   Second, your concern about diversification, we share as well. So
part of what the President’s proposal would entail is to provide in-
depth quarterly statement. An in-depth quarterly statement will be
very explicit with visible notification about the need to diversify.
And hopefully by that time, we will have some kind of access to
professional advisors as well.
   The 10-day lockdown—we have a 30-day advance notice of the
blackout period that is coming, but we do not have a specific period
in mind. But we have something that we believe is even better that
is going to motivate companies, because we are taking away their
safe harbor provisions. There is something called 404(c) in ERISA
which basically says that because 401(k)’s are self-directed, work-
ers bear the responsibility. But in a lockdown period, they lose that
autonomy, and the employer therefore has to bear the liability. So
we codify this, and we ask for clarification in ERISA. So we are
saying that if you are going to have a lockdown period, you are lia-
ble for what happens in that pension fund on behalf of your em-
ployees. We believe that that is going to be a powerful incentive for
employers to make their lockdown periods as short as possible.
   Under vesting for 1 year, under a 401(k), an employee can take
their employee portion out at any time, whenever they leave. As I
mentioned, in terms of the employer matching stock, Congress says
3 years; that is kind of how we came up with 3 years.
   Senator WELLSTONE. I am out of time, so I thank you.

=== PAGE 55 ===
                                  51

   Secretary CHAO. Thank you, and let us talk further.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Thank you. I appreciate it.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Reed?
   Senator REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Thank you, Madam Secretary. Section 404(a) of ERISA provides
for an exemption for diversification for companies that match their
employee contributions with company stock or company real estate.
Would you be in favor of repealing that exemption?
   Secretary CHAO. No, no, because currently, ERISA puts a cap on
defined benefit plans, because defined benefit plans are not con-
trolled by the workers. A 401(k) is a self-directed investment vehi-
cle for the workers, so they have the choice of the control of their
own funds. So we would not—they are two different——
   Senator REED. Well, as I understand the law—and I must admit
I am not an expert in this and would not claim to be—but as I un-
derstand it, if the company chose not to offer their own stock or
real estate, they would have the requirement to diversify the offer-
ings in their portfolio and much more of a requirement. And it just
seems to me that this is one of these loopholes——
   Secretary CHAO. I will take a look at it. OK. I will take a look
at that.
   Senator REED [continuing]. And you can see where there is a
huge incentive for companies to match stock, to use their company
stock to fund an employee retirement plan; it is virtually zero cost
to them.
   Secretary CHAO. Right.
   Senator REED. Again, what we are trying to do—and the thrust
of many of your comments is that there are some bad actors here,
and I believe there are—but there is also just the incentive of doing
something as cheaply as you can, and that is something that we
control by appropriate regulatory and legislative measures that we
have to think about.
   I would encourage you to look at that issue in terms of diver-
sification. I know that the trustees have a fiduciary obligation, but
I think at the core of many of your comments today, Madam Sec-
retary, is that you are assuming that the average worker in a com-
pany has the same level of information that the administrators or
trustees of a plan do. I do not think that that is the case in reality.
It might be a nice thought.
   Secretary CHAO. I do not make that assumption at all.
   Senator REED. Well, you keep saying we do not want to take
away the worker’s choice——
   Secretary CHAO. And the President’s proposal would have profes-
sional advisors made available to these workers. That is part of the
President’s proposal.
   Senator REED. And could you elaborate on that, Madam Sec-
retary?
   Secretary CHAO. Sure. Basically, we believe that workers are in
an environment where they have a lot of choices to make, so in this
environment where they have 401(k)’s or what are called defined
contribution plans, we want to equip workers with better informa-
tion. So our proposal, the President’s proposal, would require pro-
fessional advisors to be employed by the employer for the benefit

=== PAGE 56 ===
                                  52

of the employee and who will act solely in the interest of the em-
ployees.
   Senator REED. That sounds an awful lot like the proverbial trust-
ee of a plan.
   Secretary CHAO. Not really, because the underlying instrument
is different. The trustee of let us say a defined benefit plan——
   Senator REED. We are talking about the 401(k), defined contribu-
tion plan of Enron.
   Secretary CHAO. Right, yes. So we are talking about for the
401(k)’s, the trustees have their own responsibilities; they are in-
volved in administering the plan. The investment advisor is dif-
ferent. The investment advisor would be like an employee’s per-
sonal investment advisor. I mean, rich people have their
advisors——
   Senator REED. I know.
   Secretary CHAO [continuing]. So we want to make sure that
employees——
   Senator REED. And I would point out that many of those advisors
were advising people to buy Enron stock for a very long time, even
as it fell.
   Secretary CHAO. Well, you know——
   Senator REED. But there is a second question——
   Secretary CHAO [continuing]. But the basic issue remains that
rich people have access to financial expertise, and I think workers
should have that access as well. So that is what we are tying to
do.
   Senator REED. Would this be a mandatory requirement of the
company, or would this be a voluntary, permissive encouragement?
   Secretary CHAO. We would require that.
   Senator REED. So it would be mandatory.
   Secretary CHAO. This is, for example, the Retirement Security
Advice Act that just passed the House.
   Senator REED. And the company would hire the advisor?
   Secretary CHAO. Yes.
   Senator REED. Why couldn’t the worker choose the advisor, since
it is all about worker choice?
   Secretary CHAO. I think that conceptually, that sounds wonder-
ful; I think that logistically and realistically, that would be a night-
mare to handle.
   Senator REED. Given the track record, for example, of Enron of
hiring people to run pension plans, to give them advice and to do
other things, are you confident that they would have picked some-
one who would have zealously guarded the rights of workers?
   Secretary CHAO. Well, if they are not, they are going to go to jail.
And if we find that some company folks are doing that, they are
going to go to jail.
   Senator REED. Madam Secretary, I think we should be thinking
not about putting people in jail but about creating a system in
which there are not incentives to do stupid or venal things.
   Secretary CHAO. I agree. I totally agree.
   Senator REED. And frankly, when we unravel this very sordid
and, for workers, tragic series of events, we will find some crimi-
nality, I suspect, but we will find a lot more venality, we will find

=== PAGE 57 ===
                                  53

a lot more rules that did not control behaviors. One is the example
of diversification.
   Another point I would raise is with respect to the lockdown. Your
comments to Senator Wellstone I thought were very encouraging,
that you would place liability on the company if they went into a
lockdown period for as long as it is locked down. What would that
liability constitute? Could you explain that now—liable for what?
   Secretary CHAO. All fiduciaries of ERISA plans are personally
liable, and they would be subject to civil and criminal investiga-
tions and penalties.
   Senator REED. Well, they are subject right now to those pen-
alties. What difference would this new liability have during a
lockdown period? What are the liable for—the loss of profits of the
workers individually?
   Secretary CHAO. Yes. They would have to make the workers
whole.
   Senator REED. So the three or four plan administrators would
have to make all the workers of Enron—if this were in effect when
this terrible thing happened, it would have to make whole all of
the——
   Secretary CHAO. It depends on—there are people who are fidu-
ciaries who are stated fiduciaries, and there are some who, by their
very actions, will be considered fiduciaries.
   Senator REED. I understand that. But your point is that some
people if they go into a lockdown period will be personally liable
for all the loss in the stock value per se just because the stock fell?
   Secretary CHAO. They can be, yes. Right now, the employer is not
held liable during the lockdown period. We want to make it very
clear that they are liable.
   Senator REED. But I am still confused, and I do not mean to go
back and forth—they would be liable for any lost value of the stock
during a lockdown period?
   Secretary CHAO. They have the obligation to make the worker
whole.
   Senator REED. And it would be per se liability—it would not be
any type of bad action or negligence or stupidity—it would be per
se liable?
   Secretary CHAO. Currently, employers are not responsible for the
results of investment decisions if they broach their fiduciary liabil-
ity. So we want to——
   Senator REED. But only during the lockdown period.
   Secretary CHAO [continuing]. No. We want to make them liable,
but it is a fiduciary responsibility. We want to make that very
clear.
   Senator REED. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
   Again, we have all kinds of behavioral theories about what hap-
pened, but it strikes me that this is a case of a company that was
desperately trying to keep itself afloat and that their goal was not,
I think—in fact, I do not think they cared about their workers—
they just wanted to see if they could stabilize the stock a bit. And
using a lockdown period to me in that sense should be wrong. I
think a lockdown is just to administratively change people; they
were trying to do something else. Are you going to look into that?
   Senator MIKULSKI [presiding]. The Senator’s time has expired.

=== PAGE 58 ===
                                 54

   Senator REED. I thank you.
   Secretary CHAO. We have an investigation going on that
lockdown, and obviously, during the investigation, I cannot say
very much, but as I have said to this committee, you have my com-
mitment that we will take this investigation wherever it goes.
   Senator REED. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I appreciate that.
   Thank you.
   Senator MIKULSKI. Senator Edwards?
   Senator EDWARDS. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
   Good morning, Madam Secretary.
   Secretary CHAO. Good morning.
   Senator EDWARDS. I think one of the reasons why the American
people have responded so strongly with respect to what has hap-
pened with Enron is that they have seen this story before—people
at the top, powerful, well-financed, politically well-connected, have
taken advantage of regular working people who were working in-
side Enron. I think they are also worried about it happening to
them and their families and their children.
   Can you tell us what you have done to determine whether there
are other Enrons out there waiting to happen?
   Secretary CHAO. I think it is very hard to predict the future via-
bility of an organization, and I think it is very dangerous to pre-
dict, because obviously, that will move markets as well.
   I would say that we have an investigation ongoing with Enron.
I started that investigation before the company went bankrupt.
When the company went bankrupt, we sent our employees down to
the company, and we have given information about career options,
health care options, what rights they have in a bankruptcy, to help
them work through this period. So I am very concerned about these
workers. I will do everything I can to help them, and also——
   Senator EDWARDS. And I appreciate your concern——
   Secretary CHAO [continuing]. And also, the President’s plan obvi-
ously is looking at ensuring the overall long-term retirement secu-
rity of all workers, and that includes the unions and corporations,
businesses and unions.
   Senator EDWARDS. But people around the country who are work-
ing and have been working for years, some of them for decades, at
companies are not interested in what we are doing here in Wash-
ington, DC.
   Secretary CHAO. I totally agree.
   Senator EDWARDS. They are worried about their own families’
and their own families’ pension funds. And what I am asking you
is, as we sit here today, the law and regulations that applied to
Enron are still the law of the land, are they not?
   Secretary CHAO. That is why we are asking for action.
   Senator EDWARDS. But that is the case. The law that applied to
Enron—all the laws and regulations that applied to Enron—are
still the laws that apply to companies all over this company, which
is why——
   Secretary CHAO. The President’s proposal would change that, and
that is what we are asking for action on.
   Senator EDWARDS [continuing]. Yes, ma’am, I understand that.
But there are millions of Americans working as you and I sit here
and talk about the President’s proposal who have the same law ap-

=== PAGE 59 ===
                                 55

plied to their companies that already existed when the Enron scan-
dal occurred. I am asking you if you have done anything to try to
determine whether there are other companies around the country
that may be engaging in the same kind of conduct that Enron has
engaged in, because——
   Secretary CHAO. First of all, I do not think——
   Senator EDWARDS [continuing]. Excuse me, if I may finish——
   Secretary CHAO. Yes, please.
   Senator EDWARDS [continuing]. Because if we have in fact, as we
do, millions of people out there working all over the country subject
to the same kind of horrible behavior that was engaged in at
Enron, the same laws that existed before still apply to them, obvi-
ously, people are concerned. I am not asking you about a process
question. I am not asking you about proposals and legislation and
all the things that are being done by Congress and the President.
I am asking you about folks who are out there right now, working,
worried that what happened to the people at Enron is going to hap-
pen to them—today, tomorrow, next week—before any change is
made in the law.
   Have we done anything—have you done anything—to try to pro-
vide protection to those people by determining whether there are
other companies that are engaged in the same activities?
   Secretary CHAO. I think, sir, you are an attorney yourself, so I
think we need to have the facts. And I do not know what happened
at Enron, and I do not think anyone else does at this point. There
are criminal investigations going on. There are civil investigations
going on. We do not know what ultimately contributed to the de-
mise of that company, and I do not think I can go into any other
company and say that you are doing what Enron is doing—I mean,
how would I know that?
   Senator EDWARDS. Yes, ma’am, but the President has made pro-
posals, so that obviously, you and the President believe that you
know enough about what happened to know that the law needs to
be changed, and action needs to be taken. My question——
   Secretary CHAO. I do not think that is true. I do not think that
is true.
   Senator EDWARDS. You do not think that is true?
   Secretary CHAO. No, I do not. There are investigations ongoing.
The results of these investigations are not yet known.
   Senator EDWARDS. OK. Then, how is the President making pro-
posals if he does not know the law needs to be changed?
   Secretary CHAO. Because I think, based on the preliminary infor-
mation that all of us have received on what we have seen happen
with this company, there are some lessons that we can draw, and
the President’s plan is to ensure the long-term retirement security
of all workers, number one by preserving their right to make their
own investment decisions; two, to empower them by giving them
the information and professional advice they need to make wise in-
vestment decisions; and three, control so that they have parity, so
that if some executive is going to sell their stock, workers should
be allowed to as well, and if workers cannot, then executives can-
not either.
   Senator EDWARDS. And is there anything that I can tell people
who work in my State, North Carolina, who ask me today, or to-

=== PAGE 60 ===
                                  56

morrow, or next week, before Congress acts, before the President’s
proposal is acted upon, anything that is being done to protect them
from the possibility that what happened at Enron could in fact
happen to them as we speak?
   Secretary CHAO. Well, if employees, workers, have any suspicion
that their company is engaging in unlawful practices concerning
their pensions, I want them to call us. I want them to call the De-
partment of Labor—and I have a toll-free number that I want them
to call, because this is a very serious matter. If any employee feels
that his or her company is engaging, again, in any untoward, un-
wise, illegal activity, they need to alert our offices, and we will in-
vestigate. The number is 1-866-ASK-PWBA—and I will get on top
of it.
   Senator EDWARDS. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
   Secretary CHAO. Thank you.
   Senator EDWARDS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
   Just finally, Madam Secretary, on the aspect of the President’s
proposal that you commented on today about the independence of
these financial officers, we have just seen the example of Andersen
doing the accounting and also consulting. And now, Andersen Com-
pany has indicated that they have now as a matter of policy given
that up because of what they think is the real danger of conflict
of interest and the appearance of conflict of interest. Are you still
satisfied in regard to the kind of money managers who will be giv-
ing advice under the President’s program, who are going to benefit
in varying degrees, depending upon which stocks are selected by
the workers themselves, that this does not present a conflict for
those individuals who are pushing the investment on these work-
ers?
   Secretary CHAO. The conflict of interest that you speak about
with Andersen, for example, and the whole issue of accountability
is one that needs to be taken a look at. The President has ap-
pointed a second task force which is headed by the Treasury Sec-
retary, and it also comprises the chairman of the SEC, the chair-
man of the CFTC, and the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board,
and they should be coming out soon, I hope, with their rec-
ommendations on that.
   The CHAIRMAN. Well, that is good, but Arthur Leavitt had this
nailed 2 years ago.
   Secretary CHAO. The blue ribbon committee, yes.
   The CHAIRMAN. He had that, and he tried to get it, and it was
resisted; it was resisted by Congress and by the companies them-
selves. But they saw this as a real danger, and I am just wondering
why we are not seeing a similar kind of danger of conflict for these
money managers who are going to be paid on the basis of what
they are able to convince the workers to accept—and as you point
out, the workers who are working 40 hours a week, 52 weeks of
the year, and are not experts in terms of the managing of these
funds, are depending on the information they receive, and then
these money managers are receiving their income based upon how
much they are able to sell to these workers, and obviously, there
will be differentials in terms of the types of stock they will be able
to push.

=== PAGE 61 ===
                                 57

   I do not know why this is not on its face going to pose the kind
of conflict of interest that will be detrimental to the workers.
   Secretary CHAO. I think we are trying to provide a balance.
Again, there are some small companies that will not be able to hire
two different investment advisors, and ultimately, the cost is going
to fall on the workers.
   The CHAIRMAN. I want to thank you very, very much. You have
been very helpful to us, and we will be looking forward to working
with you.
   Secretary CHAO. Thank you.
   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
   Our final panel today includes Steven Lacey, who is an emer-
gency repair dispatcher for Portland General Electric Salem Divi-
sion in Oregon. Mr. Lacey joined the company in 1981, and in 1987,
Enron bought PGE, and he and his coworkers at PGE have lost vir-
tually all of their 401(k) savings.
   Jan Fleetham is a retiree from Northern Natural Gas, an Enron
subsidiary. She lives in Bloomington, MN. She worked for the com-
pany for nearly 20 years, from 1978 to 1997. I know that Senator
Wellstone would like to introduce Jane, so I will let him do that
after I introduce the rest of the panel.
   Karl Farmer, a former Polaroid worker from Lawrence, MA was
an engineer with Polaroid for 30 years, retiring in September of
2001. He is now chairman of the Official Committee on Retirees
from Polaroid Corporation.
   Although not testifying, Betty Moss, a former Polaroid employee
from Smyrna, GA is here today. Betty worked for Polaroid for more
than 35 years. She drove all the way up here from Georgia, and
I am grateful for her presence here today. I know that Reverend
Jackson has been working with a number of Enron employees, and
a number of us, Senator Daschle and myself and others, met with
a number of them, and we are very appreciative of his strong work
in their behalf.
   We will also hear from James Prentice, chairman of Enron’s Ad-
ministrative Committee on the board of directors, charged with ad-
ministering the Enron Corporation’s savings plan, the 401(k) de-
fined contribution plan. Mr. Prentice has been chairman of that
committee from December 31, 1998 to the present.
   We will hear from Professor Alicia Munnell, Peter F. Drucker
Chair in Management Sciences at Boston College. Prior to joining
Boston College, she was a member of the President’s Council of
Economic Advisors and Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Eco-
nomic Policy.
   Dallas Salisbury is president and CEO at Employee Benefit Re-
search Institute in Washington, DC. EBRI is a private, nonprofit,
nonpartisan education research institute with respect to employee
benefit programs. EBRI does not lobby and does not take positions
on legislative proposals.
   We are glad to have all of you, and we will start if we could with
Mr. Lacey.

=== PAGE 62 ===
                                 58
STATEMENTS OF STEVEN E. LACEY, PORTLAND GENERAL
 ELECTRIC EMPLOYEE, SALEM, OR; JAN FLEETHAM, FORMER
 ENRON EMPLOYEE, BLOOMINGTON, MN; KARL V. FARMER,
 FORMER POLAROID EMPLOYEE, LAWRENCE, MA; JAMES
 PRENTICE, CHAIRMAN, ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE,
 ENRON CORPORATION SAVINGS PLAN; ALICIA MUNNELL,
 PETER F. DRUCKER CHAIR IN MANAGEMENT SCIENCES,
 BOSTON COLLEGE, BOSTON, MA; AND DALLAS SALISBURY,
 PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, EMPLOYEE
 BENEFIT RESEARCH INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, DC
   Mr. LACEY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and members
of the committee.
   My name is Steve Lacey. I am from Salem, OR, and I work out
of Portland General Electric as an emergency repair dispatcher. I
have worked for this small utility for 21 years and am also a proud
member of the IBEW for the same number of years; I started back
in 1981.
   The reason I am here is to tell you a little bit about what hap-
pened to us at Portland General Electric. Even though our lawsuit
represents Enron and a full 21,000 people, some of us did not have
the choice in our stock program. When Enron took over PGE, our
stock was converted to Enron stock. At that time, our company—
just to give you a little history about it—is a little different cor-
poration. Enron came in and to us was like a Ferrari—very expen-
sive, very fast, very flashy—it was a corporate world that we had
never seen before. We were a very small, conservative, family-ori-
ented company. It is not uncommon to have many members of a
single family working—a lot of husband and wife teams. My own
personal family has over 50 years of service for Portland General
Electric.
   The change there was like a media blitz to us. In the past, our
401(k) program was very conservative. Putting money in there was
like putting money in the bank. You saved as much money as you
could, you put your 30 years in, and you retired as best as you
could.
   Enron did a great job of selling their stock to us. Probably the
most frequent people ask me is why did I put all my stock in
Enron. It was very simple. It was good production. Educationally,
they did not sit down and talk to us about any other options, where
in the past, under Portland General Electric, we had very explicit
options, none of which were very radical or risky, either one.
   The other thing is that the executives of the company continually
touted that our stock was undervalued, that at $80, it should be
$120 and so on. So it was very easy to find yourself joining the
bandwagon. I saw something that I had never seen before when I
went to work, which was people checking their stocks every day.
I had never seen this before Enron. There was a frenzy involved
with it, that people were excited, and it was performing well, but
we were basing our opinions and our own knowledge on some very
false statements, as we find out now.
   Most of us were 100 percent in Enron stock. Even to the end, it
has been shown that the executives made statements repeatedly
that everything was fine, do not worry about it. When we did come
to the lockdown, and there was some controversy about the day

=== PAGE 63 ===
                                 59

that it was actually frozen, I can attest that in the area that I
worked—and I cannot speak for Houston or any other places—but
in my company, as early as late September, we were unable to get
into our website to do anything. And it is something that we are
looking into right now in our own lawsuit.
   So that effectively, we were locked out in late September. We
made continuous pleas as the stock started to go down to help us
out. Phone calls were not returned. We were told that the website
was down because of different structural problems within, that it
was not a lockdown as they called it.
   When I filed the lawsuit, I think I did it more for my fellow em-
ployees than I did for myself at the time. It was like living through
1929 again. It was amazing to go into the building—I had been off
for a few days and came back—and see good friends talking about
the stock, and as I got up-to-speed on what had been happening,
my losses were in excess of $100,000, which in Portland General
Electric, as I talked to friends, was really very, very small com-
paratively. We average about 46 years of age in our company. To
give you an example, in my job, there are nine of us trained to do
this job company-wide. We work in a 24-hour emergency center. I
am number seven on the seniority list at 21 years, just to give you
an idea of where I stand. So that age and years of service in our
company are very, very high.
   I think one of the people who spurred to contact Hoggins Berman
was probably one of my better friends whom I spent 16 years in
the field with before I was injured. His name is Roy Rinard. Roy
is in his early to mid fifties, was very close to retirement, and lost
over $470,000. He is a very proud man, he is a hardworking man.
I spent countless hours on Mount Hood, in the Gorge, in subzero
weather, and he was one of those people who would work 20-hour
shifts, day after day after day to get power back to people. There
are countless others there as well. Roy also has three other family
members who are members of Portland General Electric who lost
their 401(k)’s.
   The list goes on and on. The amount of money lost here was a
phenomenal amount. For most of us age-wise, we are at a point
where we are not going to be able to recover just because of our
age and the number of years, unless we plan to work until we are
70. We are hoping that through speaking to you, we are able to
convince people that this was not just a bad stock investment.
Some people did some very bad things. They lied to us and quite
possibly they broke the law. Hopefully, through working together,
different groups and your panel, you will be able to come to a con-
clusion that we can make ourselves whole again, that we can have
a future to look forward to.
   I think most of our expectations are not real high. We want to
be able to take care of our grandchildren. We want to have a de-
cent retirement, maybe travel a tiny bit. I do not see us wanting
mansions or resorts or anything like that. But the future right now
is pretty bleak. Myself, I got married 2 years ago. The hardest
thing I have ever done was to sit down and explain to my life that
I had lost everything; and that is probably one of the few times I
have ever really emotionally broken down and cried in my whole
life. That was a tough night, and I will not forget it. And coming

=== PAGE 64 ===
                                 60

back to work, looking around, seeing fellow employees—we have
one gentleman at work who is very good with the stocks; it is a
hobby to him, a business to him on the side, and a lot of people
used him for advice because we did not have professionals avail-
able. We just had emails from executives telling us to buy, buy,
buy, build the company, be a part of it.
   He felt so responsible for the fact that he had convinced some
others, including myself, to be 100 percent in Enron, that he was
off on stress leave for a fair amount of time, and rightfully so. I
spent quite a bit of time talking to him, too, away from work, and
it was devastating to watch this man, too. He lost over $700,000
of his own money, but he felt very responsible for the others
around him.
   As I said, the crash was really devastating to all of us, and we
are hoping that the recovery is aimed at this time. We hear a lot
of talk about we want to change things to make sure it never hap-
pens again, and I have learned a lot today, sitting here and listen-
ing and understanding how the process works a little better. But
I hope that the laws and the things that are being worked on may
be able to come back and help the Enron workers—not that we are
more special than anybody else who has lost money, but I think the
reason we lost it—it was not a bad investment; I have heard a lot
of reporters say, ‘‘Well, you made bad choices.’’ Maybe we did.
Maybe 100 percent is not correct. But like I said, in the culture I
came out of in a very conservative company prior to Enron, that
was not a bad choice at all. My father spent 30 years there, and
as I said, I will probably put my 30 in as well.
   I believe that this committee can do some things to help us. I am
hoping that as the investigation finds those who are responsible
that the punishment will fit the crime. I think one of the biggest
things—even last night, I was receiving phone calls in my motel
room at midnight wishing me luck, but also asking me to pass on
that Enron made us believe that they were of the highest integrity.
In fact, my boss, who is a middle management person, gave me a
stress reliever that Enron passed on to him with the RICE pro-
gram, which is Respect, Integrity, Communication, and Excellence.
   Every person at PGE who was in middle management had some-
thing along this line, and I think most of us believed in it—not that
it was new to us. I think we did it at Portland General Electric
very well; for the past 100 years, the company has done very well.
But all of this media hype was so important, and I think a lot of
people took it to heart that there was no way that these people
could mislead us or lead us down the road.
   I appreciate the time that you have given me, and hopefully, we
will be able to resolve this so it will not happen again.
   Thank you.
   The CHAIRMAN. Well, Mr. Lacey, speaking I think for the com-
mittee, we know how difficult it is to describe these circumstances,
so we appreciate those who share them with us. I think that that
is what this is really about—real families, real hopes and dreams
that are lost, and real exploitation of the workers. We want to do
what we can to remedy that, and we thank you.
   [The prepared statement of Mr. Lacey follows:]

=== PAGE 65 ===
                                         61
                     PREPARED STATEMENT OF STEVEN E. LACEY
   Good morning Mr. Chairman and members of the committee. My name is Steven
E. Lacey. I am 46 years old, and I work as an Emergency Repair Dispatcher for
Portland General Electric’s (PGE) Salem Division. As you know, PGE is a small util-
ity in Portland, OR that is owned by Enron. I started with the company in 1981
and have worked hard for PGE for the past 21 years.
   The reason I am here today is to tell you what really happened at Enron, from
a victim’s perspective. I am a second-generation employee at the company. Between
my father and I, we have dedicated 51 years to PGE. This collapse has affected en-
tire families. In some cases, several generations were all working at the company
and devastated simultaneously. I want to tell you what my co-workers; and I experi-
enced at our company and why I believe the system is broken.
   First of all, you have to understand what type of company PGE was before Enron
bought it in 1997. PGE has been in business for over 100 years. It was a very stable,
local utility company that was run almost like a family business. PGE was very ac-
tive in the community, and was a model of corporate and civic responsibility. Our
stock price was steady, always within the $23 to $28 range. Putting your money into
PGE stock seemed almost like putting it in a savings account at the credit union.
   When Enron came in, it turned the company’s culture upside down. Employees,
and all Oregonians, were very skeptical of this fast-talking, Texas corporation. Com-
paring Enron to PGE is like comparing a Ferrari to a Volkswagen Bug. The Ferrari
looks good, drives 240 miles per hour, but takes a lot of money to keep it running;
on the other hand, the Volkswagen is practical, no-frills, cost-effective and pretty
self-sustaining. The differences are striking. It took almost a year of negotiations
and money in the form of ‘‘community investments’’ from Enron before the Oregon
Public Utility Commission (OPUC) would approve the deal. When the sale was fi-
nally approved, our PGE stock was automatically converted to Enron stock one-for-
one. We did not have a choice. When the conversion to Enron took place, none of
the employees realized how different this corporation was and what kind of impact
it would have on our investments. We know now, that our stock went from being
a stable, predictable asset to a volatile, high risk gamble.
   My 401(k) allocation was 100 percent Enron. I put the maximum amount possible
(which was six percent of my pay) into the 401(k), elected to put that into Enron
stock and received a matching contribution from the company in Enron stock as
well. At that time, I did not think about retirement very often, since I was a young-
er worker and it seemed like a long way off. I was always told I should put as much
as possible into my retirement plan because it was important for my future security.
Our plan also prevented us from selling any of the company’s matching stock con-
tributions until age 50, so I didn’t think much about trading, period. My shares of
Enron stock are now worth next to nothing. I worked hard to save for my future
and I have lost it all.
   I have heard many stories that are even more devastating than mine. For exam-
ple, Roy Rinard, age 53, has 22 years with PGE and had a $472,000 loss. He was
hoping to retire early after many years of physically demanding work, but now can-
not. Al Kaseweter, a lineman with PGE’s Oregon City Division, is 43 years old, has
21 years with PGE and has lost $318,000. Dave Covington, age 42, has 22 years
with PGE and lost $300,000. There are many more stories of folks who have delayed
retirement or were going to finance their children’s education with this money.
   You may wonder why I chose to put all of my assets in Enron instead of diversify-
ing. Well, the answer is simple. I was young, the stock was doing well, and all over
the company, people said Enron was the best investment you could make. Words
like ‘‘concrete’’ and ‘‘bullet-proof’’ were drifting through the halls of the shop as
many folks watched the stock price climb in the late 90s. I did not follow stocks and
investments like some people did. I just glanced at my statement quarterly when
it came in the mail and went about my daily life.
   Many employees followed the stock prices closely. When the value of our shares
started to go down in April of 2001, and Ken Lay sold off millions of dollars in his
own Enron stock, officials at the company would make excuses and ease our fears
by talking about how the company was strong and the price would go back up. Also
in April, Jeffery Skilling, then President and CEO of Enron, told employees that the
stock was undervalued and would go up to $120 per share. This was also reported
in The Oregonian (Oregon’s statewide newspaper). On August 14, 2001, Ken Lay
sent an email to employees stating, ‘‘Enron is one of the finest organizations in busi-
ness today. Performance has never been stronger.’’ On August 21, 2001, Ken Lay
sent another email to employees expressing confidence that stock prices would con-
tinue to go up, which was also quoted in the Enron newsletter. So, as you see, the
company officials kept encouraging us to hold onto our stock and never let on that

=== PAGE 66 ===
                                         62
our company was in serious trouble. We thought we were all working together, help-
ing to build our company and make it strong. Never did we think that this collapse
could happen.
   The most painful part of this whole ordeal was the feeling of helplessness during
the lock down. As you know, the company made a switch in 401(k) plan administra-
tors in, depending on whom you talk to, September or October 2001. This just hap-
pened to coincide with the company’s announcement of a revised accounting state-
ment detailing additional losses in revenue, followed by the most dramatic decrease
in Enron stock value we had seen. In late September 2001, some PGE employees
attempted to access their accounts to sell Enron stock and could not. Their account
seemed to be frozen before the official date Enron said the lock down period would
start. I, along with many other employees, tried to contact our plan administrator
for help. Usually, an employee would either be on hold indefinitely, or if they did
get through, they were told the system was temporarily down and to try again later.
My belief is this—and I hope someone will investigate and verify my theory— that
Enron froze out employees during this period to try to save the company.
   The suffering people went through as they watched their futures crumble each
day the lock down dragged on was unimaginable. It reminded me of the stock mar-
ket crash of 1929. Our building was dead quiet. Everyone was in shock. Every com-
puter terminal was logged on to an investment-type web site, as the news got worse.
Emotions ranged from profound anger to unbearable grief and sadness. I could now
understand why people jumped out of windows during the Great Depression, be-
cause we saw the effect it was having on our friends and co-workers right there,
in front of us. One employee even left work on stress leave for an entire month. It
was a brutal awakening.
   This crash was devastating on all of us. We must bring the people who wronged
us to justice. Why should the executives, who had prior knowledge of the hollow
practices of the company, be able to escape with the millions they cashed out before
the collapse and live happily ever after? Why should the hard-working people that
literally built their company be left with nothing? We are pursuing a class-action
lawsuit against Enron, in which I am the lead plaintiff. We believe we will win this
lawsuit, but we don’t want to end up losers in the long run. We may re-coup some
of our losses through the liability insurance money the company kept on its officials,
but even that won’t make a big difference in the lives that have already been ru-
ined. We must not leave these people behind by letting those who committed white-
collar crime run off to some weekend prison with a putting green.
   I believe this committee can do a few things to help us. We should make Ken Lay
and other Enron executives personally liable for what they did to thousands of peo-
ple. We must make it clear that there are serious personal consequences to delib-
erate corporate mismanagement. If you purposely deceive American working people,
you will pay. We should pass a law that helps Enron workers recover immediately.
We should send a message that, yes, this cannot and will not happen again, but
also not turn our backs on the workers who are suffering now. If we cannot go after
the millions these corporate executives made on the backs of hard working employ-
ees, then we should look to other reforms. I believe a law should be passed to ad-
dress issues surrounding mandatory stock matches, total percentage of company
stock in the 401(k) plan, and advance notice and limitations on the duration of lock
out periods.
   Thank you for allowing me to speak before your committee today on behalf of
thousands of PGE employees.
   The CHAIRMAN. I recognize Senator Wellstone to introduce Ms.
Fleetham.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Mr. Lacey, as you were speaking, I said to Senator Kennedy that
as far as I am concerned, this is absolutely the best place as I could
be as a Senator, was to be here listening to what you said. I think
this is the most important part of the testimony today.
   Mr. Chairman, Jan Fleetham is a retiree from Northern Natural
Gas, which is an Enron subsidiary, and she currently lives in
Bloomington, MN. She worked for the company for nearly 20 years,
if I am correct, from 1978 until 1997. She planned carefully for re-
tirement, but is now struggling after losing most of her retirement
assets, and the only other thing I would say is—and this comes
from when we had coffee, Jan—she is a strong, levelheaded woman

=== PAGE 67 ===
                                 63

who has been through a lot and has a powerful story to tell, and
I think she is very, very, very determined that this not happen to
other people.
   Ms. Fleetham, thank you for being here.
   Ms. FLEETHAM. Thank you for inviting me to be here. I have a
written statement, but I do not do well with the written statement,
so I am kind of going to do this on the fly, and obviously, if you
have questions, throw them out.
   I did work for Enron for almost 20 years. I started as a secretary,
and through that 20 years worked my way up. I worked in Min-
neapolis, then Omaha, then back to Minneapolis, where I was
working when I retired. During that time, it was without question
the greatest job I have ever had, with the greatest opportunity. I
had four children. I was a single mom. I raised my children. Three
of my daughters were able to go through college. We lived a good
life.
   It was always encouraging that the benefits were great. I took
college courses while working for them. We went to Omaha for 7
years, and that was a great experience, but it was nicer to come
back to Minnesota, because I now had a grandchild there.
   Over the years, I built up a retirement as best I could, with
things going up. I put in some contributions as well as the com-
pany. The bulk of what I had was in company stock. I had it
planned originally to work until age 62 and retire. I ended up tak-
ing early retirement in 1997, because it was either that or transfer
to a region in Kansas, which I did not choose to do at that time,
with my family being there.
   When I originally left, I had approximately $2,000 total. I
planned to use half of that, along with working part-time, to get
through the 5 years until I was eligible for Social Security. My plan
was that I would have $100,000 left after that time for any add-
ons, any extenuating expenses that would not be covered by my
part-time work and my Social Security.
   Before I run out of time, I want to make sure I reiterate an expe-
rience with the lockdown I had. I had a problem with the lockdown,
but it was not the same kind of problem everybody else had. I went
on Social Security in June and decided I was going to sell about
$10,000 worth of stock to get what I had caught up or paid off, and
I was all set to fly then; I would have enough, and everything was
working. I put a sell order in to sell the percentage of stock to come
up with approximately $10,000 to $11,000 on October 9. On Octo-
ber 15, I received a letter in the mail that was dated October 8,
telling me that there was going to be a lockdown, and it was going
to begin on October 20, and it would last until November 19.
   At that point in time, that was not a problem for me. I had got-
ten my sell order in before that, so the lockdown was not going to
affect me, which in fact is what the letter said.
   I got a confirmation notice on the request that had been there,
but the withdrawal date was marked on the 30th of October, which
was supposedly during a lockdown period so designated by the
company.
   I ended up getting a check with a distribution date of November
9, which was also within the lockdown period, and the check that
was supposed to be for $10,000 was for $1,200. So at the time I put

=== PAGE 68 ===
                                        64

in the order, the stock’s value I am thinking was about $30 to $35.
I would normally go $5 what it was at the time to figure out what
I needed. Had they sold that stock immediately when I had put
that in, I am sure I would have gotten very close to the value.
Holding that for some reason until October 30, and supposedly dur-
ing a lockdown, I obviously lost all but about 10 percent of that.
   I question how that whole thing even worked. I am sort of
stunned by it. So that actually, I am questioning if these people
were allowed to sell their stock and did not have the lockdown, it
would not have mattered anyway, because it looks to me like Enron
sold my stock when they good and well felt like selling it—not
when I put the order in.
   So I think that is something to note when you are talking about
lockdowns, that it is not always the lockdown that kills you. There
has to be some kind of stoppage of a plan when you are changing
administrators for computer work. But if it is not going to matter
anyway, and the company can sell the stock whenever they want
to sell the stock, that is kind of immaterial.
   I am assuming there is really nothing that those of us can do.
I would like to make one comment, though, addressing some of the
comments he made with regard to the Enron employees, that you
made a mistake, you did all of this, and it is your fault. To me, that
is offensive, and it is kind of like calling the victim guilty of being
raped because she wore a short skirt or she was in the wrong place
at the wrong time. These people were not stupid, and these people
did something—called it conditioning, call it acceptance, call it fam-
ily—that they have been doing for a number of years.
   Thank you.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Just for clarification, Jan, if you do not
mind, the $100,000 is now worth, right now, in terms of your own
situation, just for the record——
   Ms. FLEETHAM. Actually, I think, as of talking with somebody
yesterday—it was worth about $600 when we had a meeting a
while ago. I believe that as of yesterday, it is probably worth about
$300, $400. I am hearing that the stock, at the price it was at yes-
terday, is probably worth about $300 to $400.
   Senator WELLSTONE. From $100,000 to $300, which is kind of
like Mr. Lacey’s story.
   Ms. FLEETHAM. Yes.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Thank you.
   [The prepared statement of Ms. Fleetham follows:]

                     PREPARED STATEMENT OF JAN FLEETHAM
  Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. My name is Jan Fleetham and
I am from Bloomington, Minnesota.
  I am a retiree who worked for almost twenty years for a company, originally
known as Northern Natural Gas, a company that eventually became the Enron Cor-
poration. I started out in 1978 as a secretary in the Data Processing Department
in Minneapolis, Minnesota, making roughly $700 a month. By the time I retired in
1997 I had risen to the position of microcomputer analyst for the Northern Region
and I was earning a salary of $60,000.
  I worked hard for this company for twenty years. I saved and planned as carefully
as I knew how for my retirement. But now Enron’s collapse has made all of that
meaningless. My dreams for a secure retirement have been gutted and the next few
years will be a huge struggle for me financially.

=== PAGE 69 ===
                                          65
   Over the years I built up a retirement fund that included my contributions as well
as the company’s. I used some of the funds in this account over the years but
planned carefully to have a balance left upon my retirement so that I would have
sufficient resources.
   Now, the balance in my retirement account of $100,000—all in company stock—
is worth $600. As a single woman of 62, instead of looking forward to enjoying time
with my children and grandchildren, I will now have to work many hours to supple-
ment my social security and a small annuity of $200 per month I have from before
Enron took over my original company.
   While my company is in the process of reorganizing I am told that my health ben-
efits will continue. However, if the company fails, then I will lose those benefits.
Given my current situation, like most retirees, I cannot possibly afford to get my
own coverage.
   What is particularly troubling to me is that I had no reason to think that my re-
tirement fund was not secure. I read the annual reports from the company, but I
was never very sure what I was supposed to get out of them. Everything looked fine
to me. As far as I was aware, there was never a hint of a problem, not from Enron,
their auditors, nor from the financial community at large. Virtually all Enron em-
ployees were completely blind-sided when this happened.
   When I had the opportunity to choose where to put the funds, in my account, I
chose the company stock. The company gave me choices that included the Enron
Corporation Income Fund, seven Fidelity funds, Enron Corporation Stock, and
Enron Oil and Gas stock. All of my account was invested in Enron. At the time,
I did not see the good in abandoning the high returns that my stock had been pro-
viding in favor of one of the far lower anticipated returns of the alternatives offered.
   With hindsight, it appears clear to me that I could have spent more time and en-
ergy looking at what was going on within the company. However, I doubt I would
have been knowledgeable enough to pick up on the problems seeing that a noted
auditing company supposedly also failed to recognize any problems. As an employee,
I felt like I knew what was going on within the company, though looking back, this
was clearly not the case.
   I certainly don’t feel the company was very forthcoming about their—or my—situ-
ation. When the stock went public, I received mailings that offered me the oppor-
tunity to buy additional company stock. I also recall that since my retirement, I re-
ceived solicitations from Enron for me to purchase more of their stock. Nothing in
these solicitations made me think there were any problems at the company. If any-
thing, they made me think that the company was prospering.
   As did other employees, I also had problems this fall when I tried to sell some
of the stock in my retirement account. During the fall I wanted to withdraw $10,000
worth of stock. On October 9th, I submitted an order to sell. I specifically checked
a box on the order form so that the sale would be executed as soon as practicable.
In the past, this meant that the stock would have been sold within 7 to 10 days.
   I received a notice on October 15th (the letter was dated October 8th) saying that
I would be unable to access my account from October 20th to November 19th. This
was the so-called ‘‘lockdown period’’ that we’ve heard so much about.
   I did not think this was a problem because I had put in my sell order before Octo-
ber 20th and the sale should have been completed by then. For some reason, how-
ever, the confirmation I received stated the withdrawal date as October 30th—dur-
ing the supposed lockdown period. Ultimately, I received a check with a distribution
date of November 9th for roughly 10 percent ($1200) of what I had calculated the
stock was worth at the beginning of the previous month. The number of shares that
were valued at more than $10,000 at the beginning of October were worth only
$1200 by the time they were finally sold.
   Enron’s collapse has wiped out my retirement savings. I don’t know if anything
can be done to help me or other Enron employees who have found themselves
dropped into such unexpectedly dire straits. But I do think that if anything can be
done to prevent this from happening to other workers in the future, it is important
that you take immediate and decisive action.
   The CHAIRMAN. Karl Farmer, a former Polaroid worker from
Lawrence, MA, worked for Polaroid for 30 years and is chairman
of the Official Committee of Retirees.
   We are glad to have you here.
   Mr. FARMER. Good morning, and thank you, Mr. Chairman and
committee members.

=== PAGE 70 ===
                                 66

   As you said, I am a former Polaroid employee and chairman of
the Official Committee of Retirees of the Polaroid Corporation. I
am accompanied by counsel of the Official Committee, Al Gray of
Greenberg Traurig, and as well, Betty Moss, another former Polar-
oid employee.
   I am 55 years of age. I was born and raised in Roxbury, MA and
spent a lot of time in Medford and Bedford, MA, and just recently
moved to New Hampshire.
   The CHAIRMAN. Did you say you are 55 today?
   Mr. FARMER. No. Last week, the 28th.
   Senator WELLSTONE. My mistake. I am sorry.
   Mr. FARMER. The 28th—which is part of the issue of a change
for me. I was a severed employee who was severed into retirement
age, which makes me what they call a ‘‘crossover.’’
   I started working for Polaroid around 30 years ago as an engi-
neer, and just recently, in September, left because my job went
away, and I took the opportunity to take that severance into retire-
ment, if you will.
   At the time I started at Polaroid, Polaroid was one of the compa-
nies to work for. It was an especially good company for minorities
because it was very progressive. They were doing affirmative action
programs before they were mandatory and fashionable, and it was
a family kind of company with an upper management that was a
caring group of guys.
   Up until 1988, I had begun to put some savings, 2 percent of my
pay, into a 401(k) account. Polaroid did a matching dollar for dollar
on that account, and it was such that I was able to add to what
I thought was going to be a nice retirement nest egg.
   But in 1988, Polaroid started a mandatory ESOP, and that was
a plan which required the employees to take an 8 percent pay cut
to help finance the plan. And where most ESOP plans did not re-
quire workers to contribute, this one did, and the reason was be-
cause it was an ESOP to prevent a hostile takeover. What really
meant was that it prevented the management structure from being
thrown out, if you will, so it really was an entrenchment of the
management in the corporation.
   But as I said, they were at that time what we thought were de-
cent individuals, fair, and we thought they were doing the right
thing for the corporation and for us, so we bought into that
ESOP—naturally bought into it, because we had no choice.
   As a result, because of the cost—I had three sons, I had just
bought a new house recently—I was not able to continue to put the
money into the 401(k), not have it matched, and also pay for the
ESOP with that pay cut, so I had to stop doing that 401(k) part
of the investment, if you will.
   So I did not really realize the danger that was to follow in diver-
sifying the retirement account until August of 2001, when I was
told that my job was being eliminated. I was promised that sever-
ance package, as I mentioned, which included medical and dental
insurance coverage at employees’ prices, which seemed like a good
thing to do, for 6 months along with 6 months of severance pay.
This transition period actually took me into retirement, where I
could count on what I thought was a nice ESOP and pension plan.

=== PAGE 71 ===
                                 67

   The day I was to receive my first severance pay, I called and
asked whether it was going to be deposited into my checking point
or whether I was going to get a separate check. I later learned that
people were not receiving their checks that day, and there was
some issue going on.
   The next day, Polaroid declared Chapter 11. As a result, Polaroid
stopped paying the severance and they also stopped paying the
medical, dental, and insurance benefits to retirees and severed em-
ployees. I did not find this out right away. It was a couple of days
later, after calling, that I found that out.
   With that loss, I ended up having to break a lease and vacate
my apartment, because I was on unemployment, did not have a job,
and I had to act very quickly, because this happened very, very
quickly to me. There was no advance notice. So I was pretty—also,
I had to default on—I had two 401(k) loans that were outstanding,
and I asked what the penalty on that was, and they said, well, you
do not have to pay them off, but it is going to detract from what
you will get in your retirement stage. So instead of taking that fi-
nancial burden, I stopped doing that.
   As for the ESOP plan, I had about 3,500 shares which at the
peak were worth about $210,000. Now, without asking and without
knowing, the trustee of the account sold off the shares at 91⁄2 cents
a share, which was about $332 or something like that.
   So if I look at the ESOP loss and the severance loss and the fact
that I now have to pay the medical, it is about a quarter of a mil-
lion dollars’ loss to me, which I think is very unmanageable.
   The other part of that is the ESOP shares. When I left the com-
pany, my assumption was that I owned those shares of stock, be-
cause I was no longer an employee, and it says ESOP, which
means employee stock ownership plan. I was not told that I had
to sell those shares or move those shares in any way, shape, or
fashion, or they would be treated like the rest of the ESOP shares.
But that is in fact what happened. If you do not tell them that you
want to move them, they keep those shares and treat them as the
other ESOP shares.
   What else do we have—many of us cannot understand how the
trustee of the retirement plan can actually do that and call selling
the shares in the letter we received ‘‘in the best interest of the em-
ployees’’ and wait until the shares go from $20 to $10 to $5 to $3,
and then wait until it gets down to 91⁄2 cents and act in my best
interest. I think that is ludicrous in a big way.
   The other thing that it does is because the ESOP was to protect
a hostile takeover, it takes 15 to 20 percent of ownership of the
company out of the hands of the employees, so that now we do not
get to vote on anything.
   For me, one of the reasons why I am here and one of the reasons
why I am the chair of the committee—Betty Moss who is with me
today wrote a letter to the bankruptcy judge announcing what was
going on, and it kind of inspired me. I also wrote a letter to the
judge and also talked with Al Gray, one of the counsel who hap-
pens to be my brother-in-law, and we got together and talked about
what is it that we can do to try to offset what happened. I was real-
ly looking for what I could do personally to regain what has hap-
pened to me. And to make a long story short, we finally got a group

=== PAGE 72 ===
                                       68

of people together and talked about what the issues were for every-
body, and Greenberg Traurig came in and said ‘‘We can provide
some assistance to you through the court in the fashion of being
recognized by the court, starting out as an ad hoc committee and
then an official committee.’’ And this was done.
   The problem I have with the system is that we did not know
that. When we try to get people together as a group, we do not un-
derstand who the people are that are laid off. There are no lists.
You do not know where the folks are. It is not like you let one par-
ticular building go or division. So it makes it very, very hard to
unite in a fashion to try to stop the bleeding, and that is what we
ended up doing. So it was almost pure fate that Al and I happened
to get together and be able to work together to start this committee
to stop that.
   As we have proceeded along—and I would like to thank the of-
fices of Senator Kennedy and——
   The CHAIRMAN. Excuse me, Mr. Farmer, but if you will look be-
hind you, there are some little light up there, which means there
is a vote. That is why Senator Wellstone had to go over there. So
we will have to recess momentarily, but he will return, and we can
move ahead with the hearing.
   I have had the good opportunity to meet on two different occa-
sions with a number of the workers. You could have put Polaroid
on the list of outstanding companies that we heard earlier today.
Ed Land, who worked in the Defense Department in the early
1960’s, at the time President Kennedy was President, went back up
to Cambridge and was a genius, an absolute genius, in inventing
the Polaroid camera, the instant camera, worldwide. He was an ab-
solute genius.
   Mr. FARMER. He held the second amount of patents.
   The CHAIRMAN. It was unbelievable. Polaroid was well run, had
the respect of everyone in the State and all the financial institu-
tions. And we will not go into some of the difficulties they have had
with different kinds of competitive situations, but you could put
them right at the top of that list that Senator Corzine showed us,
and now, what has happened to all those, as you have described
here, hard-working people who devoted their lives to that company,
were resourceful and creative individuals who were well-informed,
well-educated individuals. It does not make any difference as far as
people who are losing; you are talking about people who have just
been left high and dry, and that is the Polaroid situation.
   We have seen it again and again and again, and that is the rea-
son we have to ask ourselves if we are just going to let this kind
of system, with some minor adjustments and changes, continue, or
are we really going to deal with the question, and the more I hear,
the more I am a strong believer in the importance and significance
of diversity.
   We will recess for just a few moments and then continue.
   [The prepared statement of Mr. Farmer follows:]

                    PREPARED STATEMENT OF KARL V. FARMER
  Good morning. My name is Karl Farmer, and I am a former Polaroid employee
and chairman of the Official Committee of Retirees for Polaroid Corporation. I am
also accompanied today by counsel for the Official Committee of Retirees, Scott

=== PAGE 73 ===
                                         69
Cousins, of Greenberg Traurig, as well as Betty Moss, another former Polaroid em-
ployee.
   I am 55 years old. I have lived in Roxbury, Medford, Bedford and Lawrence,
Mass., and I recently moved to New Hampshire.
   I started working for Polaroid more than 30 years ago as an engineer and became
a retiree after I left the company on September 29, 2001. At the time I started with
the company, Polaroid was one of THE places to work. It was an especially good
company for minorities, very progressive. Polaroid was doing affirmative action pro-
grams before it became fashionable or mandatory. It was a family company with a
caring upper management.
   Up until 1988, I had begun to save for my retirement by contributing 2% of my
pay to the Polaroid 401(k). Polaroid matched that contribution dollar for dollar so
that I was able to start building for my retirement with a diversified retirement
plan.
   But in 1988 Polaroid started the mandatory ESOP plan which required employees
to contribute 8% of their pay to the ESOP plan. I had always understood that most
ESOP plans did not require workers to contribute to them, but Polaroid required
that we contribute to this one.
   Because of the mandatory requirement that we contribute to the ESOP, I was no
longer financially able to contribute to my 401(k). As a result, my retirement was
then tied up almost exclusively with the ESOP and Polaroid stock. I have not fig-
ured out how much money I would now have if I had continued to contribute to my
diversified 401(k) instead of the ESOP, but I am meeting with a financial advisor
from Fidelity next week, and I’m sure they’ll be able to tell me the bad news.
   I didn’t really realize the danger of not being allowed to diversify my retirement
account until August 2001 when I was told my job was being eliminated, and I was
promised a severance package, which included medical, dental and life insurance
coverage at employee prices for six months, along with six months severance pay.
This transition period actually took me to retirement—where I could count on my
ESOP and pension plans.
   The day I was to receive my first severance payment I called to verify that it was
being deposited. I later learned that many people who were supposed to receive sev-
erance payments that day did not, and the next day Polaroid declared Chapter 11.
As a result, Polaroid is not paying my severance, or providing the medical, dental
or life insurance it had agreed to. I have been left unemployed with no benefits. I
had to break a lease and vacate my apartment. I had also taken out two loans on
my 401(k) plan, and I will now be unable to pay those back. As a result, I’m also
going to be hit with a huge tax penalty for making withdrawals on my 401(k).
   As for my ESOP plan, I had 3500 shares which, at their peak, were worth about
$210,000. Without asking me, or apparently anyone else, management decided to
liquidate these shares for about $300.
   We learned, after the fact, that State Street Bank & Trust, the trustee of the
fund, started liquidating Polaroid’s ESOP shares in mid November 2001, and com-
pletely liquidated the fund by mid-December 2001. After the liquidation was com-
plete, Gary DiCamillo, Polaroid’s current CEO, sent out a letter on December 10,
2001 to all employees notifying them that ‘‘it was in the best interest of participants
in the ESOP fund to liquidate all shares.’’
   Many of us cannot understand how the trustee of a retirement savings plan acted
‘‘in our best interest’’ by selling the ESOP stock when it reached 9 cents a share.
Not only that, the liquidation of those shares means the ‘‘employee owners’’ have
almost no influence. We used to own almost 20% of the company. Now we cannot
even vote on the Polaroid bankruptcy and related matters.
   We decided to try to influence the process, even if we were disenfranchised former
owners of the company. It took a big effort to pull folks together to fight for what’s
been promised. People are scattered and we do not have lists of everyone who has
been affected. Still, we organized. I’m the chair of the Official Committee of Retirees
of Polaroid, which was recently recognized by the bankruptcy court. This allows us
legal representation with the bankruptcy proceedings.
   The offices of both Senator Kennedy and Representative Delahunt have worked
very diligently with us in our fight for justice. And recently a letter was sent to Po-
laroid’s CEO from the entire Massachusetts Congressional delegation denouncing
Polaroid’s actions. Our committee and its constituents thank you and the other
members of the Massachusetts delegation for those clear signs of support. In the
same spirit, we urge you to change the rules on ESOP programs to allow employees
some control of their own destiny.
   Thank you.
  [Recess.]

=== PAGE 74 ===
                                 70

   Senator WELLSTONE [presiding]. The HELP Committee will be
back in order.
   We will start with Mr. Prentice, then Alicia Munnell, and con-
clude with Dallas Salisbury, if that is okay.
   Mr. Prentice, thank you for being here. And I apologize to all
members; we just had a vote, and that was the interruption.
   Mr. PRENTICE. Good afternoon. My name is Jim Prentice. I was
trained as a chemical engineer and currently hold the position of
senior vice president of liquids operations at an Enron affiliate,
EOTT Energy. My current duties include management of the com-
pany’s petrochemical facilities. I have been with Enron or one of its
predecessor companies for 31 years.
   I was asked to appear before you today in my capacity as chair-
man of the Administrative Committee of the Enron Savings Plan
or the 401(k) Plan, as it is often called. I have been on that com-
mittee for over 10 years, and I have served as chairman of the com-
mittee for the past 3. I am here today voluntarily to address issues
surrounding Enron’s 401(k) plan; however, I cannot address what
went wrong with Enron, and I cannot address the larger financial
and accounting issues that have been raised. My knowledge of
those issues is limited to what I have learned from the media.
   First, a few words about the Enron savings plan itself and the
investment options. The plan is a vehicle by which employees can
supplement their retirement savings by electing to defer from one
to 15 percent of their compensation, pre-tax, to an individual retire-
ment account. At present, employees have total choice over the
manner in which those savings will be invested.
   In this regard, the plan permits participants to allocate their
funds among 20 separate investment options and to make changes
if they so desire on a daily basis. One of those options includes the
ability to invest in Enron stock. It is my understanding that this
feature was included from the very beginning as part of the plan
design. Other options include a stable value fund and a variety of
fixed-income and equity funds of varying levels of risk and poten-
tial reward. Finally, employees are free to entirely self-direct their
investments through a separately maintained investment account
such as Charles Schwab.
   As the committee is also aware, over the years, Enron has also
made a matching contribution of company stock to participants in
the savings plan. This matching was reinstituted by the company
in 1998, and as a matter of plan design, the matching Enron stock
was restricted. Employees were not permitted to shift the match
from Enron to other investment options until they reached the age
of 50.
   Second, I would like to briefly comment on the Administrative
Committee. The committee is generally charged with overseeing
the administration of the savings plan. Its members are appointed
by the company and serve without compensation. The committee
effectively operates and functions like a board of directors. In per-
forming its duties, it is ably assisted by the Enron Benefits Depart-
ment. That department is responsible for the day-to-day details of
plan management and administration. The committee is also as-
sisted by professional investment consultants and legal counsel.

=== PAGE 75 ===
                                 71

   Throughout my tenure on the committee, it has typically met on
a quarterly basis, with additional and more frequent meetings as
circumstances require. The principal focus of the committee’s meet-
ings has been on investment-related matters, such as monitoring
the performance of the investment managers, and on the handling
of any participant benefit appeals that may arise.
   Specifically with respect to the savings plan, we viewed our
charge as assuring that adequate investment options were made
available to the participants for the diversification of their ac-
counts. However, the choice of those investments as among all
those vehicles was always with the participants.
   This concludes my statement. I look forward to your questions.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Thank you, Mr. Prentice.
   Ms. Munnell?
   Ms. MUNNELL. Senator Wellstone I am delighted to have the op-
portunity to talk about reforming the pension system in the wake
of Enron. I am afraid my comments are going to seem a little dry
after the losses that we have heard suffered by the rest of the
panel, but my hope is that we can make changes so that such trag-
edies do not happen again in the future.
   Since the focus of today’s hearing is Enron, I will devote most of
my comments to the immediate problem of diversification and em-
ployer stock. But I would also urge you in future hearings to look
at other aspects of 401(k) plans and at the pension system more
broadly. 401(k) plans have exploded in the last 20 years, and I
think it is really time to look carefully at both their strengths and
their weaknesses. It has become absolutely clear that the current
voluntary employer-based pension system is never going to cover
about 40 percent of all workers, and we should think of some other
mechanism to solve that problem.
   With regard to 401(k) plans in the wake of Enron, I would like
to make four points. First, the need for diversification argues
strongly for putting some limits on holding of company stock.
   Second, restrictions on selling employer stock should be elimi-
nated.
   Third, the question of ‘‘advice’’ bills raises a broader issue of
whether we want to the average person to become a financial guru
or whether we want to make investment in 401(k) plans simpler.
I would argue for simpler.
   Finally, for those who argue that we are trying to take away
freedoms, I want to emphasize a point made by Senator Corzine,
that these restrictions are limited to the tax-subsidized, employer-
provided pensions, and they are limited to vehicles that are aimed
at providing retirement income.
   Starting with the overinvestment issue, overinvestment in em-
ployer stock is not prudent. Not only are participants investing in
a single stock instead of many stocks, which raises their risk, but
they are also putting their investments where their earnings are.
Such concentration only increases risk and has no possibility of in-
creasing returns. Enron highlights the problem, but as people have
said all day long, Enron is not the only case—many large compa-
nies have much greater concentrations.
   Also, Enron is not the only company that has both had its stock
collapse and its employees lose jobs at the same time. We have had

=== PAGE 76 ===
                                 72

Lucent, we have had Polaroid. Arthur D. Little in Boston yesterday
declared bankruptcy, and its retirement plan is tied up with em-
ployer stock.
   The question is what to do. Senator Boxer and Corzine have sug-
gested limiting employer stock to 20 percent. That would solve the
diversification issue, but it does involve the question of coming in
and forcing employees to sell, perhaps just as their employer stock
has taken off.
   Another option is to put the limitation on contributions, limiting
contributions to 10 percent both on the employee and employer
side, or my preferred solution would be that if the employer pro-
vides employer stock as the match, just prohibit the employee from
investing his or her contribution in employer stock, or just, plan
prohibit employees from investing in common stock.
   The second issue with regard to employer stock is restrictions on
selling. Again, I think this makes it very difficult for employees to
diversify. These restrictions should be eliminated. The President’s
proposal on this sounds pretty good if it really means what it says,
which is that as soon as you are vested, after 3 years, you can sell
your employer stock, and if you get it 5 years later, you do not have
to wait at all; you have made this hurdle of a vesting period, and
you can sell at will.
   The third issue that has arisen—or, re-arisen, I guess is the way
to describe it—in the wake of Enron is the question of ‘‘advice’’ for
employees about their investment decisions. Right now, employers
can and do educate their workers, both on the necessity to save and
on some rudimentary financial issues. But those who support out-
side advice have something more extensive in mind. Essentially,
they want outside advisors to be allowed into the workplace to ad-
vise employees on their investment decisions.
   While at first blush, it may seem strange to question the desir-
ability of investment advice, I think it raises a fundamental issue
about how difficult we want the investment decisions faced by the
typical worker to be. My view is that 401(k) investing is simply too
hard, and we should make investment easier rather than turning
employees into investment experts.
   One way to solve the problem would be to provide tiers of op-
tions. It would be wonderful if employees enrolling in a 401(k) plan
were told that one of three alternatives meets the needs of most
workers—low risk, medium risk, or high risk packages. The em-
ployee would then answer a few simple questions to determine his
or her risk tolerance and sign onto one of these packages that
would be rebalanced over time, graded with their age, and they
would never have to think about it again. They would not be check-
ing the value of their stock every day. End of story.
   These packages would have Labor Department approval as pru-
dent—of course, with no guarantee of return—and employers who
offer these low, medium, and high packages would not be at peril
of litigation. The more sophisticated investor could say, ‘‘Those are
not for me; I want to have 20 options from Fidelity and 20 from
TIAA-CREF,’’ and they could have them, and the more daring
could have brokerage accounts.
   This tiered series of options, with the simple packages up front,
is not something I wish for other people. It is something that I

=== PAGE 77 ===
                                         73

would like for myself. It sends a message that people do not have
to become investment experts. They can coach their kids’ soccer
team, they can read a book, they can play tennis—they can spend
their lives doing normal, regular things.
   Enacting legislation that enables outside managers to enter the
workplace to offer advice sends a very different message. It says:
‘‘Investing 401(k) funds is a difficult task, and you had better study
up.’’
   So that while I support some form of mandatory diversification
for 401(k) plans, I think it is the most important thing to do and
an end to forced holding periods. It is not clear to me that the pro-
posed movement from education to advice is good for workers gen-
erally.
   Thank you.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Thank you very much.
   Mr. Salisbury?
   [The prepared statement of Ms. Munnell follows:]

                   PREPARED STATEMENT OF ALICIA H. MUNNELL
   Chairman Kennedy, Senator Gregg and Members of the Committee, I am de-
lighted to have the opportunity to testify today on the difficult issue of reforming
401(k) plans in the wake of the collapse of Enron. Since that is the focus of today’s
hearings, I will devote most of my comments to the immediate problem of employer
stock and diversification. But I would also urge you in future hearings to look at
other aspects of 401(k) plans and at the pension system more broadly. It is time
to assess both the strengths and weaknesses of 401(k)s, and to consider ways to
broaden pension coverage generally.
   With regard to 401(k) plans, let me make the following points.
   • First, the need for diversification argues strongly for placing some limits on in-
vestments in employer stock in 401(k) plans,
   • Second, restrictions on selling employer stock should be eliminated.
   • Third, the question of ‘‘advice’’ raises a broader issue of whether to make the
average employee into an investment expert or to simplify 401(k) investment op-
tions.
   • Finally, I want to emphasize that this discussion is targeted not at investments
generally, but at investments in tax-deferred savings vehicles aimed to provide re-
tirement income.
   With regard to more general concerns about 401(k) plans, voluntary participation
and contributions have meant that 25 percent of those eligible do not participate
and only 5 percent of participants contribute the maximum. Similarly, lump-sum
payments have encouraged younger workers to cash out when changing jobs and
have left retirees with the tough decisions about how to spread their money over
their retirement years. All these problems could be helped with well-designed de-
fault options.
   On the very broad issue of pension coverage, I would argue that expansion of the
employer-based system is both unlikely and probably not the best way to provide
additional retirement income for those at the lower end of the earnings distribution.
It is time to face this fact and to consider alternative ways to provide additional
retirement income for lower-paid workers.
   Let me elaborate on each of these points for a moment—starting with the imme-
diate Enron-related issues—and suggest some possible approaches for addressing
the problems.
I. Reforming 401(k) Plans in the Wake of Enron
   Enron raises three immediate issues about 401(k) plans. How much company
stock should be held in 401(k) plans? How long should employees be required to
hold that stock? And how much ‘‘advice’’ should employees be provided?
Over-Investment in Employer Stock
   Over-investment in employer stock is not prudent. Not only are participants con-
centrating their assets in a single stock, which is more risky than a diversified port-
folio, but they are investing in a security that is highly correlated with their own

=== PAGE 78 ===
                                          74
human capital. Such concentration raises the risks to employees with no comparable
increase in expected returns.
   Enron highlights a major problem of over-investment in employer stock. As of De-
cember 31, 2000, 62 percent of the assets in Enron’s 401(k) consisted of Enron stock.
But Enron is not alone. A recent study showed a number of large companies with
even greater concentrations—Procter and Gamble (94.7 percent), Sherwin Williams
(91.6 percent), and Pfizer (85.5 percent) to cite a few.
   Moreover, Enron is not the only company where employees lost their pension sav-
ing and their jobs simultaneously. In the past year, financial woes have erased bil-
lions in pension accounts at Lucent Technologies, Polaroid, and other companies just
as these woes forced massive layoffs.
   The question is what to do. I would argue for some mechanism that limits invest-
ments in company stock within the 401(k). Senators Boxer and Corzine have sug-
gested limiting 401(k) holdings of any stock to no more than 20 percent of total as-
sets. This proposal achieves the diversification goal, but it may well require employ-
ees to sell employer stock just as it takes off. An alternative option is to limit both
employee and employer contributions to 10 or 20 percent of the amount they are
contributing. This would help diversification, but would be less than perfect if the
stock did very well and employees did not rebalance their portfolios. Another alter-
native would be to prohibit employer stock as an investment alternative for employ-
ees if the company made its matching contribution in employer stock. No option is
perfect, but selecting one is superior to the current practice of allowing employers
and employees to load up 401(k)s with employer stock.
Selling Restrictions on Employer Stock
   The second aspect of employer stock is the holding period. Employers who contrib-
ute company stock as a matching contribution to 401(k) plans often place restric-
tions on selling that stock. These restrictions take the form of an age limit, such
as 50 in the case of Enron, or a requirement that employees hold it for a certain
period of time, such as 5 years. But again, Enron is not alone. Hewitt Associates
reports in a recent study that only 15 percent of firms that match with employer
stock allow their employees to sell immediately. A study by Fidelity Investments
found that only 4 percent permitted immediate sale (Purcell 2002).
   These holding restrictions limit the ability of employees to diversify their portfolio
and should be eliminated. One proposal offered by a working group of the Pension
and Welfare Benefits Advisory Council (1997) recommended that employees should
be able to sell their employer stock once they become vested in the plan. Since the
maximum period for cliff vesting of employer contributions in 401(k) plans is 3
years, one obvious proposal would be to allow employees to sell their stock imme-
diately upon receipt once they had been in the plan for 3 years. Just to be clear,
the 3 years is a onetime threshold to satisfy vesting, after employees cross that
threshold they can sell their employer stock at will.
Is ‘‘Advice’’ the Answer?
   A third issue that has arisen—or re-arisen—in the wake of Enron is the question
of ‘‘advice’’ for employees about their investment decisions. Employers can and do
already provide education about the importance of retirement saving and the rudi-
ments of investment options. Certainly, educating employees about the need for di-
versification and the risks of concentration is also an important goal, and perhaps
employers should be required to provide employees with such a statement, particu-
larly if they match with employer stock.
   Those who support outside advice have something more extensive in mind. Essen-
tially, outside advisers would be allowed into the workplace to advise employees on
their investment decisions. While, at first blush, it may seem strange to question
the desirability of investment advice, I think it raises a fundamental issue about
how difficult we want the investment decisions faced by the typical employee to be.
My view is that 401(k) investing is simply too hard, and we should make investment
easier rather than turn employees into investment experts.
   One way to solve the problem would be to provide tiers of options. It would be
wonderful if employees enrolling in a 401(k) plan were told that one of three alter-
native investment packages—low risk, medium risk, or high risk—meets the needs
of most people. Employees simply answer a few questions to determine their risk
tolerance and select one. End of story. These packages would have Labor Depart-
ment approval as prudent—of course, with no guarantee of return—and employers
who offer these low-medium-high packages would not be at peril of litigation if the
results were unfavorable.
   The more sophisticated investor or someone who wanted to participate more ac-
tively could ask for a second level of options with an array of funds from one, two,

=== PAGE 79 ===
                                        75
or even three providers. The truly daring could push even further for a brokerage
account of some sort.
  This tiered series of options with the simple packages up front is not something
I wish for other people; it is what I would like for myself. It sends a message that
people do not have to become investment experts, they can coach their kid’s soccer
team, play tennis or read a book instead. Enacting legislation that enables outside
managers to enter the workplace to offer advice sends a very different message. It
says ‘‘Investing 401(k) funds is a difficult task, and you better study up.’’
  Thus, while I support some form of mandatory diversification for 401(k) invest-
ments and an end to forced holding periods, I think the proposed movement from
education to advice may send the wrong signal.
Justification for Restrictions on 401(k) Investments
   Finally, let me respond to those who claim that mandatory diversification unfairly
restricts employees’ freedom. First, it is important to remember the limited and tar-
geted nature of the proposed provision. It is not aimed at employees’ investments
generally—although diversification is always a good idea—but rather at investments
in a tax-favored retirement program. Although 401(k) plans emerged somewhat acci-
dentally, the Federal government has contributed substantial resources in the form
of foregone revenues to their growth and success. These resources were contributed
to ensure that workers would have a second layer of protection in retirement beyond
Social Security. 401(k) plans cannot succeed in their mission if employees put all
their eggs in one basket. If employees want to make imprudent investments, they
should have to do it outside of the subsidized pension system.
   Moreover, mandatory diversification is not the first restriction put on 401(k) in-
vestments. Employees cannot withdraw money from 401(k) plans without penalty
before age 591⁄2, and can withdraw only for designated purposes. Mandatory diver-
sification is aimed at the same goal; ensuring that employees have the best chance
for a secure retirement.
   Finally, the benefits of diversifying pension fund investments have already been
recognized under ERISA. Current law limits employer stock to 10 percent of the
portfolio in conventional defined benefit pension plans. The diversification proposal
simply extends the protections to defined contribution plans.
II. Improving Pension Benefits in 401(k) Plans
   Let me move from the issue of employer stock to other troublesome aspects of
401(k) plans. Whereas 401(k) plans have some great strengths—they allow greater
portability for mobile workers, they do not encourage early retirement, they provide
a sense of ownership and control—they also create several types of problems that
do not arise with conventional defined benefit plans. The reason is that 401(k)-type
plans shift a substantial portion of the burden for providing for retirement to the
employee; the employee decides whether or not to participate, how much to contrib-
ute, how to invest the assets, and how to withdraw their funds each year during
retirement.
Optional Participation and Contributions
   Roughly 25 percent of those covered by a 401(k) plan elect not to participate, and
only 5 percent contribute the maximum. Part of the behavior can be explained by
the characteristics of workers themselves. Participation and the level of contribu-
tions tend to increase with the income, age, and education of the employee (Andrews
1992, EBRI 1994, and Bassett, Fleming, and Rodriguez 1998). People with longer
planning horizons—and presumably more interest in their retirement—also are
more likely to participate and contribute (Munnell, Sundén, and Taylor 2000).
   Plan structure and characteristics also are important. If employers offer a match,
workers are more likely to contribute. This is not surprising since the match pro-
vides a large initial return that supplements the advantage of deferral. It is not
clear, however, whether employees respond to the level of the match rate once a
positive match is provided. In addition, workers are more likely to participate and
contribute if they can gain access to their funds through borrowing. On the other
hand, workers are less likely to participate and contribute if they are also covered
by a defined benefit plan, and the more generous the defined benefit plan, the less
likely participation.
   What can be done to improve participation and encourage contributions? First, the
fact that individuals’ planning horizons are an important determinant suggests that
education about the importance of planning for retirement should improve both par-
ticipation and contributions. In fact, studies have shown that employer-provided in-
formation can be very important in changing employees’ attitudes about the neces-
sity of saving (Bernheim 1998 and Clark and Schieber 1998).

=== PAGE 80 ===
                                         76
  Second, research indicates that individuals’ behavior often reflects a surprising
amount of inertia, and that if employees are automatically enrolled in a plan, they
are more likely to participate than if they had to opt in (Madrian and Shea 2001).
In 1998 and 2000, the IRS issued regulations that permit employers to enroll em-
ployees automatically in 401(k)-type pension plans. Since the IRS issued its first
regulation, about 10 percent of 401(k) plan sponsors have adopted automatic enroll-
ment (Jacobious 2000 and Purcell 2001). A recent study found that although auto-
matically enrolled employees could opt out of the 401(k) plan, very few chose to do
so (Choi et. al. 2001). In short a combination of education, automatic enrollment,
and high default contribution rates is likely to increase participation and future
benefits.
Lump-Sum Payments
   The second problem with 401(k) plans is that they generally offer benefits as lump
sums rather than as annuities. Lump-sum payments make it difficult for retirees
to figure out how much to withdraw each year. The risk is that retirees either spend
too quickly and risk outliving their resources or spend too conservatively and under-
consume.
   Fortunately, a product exists that removes the risk of outliving resources or the
problem of lost consumption opportunities. A life annuity allows retirees to exchange
a pile of wealth for a stream of income that will be paid as long as the retiree lives.
Such payments ensure that retirees will not outlive their resources. They also en-
courage retirees to spend their accumulated funds and in fact provide a higher level
of income than retirees could receive in the absence of annuitization, in exchange
for making the receipt of income contingent upon living. Unfortunately, according
to the Employee Benefit Survey for Medium and Large Firms, in 1997 only 27 per-
cent of 401(k) plan participants had an option to choose a life annuity as their meth-
od of distribution and that percentage is likely to decline in the future.
   Of course, retirees could withdraw their money as a lump sum from the plan and
then purchase an annuity from an insurance company. But this rarely happens. Re-
cent research has suggested a number of reasons why retirees do not purchase an-
nuities. First, annuity prices are not actuarially fair; the company needs to cover
administrative costs and profits, and those with longer life expectancies are more
likely to buy the product. In fact, the net present value of future annuity payments
for a 65-year-old male in 1995 was about 80 percent of the required premium; 10
percent was due to mortality differences and 10 percent due to administrative costs
(Mitchell et. al. 1999). Second, people may want to leave a bequest, which would
reduce the incentive to annuitize at retirement. Third, families may provide a cer-
tain amount of self-insurance among themselves. Fourth, people may not want to
give up flexibility if they are concerned about future expenses, such as uninsured
medical expenses or long-term care. Finally, people appear not to understand the
benefits of annuitization; they tend to focus on the risk of dying early and receiving
less than they paid in and ignore the possibility of living longer than expected and
receiving much more than they paid (Brown 2000).
   Given the low likelihood that people will annuitize on their own, the form of dis-
tribution from 401(k) plans becomes very important. My view is that annuities—
preferably a joint and survivor annuity—should be the default option in 401(k)
plans. This would force the participants to affirmatively select an alternative dis-
tribution option. Given the importance of inertia, making annuities the default
would almost certainly increase annuitization rates, yet leave participants with the
freedom to choose other distribution methods.
III. Expanding Coverage for Low and Moderate Earners
   In 1999, only 50 percent of private sector workers aged 25–64 participated in an
employer-sponsored pension. The coverage rate has remained virtually unchanged
since 1979, even though 1979 was the end of a decade of stagnation and 1999 was
the height of the longest expansion in the post-war period. Participation in a pen-
sion plan is closely correlated with earnings levels. In the top quintile of the earn-
ings distribution, about 70 percent of workers—both male and female—participate
in pensions; in the bottom quintile, that figure drops to about 20 percent for men
and 10 percent for women.
   The lack of pension income for low-wage workers would not be a source of concern
if Social Security provided enough income for them to maintain their pre-retirement
standard of living. Most observers, however, conclude that Social Security alone is
inadequate when viewed either in terms of replacement rates or in relation to pov-
erty thresholds. The question is how to provide additional pension protection to low-
income workers.

=== PAGE 81 ===
                                         77
   After nearly 60 years, it is obvious that the current system is not structured to
provide much to the bottom 40 percent and is unlikely to do a significantly better
job in the future. Moreover, it is unclear whether an expansion of the employer-
based system is desirable. Some advocates for extended pension coverage argue as
if private pensions were a way for employers to give something to their employees.
Economists typically maintain, however, that the introduction of a pension implies
a reduction in cash compensation. It does not make sense to increase the pensions—
and thereby reduce the wages—of these low-earning workers. The only reasonable
way to improve retirement benefits for low-income households such as these is to
increase their lifetime income through some redistributive device, not through the
extension of employer-provided pension plans.
   People at the low end of the wage distribution ($20,000 or under, indexed for wage
growth) should receive their retirement income directly from the government and
should be excludable from the employer-sponsored pension system (Munnell and
Halperin 2002). This program could be financed by general revenues, but it also
seems reasonable to place more of the burden on those now enjoying tax-subsidized
savings. The specifics of the proposal are less important at this point than recogniz-
ing that a significant portion of the population is never going to gain coverage under
the existing employer-based system.
IV. Conclusion
   Let me conclude. The collapse of Enron and the loss of employee 401(k) money
have brought the issue of diversification and employer stock to the fore. Given that
401(k)s are tax-subsidized plans to ensure a secure retirement, they should be lim-
ited to prudent investments. Allowing employees to put all their eggs in one basket
is not prudent, and Congress should enact mandatory diversification provisions to
avoid such concentration. Also, existing provisions that prevent employees from sell-
ing employer stock make it difficult for employees to diversify their portfolios, and
they should be repealed.
   But I would urge this Committee to go beyond the issue of employer stock. 401(k)
plans have exploded in the last 20 years and are due for a thorough review. These
plans have many strengths, but their voluntary nature often produces less than op-
timal results. Leaving 401(k) participation and contribution decisions to employees
has created a situation where roughly one quarter do not join the plan, and only
5 percent contribute the maximum. Lump-sum payments mean that individuals face
outliving their resources or depriving themselves in retirement. The solution to all
these problems appears to be taking advantage of individual inertia and setting the
defaults to the desired outcome. That is, force individuals to opt out rather than into
plans, set high default contribution rates, and make annuities the default form of
payout. Such changes would produce the best outcome for most people, and leave
others free to choose an alternative option.
   Finally, pension solutions for low-income workers may have to be found outside
the traditional employer-sponsored pension system. The existing system has been in
place for a long time and has made little progress in coverage for low and moderate
earners. I do not see any reason to think that the situation will improve in the fu-
ture. Moreover, low earners can ill afford to sacrifice current earnings in exchange
for future pension benefits. My view is that the best way to increase the retirement
income for this group is through a government-sponsored program that increases
their lifetime income.
   Thank you so much for the opportunity to appear today, and I would be delighted
to answer any questions you might have.
                                     REFERENCES

Agnew, Julie Richardson, 2001. ‘‘Inefficient Choices in 401(k) Plans: Evidence from
  Individual Level Data.’’ Ph.D. Dissertation. Boston College.
Bassett, William F., Michael J. Fleming, and Anthony P. Rodrigues. 1998. ‘‘How
  Workers Use 401(k) Plans: The Participation, Contribution, and Withdrawal Deci-
  sions,’’ Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report, No. 38 (March).
Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1998. ‘‘Financial Illiteracy, Education, and Retirement Sav-
  ing.’’ In Living with Defined Contribution Plans, edited by Olivia S. Mitchell and
  Sylvester J. Schieber. Philadelphia, PA: Pension Research Council and the Uni-
  versity of Pennsylvania Press.
Brown, Jeffrey R. 2000. ‘‘How Should We Insure Longevity Risk in Pensions and So-
  cial Security?’’ An Issue in Brief, Center for Retirement Research at Boston Col-
  lege.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, Andrew Metrick. 2001. ‘‘For Better
  or For Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior’’ NBER Working Paper
  8651 (December).

=== PAGE 82 ===
                                        78
Clark, Robert L., Gordon P. Goodfellow, Sylvester J. Schieber, and Drew A. War-
  wick. 2000. ‘‘Making the Most of 401(k) plans: Who’s Choosing What and Why.’’
  In Forecasting Retirement Needs and Retirement Wealth, edited by Olivia S.
  Mitchell, Brett Hammond, and Anna M. Rappaport. Philadelphia, PA: Pension Re-
  search Council and the University of Pennsylvania Press.
Grad, Susan. 1990. ‘‘Earnings Replacement Rates of Newly Retired Workers.’’ Social
  Security Bulletin 53 (October): 2–19.
Halperin, Daniel I. and Alicia H. Munnell, 2002. ‘‘How Should the Private Pension
  System Be Reformed?’’ in The Future of the Private Pension System. Washington
  D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, forthcoming.
Institute of Management and Administration, 2001. ‘‘Enron Debacle Will Force
  Clean Up Of Company Stock Use in DC Plans.’’ DC Plan Investing (December).
Jacobious, Arleen. 2000. ‘‘401(k) Saving Isn’t Automatic.’’ Pensions and Investments,
  28 (16).
Kusko, Andrea L., James M. Poterba, and David W. Wilcox. 1998. ‘‘Employee Deci-
  sions with Respect to 401(k) Plans,’’ in Living with Defined Contribution Plans,
  edited by Olivia S. Mitchell and Sylvester J. Schieber. Philadelphia, PA: Pension
  Research Council and the University of Pennsylvania Press.
Madrian, Brigitte C. and Dennis F. Shea, 2001. ‘‘The Power of Suggestion: Inertia
  in 401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior.’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics
  116(4): 1149–87.
Mitchell, Olivia, James M. Poterba, Mark J. Warshawsky, and Jeffrey R. Brown.
  1999. ‘‘New Evidence on the Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities.’’ American
  Economic Review.
Munnell, Alicia H., Annika Sundén, and Catherine Taylor. 2000. ‘‘What Determines
  401(k) Participation and Contributions,’’ Center for Retirement Research Working
  Paper 2000–12.
Papke, Leslie E. 1995. ‘‘Participation in and Contributions to 401(k) Plans: Evidence
  from Plan Data.’’ Journal of Human Resources 30 (2): 311–25.
Purcell, Patrick J. 2002, ‘‘The Enron Bankruptcy and Employer Stock in Retirement
  Plans,’’ CRS Report for Congress. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Serv-
  ice.
PWBA Advisory Council on Employee Welfare and Pension Benefits Plans. 1997.
  ‘‘Report of the Working Group on Employer Assets in ERISA Employer-Sponsored
  Plans’’ http://www.dol.gov/pwba/public/adcoun/acemer.htm.
  Mr. SALISBURY. Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, thank
you. It is a pleasure to be here.
  Since my full statement will be in the record, I will dispense with
the reading of my testimony and simply offer a few brief comments
on some of what has been raised today.
  First, I wish to underline, particularly based on the tragic stories
that we have heard today, that this is not a 401(k) crisis, and this
is not a retirement crisis. This is a crisis related to corporate
wrongdoing, fraud, and criminal charges.
  In fact, 338,000 401(k) plans do not include company stock and
are quite secure today. Two thousand 401(k) plans do include com-
pany stock, and in addition, there are about 8,000 employee stock
ownership plans.
  Second, where employer stock is present, few workers actually
concentrate their assets. Mr. Corzine mentioned the number of 43
percent employer stock in firms with more than 5,000 employees;
that number is actually 26 percent. Fifty-three percent of partici-
pants actually have less than 20 percent of their money in company
stock; 73 percent less than 50 percent; only 27.5 percent have more
than 50 percent of their assets in company stock out of those 2,000
plans.
  The chart that was shown is accurate data, but it is exceptional
in that it points out the small number of companies that also gen-
erally provide a defined benefit pension plan plus Social Security,
plus very frequently, retiree medical benefits and pay wages that

=== PAGE 83 ===
                                  79

are well above market averages, and this is in fact part of diver-
sification, if you will, in a broad sense.
   Third, as we have heard the tragic stories and outcomes today,
we must not lose sight of a balance issue. There are literally mil-
lions of Americans retired today exclusively because they did not
diversify—individuals who retired with millions over time from
Proctor and Gamble, from IBM, and numerous other companies.
This does not argue against diversification. It is simply to under-
line that there are balance issues here. If this is a 401(k) crisis, the
question is: Would not many of the companies on that chart today
have already experienced massive movement by their employees
out of the stock of that company?
   And as with Enron, as reported by the Congressional Research
Service, 11 percent of the corporate stock was there by demand of
the company; 89 percent was there by the free choice of the individ-
ual participant. I do not say that as a criticism of the participants’
decisionmaking, but this in essence goes to the core of the issue
that this is more about employee choice and regulation of employee
choice than other issues.
   Fourth, the type of diversification that Ms. Munnell mentioned
is present in other plans, was present in the Enron plan, and is
very common.
   Fifth, on the question of Senator Kennedy regarding individual
brokerage windows and could the Enron employees purchase any
stock they wished, the answer, Senator, is yes. They had an open
window, as do the participants in my 401(k) plan, as do the partici-
pants in a large number of the 401(k) plans on that chart, and
those individuals could in fact choose to buy 100 percent of some-
body else’s company, so to speak, through the existing plan.
   Finally, if one looks at the general issue of what has been deliv-
ered through the overall system, I would simply emphasize that
the growing trend toward employee choice in this program has
largely been demanded and frequently demanded by employees
themselves. One company in Boston, for example, Raytheon, had a
restriction on the amount of stock that an employee could hold, and
underdemand of the workers eliminated that restriction, and they
moved to a free choice mode.
   Implementation of a dollar limit or a percentage limit adminis-
tratively, I would add, would be far more difficult to deal with than
simply deciding you cannot have company stock. The worst possible
situation I can imagine is somebody who has 19 or 21 percent in
company stock, the stock just starts to automatically go through
the roof because of some technological advance or otherwise, and
the law has said they have to be liquidated by the computer auto-
matically. I do not think that would make the individual happy; he
or she would be better off, frankly, not to have had the opportunity
in the first place.
   Finally and in conclusion, I would note that on the lockdown
issue and the administrative issue, while I hate to suggest that
technology has not become totally magical, the statement of earlier
members of the panel that technology would allow money to be
transferred very quickly is absolutely correct. It can be done in a
flash. The reason for lockdowns or blackouts is not because of the
difficulty of transferring money; it is the transfer of millions or tens

=== PAGE 84 ===
                                         80

of thousands of individual account records. With the money trans-
fer, the problem is the inability to make the other adjustments;
that does in fact take more time than the flash of electronic record-
keeping.
  Thank you.
  [The prepared statement of Mr. Salisbury follows:]
                  PREPARED STATEMENT OF DALLAS L. SALISBURY
   Mr. Chairmen and Members of the Committee: I am Dallas Salisbury, president
and CEO of the Employee Benefit Research Institute (EBRI), a nonprofit research
and education organization founded in Washington, DC in 1978. EBRI does not
lobby or advocate for or against legislative proposals. Our work is intended to assist
in evaluating present policies and the possible results of proposals made by others.
   I was pleased to accept the invitation of the Committee to join this important
hearing on retirement security. My first testimony before this Committee was in
1981, on the same topic. At that time, the issue was the solvency of the Pension
Benefit Guaranty Corporation and the future of defined benefit pension plans. Be-
cause that program is solvent, retirees and vested employees of Enron should know
that they will be paid benefits due from the Enron Defined Benefit Pension Plan,
up to the maximum guaranteed amount of $3,392.05 per month ($40,704.60 per
year) (see www.pbgc.gov for details of phase-ins, reductions for early retirement,
and other adjustments), should the plan ultimately have to be terminated and taken
over by the PBGC. This will not fully protect the pensions of highly paid workers,
but the rank and file will be secure.
   Defined benefit plans, as other witnesses have noted, are primarily sponsored by
employers that are large, with higher paid or unionized work forces. I would add
that they are confident of profitability. The total number of participants protected
by the PBGC has increased about 30 percent since the program was established in
1975, while the labor force has grown more quickly. My elderly parents in Everett,
WA, are better off than they would otherwise be due to the defined benefit pension
checks that resulted from my father spending 30 years with an employer that had
a defined benefit plan.
   My 1981 testimony noted that our tax laws began to encourage the development
of defined contribution plans in the 1920s. The primary emphasis then was on prof-
it-sharing plans that allow flexibility of contributions based upon the economic per-
formance of the employer, and flexibility for the employee in deciding whether to
fully defer contributions. The primary growth of defined benefit plans took place
during the Korean War wage price controls when the government ruled that in-
creased pension contributions would not count as wage increases. Large private em-
ployers have historically had both defined benefit and defined contribution plans,
while small employers have historically had only defined contribution plans. EBRI
small employer retirement surveys have documented the reasons for this preference,
and the reasons that most small employers provide no retirement savings plan.
Most prominent are the employees’ desire for cash and the lack of profitability of
the enterprise. EBRI Value of Benefits surveys and our Retirement Confidence Sur-
veys have documented that workers have a strong preference for defined contribu-
tion plans, as they build an account with contributions that are proportional to pay,
they are easy to understand, they are fully portable when the worker changes jobs,
and they provide a feeling of control. The Federal Government reduced the value
of its own defined benefit plan by 40 percent and established the Thrift Savings
Plan (TSP) in the early 1980s, for many similar reasons: employee appreciation,
greater value delivered to shorter service employees, predictable cost for the em-
ployer, and neutrality relative to employee mobility as compared with the ‘‘golden
handcuffs’’ of defined benefit pension plans. Participation in defined contribution
plans has grown by more than 300 percent since the passage of ERISA.
   Growth of the 401(k) plan was celebrated by many over the past several years
as account balances grew and the plans created new individual wealth. It has been
questioned by others. The numbers indicate that the growth of 401(k) plans has led
to more financial education in the workplace, with more employers facilitating ac-
cess to investment advice as well. My in-laws in West Hampstead, NH are better
off that they would otherwise be today due to the defined contribution plan that my
mobile father-in-law had during his last decade of employment.
   EBRI provides an interesting example of plan formation decision-making. EBRI
was founded in 1978 by 13 actuarial consulting firms. This group was joined by
group insurance companies, investment management firms, labor unions, multi-em-

=== PAGE 85 ===
                                          81
ployer pension, health and welfare plans, and business corporations that sponsored
pension, health, and welfare plans for their employees. The common element: a be-
lief in the provision of economic security benefits to workers and the value of spon-
soring research and data collection to facilitate understanding the programs. These
firms were all strong supporters of defined benefit plans, yet they would not estab-
lish a defined benefit plan for the employees of EBRI. Instead, they established an
employer funded defined contribution (money purchase) plan in 1979 to which EBRI
contributes 8 percent of pay for each employee and a 401(k) plan in 1983 in which
EBRI will watch the first 4 percent of contribution at a 100 percent rate. They had
a number of reasons for doing defined contribution: (1) the annual cost could be
budgeted and did not change with the economy; (2) EBRI might or not be around
for the decades necessary to provide meaningful benefits from a defined benefit
plan; (3) EBRI might or might not end up with long-service employees who would
benefit from a defined benefit plan; (4) the 401(k) plan allowed EBRI employees to
save added dollars if they wanted to do so; and (5) the matching contribution could
provide an incentive for employees to do so. The decision was made to go with de-
fined contribution for these reasons, even though (1) a defined benefit plan would
have been less costly to operate; (2) less costly over time in terms of contributions;
and (3) could have included lump-sum distributions so that departing employees did
not have to be tracked after leaving. These issues are common to many small- and
medium-size employers. As in so many aspects of life, one ‘‘size’’ does not fit all. At
the point ERISA was enacted in 1974, for example, there were approximately
200,000 defined contribution plans and 100,000 defined benefit plans, underlining
differences in employer decision making. Today there are approximately 800,000 de-
fined contribution plans and 60,000 defined benefit plans.
401(k) Prevalence
   Studies based upon the EBRI/ICI Participant-Directed Retirement Plan Data Col-
lection Project for the past five years document points that are central to retirement
security. This database is representative of the universe of 401(k) plans. The U.S.
Department of Labor, and others, provide data updates on the full plan universe:
   • There are an estimated 43 million participants in an estimated 340,000 401(k)
plans, with an estimated total of about $1.7 trillion in assets. Actual universe counts
lag by several years, making estimates necessary. 401(k) plans have a wide range
of designs, but most differ from that of the Enron 401(k) plan as most do not include
company stock.
   401(k) accounts grew dramatically from 1983 until 1999. With the decline in the
equity markets in 2000, the average account balance of workers in plans in both
1999 and 2000 declined by an average of one-tenth of one percent, largely as a re-
sult of new contributions being made and diversification of plan assets through the
selection of professionally managed funds provided by financial institutions. We are
now beginning to review data from 2001, but expect a small average decline for a
second year. EBRI’s November 2001 Issue Brief provides detail on investment alloca-
tion, account balances, and multiple other issues (see www.ebri.org.)
Company Stock
   The incidence of company stock in 401(k) plans has been analyzed extensively as
part of the EBRI/ICI Participant-Directed Retirement Plan Data Collection Project
for the past five years. A special report published by EBRI last week looks at the
company stock issue. The most recent information published in November 2001 ap-
plies to year-end 2000 account balances and shows that:
   • The aggregate percentage of 401(k) assets that are in company stock is equal
to 19 percent and has stayed constant over the last five years.
   • Where company stock is offered as either an employer match and/or an em-
ployee investment option, 32 percent of plan assets are in company stock if the plan
sponsor does not offer a GIC (guaranteed investment contract, a stable-value invest-
ment) and 28 percent if it does.
   • Where employer matching contributions are provided in the form of company
stock, 33 percent of employee-directed deferrals are in company stock. But where
company stock is not the match (but is available as an investment), 22 percent of
employee deferrals are in company stock. These numbers suggest that employees
view company stock as a desirable option.
   Although the topic of company stock investment in 401(k) plans has recently been
the focus of considerable interest, the concept of preferred status for employee own-
ership has been part of the U.S. tax code for more than 80 years. When the Em-
ployee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) was passed in 1974, it required that
fiduciaries diversify plan investments for defined benefit plans and some types of
defined contribution plans. However, there is an exception for ‘‘eligible individual ac-

=== PAGE 86 ===
                                         82
count plans’’ that invest in ‘‘qualifying employer securities.’’ An Employer Stock
Ownership Plan (ESOP) normally qualifies for this exception, as do profitsharing
plans.
   Congress has acted repeatedly over the last 40 years to provide incentives for em-
ployee ownership. Former Senator Russell Long (D–Louisiana) was the primary
champion of the provisions, believing that employee ownership was a form of worker
democracy and ‘‘gainsharing’’ as employers grew and prospered. Employee owner-
ship has also been shown to align employee, management and shareholder objec-
tives, resulting in greater productivity and growth. Employers like Procter & Gam-
ble have relied upon profit sharing and employee ownership as the retirement pro-
gram for decades, and new economy firms like Microsoft and Sun Microsystems
have done the same. Employers match employee contributions in 401(k) plans as a
means of encouraging participation, and some employers match in company stock
to meet an employee ownership objective. Provisions enacted as recently as 2001 in
EGTRRA related to the deduction of dividends paid to shares held in an ESOP have
served to communicate to employees and employers that government policy seeks
to encourage employee stock ownership.
   EBRI’s recent Special Report on company stock (see www.ebri.org) notes that
profitsharing plans with cash or deferred arrangements (more commonly referred to
as 401(k) plans) grew from virtually no plans in 1983 to a point where by 1997 (the
most recent year for which government data are currently available) they accounted
for 37 percent of qualified private retirement plans, 48 percent of active employees,
and 65 percent of new contributions.
   Enron had a defined benefit pension plan, matched employee contributions with
company stock, and restricted diversification until after the age of 50. At Enron,
57.73 percent of 401(k) plan assets were invested in company stock, which fell in
value by 98.8 percent during 2001.
   To produce the Special Report on company stock, initiated as a result of a high
number of inquiries following the collapse of Enron, on Jan. 15, 2002, a fax-back
survey was sent to 3,346 members of the International Society of Certified Employee
Benefit Specialists (ISCEBS). Respondents were asked to respond by Jan. 23 and
to answer the questions for the largest (in terms of participants) client they worked
for (if they were a consultant or service provider for 401(k) plans); otherwise, they
were asked to answer for the firm that they were employed by. The survey was de-
signed, fielded, and analyzed by Professor Jack VanDerhei of Temple University,
who also serves as research director of the EBRI Fellows Program. The full report
is an appendix to this testimony.
   VanDerhei notes in the report: ‘‘Presumably, any recommendations to modify cur-
rent pension law would attempt to strike a balance between protecting employees
and not deterring employers from offering employer matches to 401(k) plans. Some
have argued that if Congress were to regulate 401(k) plans too heavily, plan spon-
sors might choose to decrease employer contributions or not offer them at all. Pre-
vious research has shown that the availability and level of a company match is a
primary impetus for at least some employees to make contributions to their 401(k)
account. Others have argued that individuals should have the right to invest their
money as they see fit.
   ‘‘This survey was conducted in an attempt to provide a context to the current de-
bate on company stock in a timely fashion, and it is not a statistically representa-
tive survey of the 401(k) industry; rather, this survey is a nonrandom polling of ben-
efits professionals who are knowledgeable about the subject matter and able to re-
spond to the survey quickly.’’
Company Stock: Availability and Percentage of Average Asset Allocation
   • 48 percent of the respondents to this survey reported a company stock invest-
ment option in their client/employer’s 401(k) plan.
   • Large plans (defined as those with 5,000 or more employees) are much more
likely to have a company stock option in the 401(k) plan: the large plans had this
option 73 percent of the time vs. 32 percent for small plans (defined as those with
fewer than 5,000 employees).
   • Among those plans that have a company stock option, the average percentage
of company stock in the employees’ 401(k) account breaks down as follows: Less
than 10 percent (39 percent); 10–50 percent (42 percent); more than 50 percent (18
percent).
   • Large plans have a higher average percentage of company stock in the employ-
ees’ 401(k) account

=== PAGE 87 ===
                                          83
Employer Contributions: Investment in Company Stock and Restrictions on Sale
  • 43 percent of those having a company stock investment option in the 401(k)
plan reported that employer contributions were required to be invested in company
stock.
  • Among those plans that have a company stock option, large plans are more like-
ly to require employer contributions to be invested in company stock: 49 percent of
large plans vs. 38 percent of small plans.
  • Of the 401(k) plans where employer contributions were required to be invested
in company stock:
     • 13 percent reported no restrictions existed for selling the company stock.
     • 27 percent reported that they were restricted throughout a participant’s in-
     vestment in the plan.
     • 60 percent reported that they were restricted until a specified age and/or
     service requirement is met.
Limitations on Company Stock That May Be Held by an Employee
  • 14 percent of those having a company stock investment option in the 401(k)
plan reported that they limited the amount or percentage of company stock that em-
ployees may hold in their 401(k) plan.
Blackouts
   • 74 percent of the respondents’ plans have undergone a blackout.
   • Of those that have undergone a blackout, the distribution of the blackout period
follows:
     • No delay/overnight/over weekend, 3 percent.
     • Between one day and two weeks, 27 percent.
     • Between two weeks and one month, 39 percent.
     • Between one month and two months, 26 percent.
     • More than two months, 5 percent.
Impact of Defined Benefit Sponsorship
   • It is more likely for there to be a company stock investment option in the 401(k)
plan if there is also a defined benefit plan: 60 percent of those with a defined benefit
plan vs. 35 percent of those without.
   • Employer contributions are more likely to be required to be invested in com-
pany stock if there is also a defined benefit plan: 50 percent of those with a defined
benefit plan vs. 33 percent of those without.
   • It is more likely for restrictions to exist on selling the company stock if there
is also a defined benefit plan.
Respondents’ Perceptions on Appropriate Limits and the Role of Government
  • When asked what they thought was the maximum percentage of company stock
any employee SHOULD hold in his or her 401(k) portfolio, the distribution of re-
sponses was.
     • 4 percent of the respondents thought it should be zero.
     • 39 percent replied with no more than 10 percent.
     • 38 percent replied with no more than 20 percent.
     • 9 percent replied with no more than 50 percent.
     • 9 percent did not know.
  • When respondents whose client/employer did not require employer contributions
to be invested in company stock were asked if they thought the government should
limit the plan sponsor’s ability to mandate that matching contributions to a 401(k)
plan be invested in company stock, 66 percent of the respondents said yes, 29 per-
cent said no, and 5 percent did not know. However, when respondents whose client/
employer did require employer contributions to be invested in company stock were
asked if they thought the government should limit the plan sponsor’s ability to man-
date that matching contributions to a 401(k) plan be invested in company stock, 38
percent of the respondents said yes, 61 percent said no, and 2 percent did not know.
  • When asked if they thought the government should limit the employees’ ability
to invest their own (participant-directed) contributions to a 401(k) plan in company
stock, 32 percent said yes, 63 percent said no, and 5 percent did not know.
Respondents’ Perceptions on Public Policy Issues Related to Company Stock in 401(k)
     Plans
  • Respondents were fairly evenly split on whether they thought there was an in-
herent conflict of interest when a plan sponsor includes company stock as an option
in their 401(k) plan.

=== PAGE 88 ===
                                         84
   • The vast majority of respondents (83 percent) strongly agreed that plan spon-
sors that offer company stock as an investment option should advise their employees
to diversify.
   • Respondents were fairly evenly split on whether they thought ERISA should be
revised to require pension plan diversification or participant direction if an em-
ployee is over-invested in company stock.
   • The majority of respondents (58 percent) agreed that problems resulting from
employees investing their own contributions in company stock would be mitigated
if employers were allowed to provide independent financial advice to their employ-
ees. Only 27 percent of the respondents disagreed with this statement.
   • The majority of respondents (56 percent) did not agree that 401(k) plan spon-
sors should be allowed to mandate that matching contributions be invested in com-
pany stock, while 39 percent agreed, and 5 percent were neutral.
   • More than 3 in 5 respondents (62 percent) did not agree that 401(k) plan spon-
sors should be allowed to restrict the sale of company stock they contributed on be-
half of the participants as long as they are employees. 29 percent of the respondents
agreed and 9 percent were neutral.
Respondents’ Perception of the Impact of Various Legal/Legislative Developments
   • Nearly one-half (47 percent) of respondents thought the most likely reaction to
a successful class action suit alleging fiduciaries failed in their obligation to cease
using company stock as the form of the matching contribution prior to the firm’s
bankruptcy would be to discontinue the use of company stock as the form of match-
ing contribution or as an investment option.
   • More than one-half (52 percent) of the respondents thought that the most likely
reaction to a successful class action suit alleging fiduciaries ‘‘pushed’’ the company
stock on employees through the 401(k) plan would be to discontinue the use of com-
pany stock as the form of matching contribution or as an investment option.
   • Nearly 7 in 10 respondents (69 percent) thought that the most likely reaction
to a legislative change reducing the deduction for matching contributions in the
form of employer securities to 50 percent would be either to discontinue the use of
company stock as the form of matching contribution or as an investment option, or
to decrease the matching contributions.
   • Approximately one-third of the respondents (37 percent) thought that the most
likely reaction to a legislative change requiring immediate transfer availability for
company stock for employees after 90 days would be either to discontinue the use
of company stock as the form of matching contribution or as an investment option,
or to decrease the matching contributions. However, another 35 percent thought
that there would be no reaction.
   • Nearly one-half (47 percent) of respondents thought there would be no reaction
to a legislative change limiting to 20 percent the investment an employee can have
in any one stock in his or her individual account plan. Another 28 percent thought
that this would cause plan sponsors either to discontinue the use of company stock
as the form of matching contribution or as an investment option, or decrease the
matching contributions.
Employee Education
   ERISA and its implementing regulations seek to assure extensive employee edu-
cation. Sec. 404(c) of ERISA sets forth the types of conditions a plan sponsor must
meet in order to allow a participant to exercise control over his or her participant-
directed individual account. Providing sufficient information to make an informed
investment decision is one of the requirements. The regulations do not set forth ei-
ther ‘‘bright line’’ tests or offer a ‘‘safe harbor,’’ but many employers have sought
to meet what they believe to be required in an effort in the hope that it will reduce
their fiduciary exposure. Interpretive Bulletin 96–1 provided additional guidance in-
tended to increase the amount of participant investment education delivered to par-
ticipants. A recent opinion letter issued to SunAmerica, like a number of previous
actions of the Department of Labor, was aimed at increasing the provision of invest-
ment advice to plan participants, in addition to education. Technology has facilitated
the delivery of both education and advice to plan sponsors and participants that de-
sire it. Legal provisions provide special exceptions for employee stock ownership in
defined contribution plans from normal rules related to diversification and employee
direction.
   Congress enacted the SAVER Act in 1997 to encourage savings and investment
education. The first SAVER Summit was held in 1998, and the second will be held
the end of this month. Inspired by the passage of SAVER, EBRI worked with part-
ners to form the Choose to Save public service announcement program in 1997.
Those public service announcements, plus four Choose to Save specials, have now

=== PAGE 89 ===
                                          85
taken messages of savings, compound interest, debt management, diversification,
and more, to viewers in 49 states (see www.choosetosave.org). The National Associa-
tion of Broadcasters, AP News Radio, ABC, CBS, Bonneville Radio, and others have
worked together to expand the program in each of the last five years (Fidelity In-
vestments has underwritten production and distribution of the program).
   The Retirement Confidence Survey has been used to assess the level of financial
education and preparation, attitudes toward retirement and savings, and what edu-
cation approaches are valued and used by workers. Over the 11 years of the survey,
we have seen steady movement toward more saving and retirement preparation, but
the survey clearly documents that there is much more to be done.
   While the surveys find that the public places very high-value on Social Security
and Medicare, it also underlines the public’s desire for control of their own savings
and investing.
Conclusion
   Since the Bureau of Labor Statistics began a data series on job tenure in 1952,
median job tenure for the total labor force has remained near four years. In spite
of this short median tenure, about a quarter of all workers ages 55-64 report having
spent 20 or more years with one employer, but that means 75 percent have not. For
long-service workers defined benefit pension plans can provide meaningful benefits.
For short-service workers defined contribution plans will do a better job of accumu-
lating retirement income if the worker chooses to participate and contributes over
many years. For both types of plans an essential element is saving the money upon
any job change, obtaining good investment results, and spending the funds at a rate
that keeps them from running out. Most defined contribution plans, including the
federal Thrift Savings Plan (TSP), provide the option of lump-sum distributions. A
growing number of defined benefit plans provide a lump-sum option as well upon
job change, including the Federal employee defined benefit plan. Those with both
types of plans have the opportunity for the best of both, but also face the risks and
responsibilities of both. As noted above, when both types of plans are offered in the
private sector, there is a greater likelihood of company stock being used in the
401(k).
   The relevance of Enron for 401(k) participants in the estimated 338,000 plans
without company stock matches, is that it sends a message about the value of diver-
sification. For participants in the estimated 2,000 plans that match with company
stock, it is a more powerful message of diversification for the funds contributed by
the employee and for assets outside the 401(k) plan. Diversification is a function of
all assets and income sources. The presence of Social Security allows investors cov-
ered by this program (nearly 99 percent of the labor force) to take higher risks in
their investments. The presence of a defined benefit plan allows a participant to
take higher risks in their 401(k) plan. The Internet allows access to financial tools
for education and advice undreamed of 20 years ago. Growing life expectancy and
longer retirements make it increasingly essential that our citizens be financially lit-
erate, that they understand investing, and that they understand how quickly they
can spend funds in order to not outlive them. The public and private sectors are
working together to increase financial literacy, to distribute those tools, and to in-
crease their use. A silver lining of Enron is the attention being given to education,
advice, diversification, financial literacy, and other financial education issues. There
is a great deal to be done, but programs like Choose to Save can make a difference.
A negative is the suggestion that Enron means that the entire 401(k) system is in
‘‘crisis,’’ because that is not true. As we deal with Enron, we must take care not
to inappropriately undermine confidence in 401 (k), IRA, and other programs, which
are sound for the vast majority of participants.
   Thank you for the invitation to testify today on this important topic. I would be
pleased to take questions now, and to respond to written questions following the
hearing.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  Mr. Prentice, as the chairman of the Administrative Committee,
you and the other members of the committee are the fiduciaries
under ERISA, and you are all required to discharge your duties
with respect to the plan solely in the interest of the participants
and beneficiaries.
  Disturbingly, the Enron executives sold over $1 billion in stock
while Enron workers lost over $1 billion of their retirement. On
Tuesday, your colleague on the Administrative Committee, Cindy

=== PAGE 90 ===
                                 86

Olson, testified that about a year ago, she sold $3 million of Enron
stock when it was near its peak. Did you also sell stock in the last
year?
   Mr. PRENTICE. Yes, I did.
   The CHAIRMAN. For how much?
   Mr. PRENTICE. I exercised some stock options in June of last
year, and exercised a same-day sale, and it was about $900,000. I
also sold approximately 50,000 shares of Enron stock that I had in
my own account on November 28 for about $1 a share.
   The CHAIRMAN. But in the earlier sale, you made how much?
   Mr. PRENTICE. Nine hundred thousand.
   The CHAIRMAN. Nine hundred thousand. How can Enron execu-
tives sell and yet continue to allow workers to risk their retirement
savings?
   Mr. PRENTICE. I am not sure that the two are connected. Speak-
ing as a member of the Administrative Committee, as I stated, I
felt that it was our responsibility—and I do accept that we have
a fiduciary responsibility—to oversee the savings plan and to pro-
vide as many options as we can for the diversification efforts of
those employees. That is not the only retirement plan within
Enron. There is another pension plan, and the 401(k) savings plan
is in addition to those pension funds.
   The CHAIRMAN. But the great majority of stock obviously was in
Enron.
   Mr. PRENTICE. Not in the pension fund; in the 401(k), at the be-
ginning of the year, I think it was 60, 61 percent, and at the end
of the year, it was 20 percent or so.
   The CHAIRMAN. Do you feel that you have violated your fiduciary
duty?
   Mr. PRENTICE. I definitely do not, sir.
   The CHAIRMAN. Professor Munnell, would the President’s pro-
posal fix the problem of lack of retirement security in the 401(k)?
   Ms. MUNNELL. No, it will not. There are some good proposals in
there, but the key thing that needs to be addressed is diversifica-
tion, and it has to be mandatory diversification. We have to have
limits on how much employees can invest in employer stock in
401(k) plans.
   The CHAIRMAN. You listened all morning very patiently to these
arguments about balancing freedom and security. How do you an-
swer that?
   Ms. MUNNELL. Allowing people to invest a lot of money in their
employer stock is imprudent. These 401(k) plans are tax-subsidized
plans; they are designed for retirement. We want people to end up
having money when they stop working. We want to make sure that
their investments are solid, and the only way you can guarantee
solid investments is to not put all your eggs in one basket. You
have to have mandatory diversification.
   The CHAIRMAN. I want to thank our employees very much for
their presence here today. As Senator Wellstone pointed out, these
are extraordinarily sad and difficult times for people who have
really devoted their lives to companies. The greatest violation is
the violation of trust which has been referenced by each of you in
terms of your devotion to those companies and your commitment
to, I am sure, produce, work hard, give it the best day in and day

=== PAGE 91 ===
                                 87

out, relying on the trust of those companies, and then, in the cir-
cumstances to find out that that has been violated. That is heavy
enough, plus the extraordinary loss to your own security at this
time of your lives, after you have worked hard and played by the
rules, is just an extraordinary burden.
   I commend all of you for your willingness to come and share your
stories with us at this difficult time. The best way we can thank
you is to try to do the best we can to help you and to make sure
it does not happen to others.
   Paul?
   Senator WELLSTONE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Let me start with Ms. Fleetham. Just to be clear, you issued a
sell order that usually would take place in 7 to 10 days, and in-
stead, it took somewhere between 20 and 30 days; is that correct?
   Ms. FLEETHAM. Yes.
   Senator WELLSTONE. It is not totally clear to me when the actual
sale took place, but it was certainly longer than 7 to 10 days; right?
   Ms. FLEETHAM. Yes.
   Senator WELLSTONE. And this was when the stock was plummet-
ing in value, too, during this period of time?
   Ms. FLEETHAM. Obviously.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Did you ever get an explanation to the com-
pany as to what happened or as to why this happened?
   Ms. FLEETHAM. No. Basically, what I got was the statement that
I had gotten—first, the confirmation of the order with the dates on
it, and then, the actual distribution statement with those dates on
it. And obviously, I knew what had happened when I saw that it
had not actually been done until the 30th of October. Why it had
been done then, I do not know, and why it was done during a sup-
posed lockdown period, I do not know.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Had this ever happened to you before?
   Ms. FLEETHAM. No. Generally speaking, when we first started
this, there was a point in time where, if I remember correctly, you
did have to have your sell request in before the 20th of the month,
and then your stock would be sold the next month. Then, the last
few years, there was an option where you could check a box that
said you wanted to waive the 30-day waiting period and sell the
stock as soon as practicable. And apparently, that must have been
‘‘practicable’’—and that is the word they use—on the part of whom-
ever was selling it. It certainly was not on the sellee. And I do not
know why—previously, I had put in some orders, and by checking
this box had probably had a check back in as early as 10 days;
sometimes it was a couple weeks, but I would say 7 days to 2
weeks.
   Senator WELLSTONE. I am guessing that you might favor a rule
that would shorten the time for lockdown periods.
   Ms. FLEETHAM. Well, yes and no. I am not sure now, if they can
sell it whenever they want to anyway.
   Senator WELLSTONE. That is something that we really ought to
come to understand, that is for sure.
   I want to thank all of you, but let me go on with a few more
questions, and I am not going to do justice to the appearance of
each one of you, and maybe I should even say it now—I do want
you to know, however, that all of your statements will be made a

=== PAGE 92 ===
                                 88

part of the record, and all of it is going to be used—I do not think
this can be symbolic. If we did not pass legislation here that really
made a difference in terms of making sure this did not happen to
people again, none of us deserves to be here. So I do not think this
is just symbolic, and I want you all to know, even if I do not put
questions to you, that what you have said today has been so power-
ful, so powerful.
   Mr. Prentice, would you agree, just to go through this quickly,
that diversification is the foundation of prudent investing?
   Mr. PRENTICE. It is one of the foundations, yes.
   Senator WELLSTONE. And would you agree as well that no finan-
cial planner would advise an investor to have, let us say, more
than 10 percent of his portfolio invested in one single security?
   Mr. PRENTICE. I cannot specifically speak to a number, but I
agree with the concept of spreading the risk.
   Senator WELLSTONE. As a rule-of-thumb.
   Mr. PRENTICE. Yes.
   Senator WELLSTONE. What steps did you take—and by the way,
I appreciate your being here, and I appreciate your testimony, and
I want to be clear about that; others have sidestepped even being
here, and you did not—what steps did you take to educate people
about the need to not have so much or such a large percentage of
their retirement savings tied up in one stock, the stock of their em-
ployer—and of course, this was the source of their income to boot.
Did you take some steps to educate people about the danger of
this?
   Mr. PRENTICE. As the Administrative Committee specifically
knows, we oversaw or we were in serious discussions with the
Enron Benefits Department, and then they, through the various
human resource departments—I am aware of multiple attempts
over the years to distribute various brochures; they have distrib-
uted CDs. The primary purpose of the information was first of all
to encourage participants to participate in the 401(k) plan, and in
just about every document that I can remember, at some point in
time, it would mention that diversification is very important. Each
one of the options—and we had 20 different individual options, one
of which was Enron stock—that in and of itself, I believe, shows
that we encouraged people to diversify into other investment op-
tions, and in each one of those options, there were short writeups
describing those options and mentioning the various risks associ-
ated with them.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Would you be willing to provide me with
some of those documents where Enron mentioned the word ‘‘diver-
sification’’?
   Mr. PRENTICE. Yes, I would.
   Senator WELLSTONE. I ask you because—and I held this up ear-
lier; it is entitled, ‘‘Money in Motion: Enron Corporation Savings
Plan and 401(k) Plan Details,’’ which I know you are familiar
with—this is what the company gave to the employees to describe
the plan, and I have looked through the whole document, and I do
not find the word ‘‘diversification’’ anywhere in this document.
   Mr. PRENTICE. Senator, the one that I reviewed recently was the
compact disk. It was a fairly sophisticated brochure, and I remem-
ber specifically reading—I think it was quoting John Vogel, who is

=== PAGE 93 ===
                                 89

a well-known investment advisor—it was quoted in there that the
key thing in a program is diversification, diversification, diver-
sification.
   Senator WELLSTONE. I would like to see that.
   Did you hold meetings with employees where you also mentioned
the importance of diversification? Were there any of those kinds of
educational efforts?
   Mr. PRENTICE. Again, not me personally, but the Benefits De-
partment and the Human Resource Department I believe did that,
yes.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Now that Enron is in bankruptcy, does
Enron stock remain a prudent investment plan in the 401(k) plan?
   Mr. PRENTICE. We at the Administrative Committee have taken
this under consideration, and to help us decide whether it is a pru-
dent investment, we have hired an independent investment coun-
selor/advisor to assist us in making that decision.
   Senator WELLSTONE. I have here: ‘‘Until the bitter end, Enron
executives continued to tout Enron stock to workers in a series of
emails. On August 14, Enron CEO Kenneth Lay told workers that
he’ never felt better about the prospects for the company.’ On Au-
gust 27, Lay predicted to workers a’ significantly higher stock
price.’ And on September 26, Lay called Enron stock’ an incredible
bargain.’ Even as they promised the moon, Lay and other execu-
tives were cashing in their stock.’’
   So the question I am asking is when does it become imprudent.
   Mr. PRENTICE. Senator, I share the concerns of the stock price.
I am not a professional investment advisor. I think that as a pru-
dent person on the Administrative Committee, we have taken steps
to get that professional advice, and we are awaiting that initial re-
port from that investment advisor.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Professor Munnell, I want to ask you—and
I am not asking you for a yes or a no on this—and again, I want
to tell all of you that when I met with Jan, she knows 100 times
more than I do; I am far from an expert on all of this, and I am
just trying to learn—but you were saying that you think there has
got to be some kind of threshold here, 20 percent or something. I
have been doing some thinking about this and thinking that maybe
it would not just include the 401(k), but you could include the de-
fined benefits package, which would give employers an incentive
for that in figuring that 20 percent, if you see what I am saying.
There is more flexibility.
   Would you be willing—I am not asking for a yes or no—but
would you be willing to give my office some advice on this as we
try to figure out what would be best?
   Ms. MUNNELL. I would be happy to work with you. I worry about
all of these proposals that involve a percentage, because it means
that as soon as you go over the percentage, you have to do some-
thing. So I think I would start——
   Senator WELLSTONE. OK. Let me hear that—and I see some oth-
ers nodding—let me hear from all three of you on that. Let us go
on a little while here—not too much longer—but go ahead.
   Ms. MUNNELL. I think the way to limit it is probably just to tell
employees within the 401(k) that they do not have company stock
as an option—just eliminate it. And then, if the employer wants to

=== PAGE 94 ===
                                 90

do the match with employer stock, so be it. But that would have
solved a lot of the problems at Enron, because most of the money
in the fund came from employee contributions, not from the em-
ployers. And employees are put under such pressure to show that
they are team players, that they are really for the company, so it
is natural that they want to invest where they work, and it is just
such an imprudent thing to do.
   Senator WELLSTONE. I was a teacher, and I am pretty good at
reading faces. There are at least three of you who want to jump
in here. Mr. Farmer does, and Jan, I could not tell whether you
were shaking your head this way or that way; and I want to hear
from Mr. Salisbury as well.
   Mr. FARMER. Early on in Polaroid Corporation, Dr. Land was ve-
hemently against the employees purchasing stock in the fashion
that the company would provide for them. There were no stock op-
tion plans for the people in the company, and the reason was just
that—he did not want to make it something that somebody
would—I mean, you could go out naturally on your own and pur-
chase stock, but doing it through the corporation sent a message
from the corporation and put the corporation at risk for giving you
a message of the wrong kind, especially in the stock of Polaroid,
which was in essence a luxury stock, because it was volatile and
went up and down. So for that reason, he did not provide stock op-
tions for the employees.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Mr. Salisbury?
   Mr. SALISBURY. Senator, my concern about set limits if it is in
an employee choice plan, whatever you pick as a percentage, is the
difficulties in administration of it plus the potential of when they
run up against that limit, just the necessity of automatic liquida-
tion, which essentially, the greatest likelihood of automatic liquida-
tion would be at the time that the stock is going up the most,
which is the reason I say that if you are going to choose to make
people diversify, you are almost better off to just not have employer
stock as an option at all in the employee account per what Alicia
is mentioning—it is a proposal that I know was in AARP testimony
a few days ago—as opposed to trying to come up with some set per-
centage limit. So my only administrative suggestion to you would
be that it is almost better to do an all-or-none than to try to make
some percentage amount work as a practical administrative mat-
ter.
   The second comment goes to the Polaroid example, and I have
two brief comments. One is the basis of employee stock ownership
and the primary advocacy for it came from Senator Russell Long
of Louisiana during all the years that he was the Democratic chair
of the Finance Committee, as a very populist motion. During the
years of that advocacy by Russell Long, he was actually frequently
criticized by many on the right for being an advocate of essential
communism and social democracy that was undesirable and unac-
ceptable. It is always interesting to see how, over time, these de-
bates change.
   The second is the dilemma that I am sure the individual at the
far end of the table might be able to comment on, or might not
want to but might be able to. That is, in many, many, many cor-
porations that I deal with, the people in the finance function and

=== PAGE 95 ===
                                 91

the benefits function would look at you and say, ‘‘It would be best
if we did not have employer stock in this plan.’’ And it is the CEO
and the most senior officers who are committed to the concept of
employer stock. And against this issue of cutback, the discussion
that always takes place is if you could not have employer stock,
what would the CEO do. And the response very frequently is:
‘‘Well, that is why I do not raise the issue anymore; the last time
I raised it, the response was, Look, if the employees do not want
to match, that is fine, there will not be a match, or there can be
a match in employer stock.’’ They look at the staff: ‘‘You are my
staff. You tell me—would you just as soon communicate to the em-
ployees that there is no matching contribution, or would you rather
go ahead and do it in employer stock?’’
   ‘‘I as a CEO,’’ they say, ‘‘believe in employee ownership. We have
a defined benefit plan. We have other programs. They do not have
to put their money in employer stock. This is my dedication to em-
ployee ownership.’’
   So there are those kinds of complexities but also dramatic dif-
ferences in the answers you will get depending on at what level you
are asking a question within a company.
   Senator WELLSTONE. This is very helpful.
   Let me conclude—I and other members of the committee may
want to get back to some of you—just for the record, Mr. Prentice—
and I just want to get this on the record, and it is probably one
of the reasons you came here to be on record—as the stock started
plummeting in value, did the committee do any kind of evaluation
as to whether or not the stock was a prudent investment? I ask you
that because other companies—and I could give examples—have
done so.
   Mr. PRENTICE. If you look at the year 2001, we started off at
about $83. I think we were still at about $80 in mid-February.
From that point until the end of the year, it was basically a down-
ward trend. We did not as an Administrative Committee do any-
thing at that time because of several factors. The first factor was
that the stock market in general was on a downward trend. There
were other factors that were particular to Enron at the time. Enron
was one of several Texas companies that was being blamed for the
California energy crisis, and we were taking some knocks for that.
We had made a major investment in broad band technology, and
we were suffering with the rest of the technology industry and that
downward spiral.
   We had, in hindsight, made a very ill-advised entry into the
water business, and that proved to be very disastrous. And we had
over the last several years made a major investment in a large
power facility in India, and the Indian Government decided that
they did not want to honor the contract.
   So we had had multiple hits to Enron in addition to the overall
downward trend in the stock market. We were not happy with the
trend, but we thought that the basics of the company were sound.
Fellow committee members as well as myself also read the state-
ments from Mr. Lay and other members of senior management,
and we believed the company was sound. It was not until early No-
vember that we decided that we needed additional help, and we

=== PAGE 96 ===
                                 92

needed to look into it, and that is why we took steps to hire a pro-
fessional investment advisor.
   Senator WELLSTONE. You are telling me what was affecting the
value, but I was asking you when the actual evaluation of whether
or not the stock was prudent took place, and you are saying not
until much later.
   Mr. PRENTICE. Yes.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Now, the last question—the testimony of
Cindy Olson, who was also on the Administrative Committee, was
that she had reason to believe, at least going back to August of
2001, that the company was in precarious financial condition, and
that is because she had apparently had a conversation with Sharon
Watkins, the company employee who had written Mr. Lay about
her fears that the company was going to ‘‘implode in a wave of ac-
counting scandals.’’
   Did Ms. Olson ever share any of this with you?
   Mr. PRENTICE. No.
   Senator WELLSTONE. I appreciate that.
   Does that disappoint you? I mean, do you think that she had
some responsibility to report this information to you and other col-
leagues?
   Mr. PRENTICE. I think it would have been very interesting con-
versation, and had she brought it up, I do not believe that that is
a function of the responsibility of the Administrative Committee. I
feel like we would have advised Cindy to take that to the attention
of Enron’s legal counsel.
   Senator WELLSTONE. I am not here to change the whole tenor of
the meeting, and I have told you I thank you for being here, but
in some ways, I just feel like part of what you are saying is, ‘‘Look,
I did not really have any fiduciary responsibility here.’’
   Mr. PRENTICE. That is not true. No, I am not saying that.
   Senator WELLSTONE. OK. I wanted to be clear about that. That
is the way I heard it, and it may not be what you were saying.
   Mr. PRENTICE. I apologize. I did not mean that in any way, shape
or form.
   Senator WELLSTONE. Fair enough.
   Let me thank all of you. Some of you, I want to definitely get
back to if that is all right. We will keep the record open for 2 more
weeks.
   Thank you very much for being here. It is much appreciated.
   The hearing is over.
   [Whereupon, at 1:40 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

                                  Æ
