
=== PAGE 1 ===
                                            THE FINANCIAL COLLAPSE OF ENRON—Part 3



                                                                             HEARING
                                                                                   BEFORE THE

                                                               SUBCOMMITTEE ON
                                                         OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS
                                                                                       OF THE


                                                    COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
                                                           COMMERCE
                                                    HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
                                                          ONE HUNDRED SEVENTH CONGRESS
                                                                               SECOND SESSION


                                                                               FEBRUARY 14, 2002



                                                                       Serial No. 107–89

                                                  Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce




                                                                                      (
                                           Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.access.gpo.gov/congress/house


                                                                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                            77–991CC                            WASHINGTON : 2002

                                                      For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
                                                   Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800
                                                           Fax: (202) 512–2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402–0001




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00001    Fmt 5011    Sfmt 5011   W:\DISC\77991     pfrm17    PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 2 ===
                                                            COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
                                                           W.J. ‘‘BILLY’’ TAUZIN, Louisiana, Chairman
                                      MICHAEL BILIRAKIS, Florida                 JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
                                      JOE BARTON, Texas                          HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
                                      FRED UPTON, Michigan                       EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
                                      CLIFF STEARNS, Florida                     RALPH M. HALL, Texas
                                      PAUL E. GILLMOR, Ohio                      RICK BOUCHER, Virginia
                                      JAMES C. GREENWOOD, Pennsylvania           EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
                                      CHRISTOPHER COX, California                FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
                                      NATHAN DEAL, Georgia                       SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
                                      STEVE LARGENT, Oklahoma                    BART GORDON, Tennessee
                                      RICHARD BURR, North Carolina               PETER DEUTSCH, Florida
                                      ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                     BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
                                      GREG GANSKE, Iowa                          ANNA G. ESHOO, California
                                      CHARLIE NORWOOD, Georgia                   BART STUPAK, Michigan
                                      BARBARA CUBIN, Wyoming                     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
                                      JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois                     TOM SAWYER, Ohio
                                      HEATHER WILSON, New Mexico                 ALBERT R. WYNN, Maryland
                                      JOHN B. SHADEGG, Arizona                   GENE GREEN, Texas
                                      CHARLES ‘‘CHIP’’ PICKERING, Mississippi    KAREN MCCARTHY, Missouri
                                      VITO FOSSELLA, New York                    TED STRICKLAND, Ohio
                                      ROY BLUNT, Missouri                        DIANA DEGETTE, Colorado
                                      TOM DAVIS, Virginia                        THOMAS M. BARRETT, Wisconsin
                                      ED BRYANT, Tennessee                       BILL LUTHER, Minnesota
                                      ROBERT L. EHRLICH, Jr., Maryland           LOIS CAPPS, California
                                      STEVE BUYER, Indiana                       MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
                                      GEORGE RADANOVICH, California              CHRISTOPHER JOHN, Louisiana
                                      CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire             JANE HARMAN, California
                                      JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
                                      MARY BONO, California
                                      GREG WALDEN, Oregon
                                      LEE TERRY, Nebraska
                                                              DAVID V. MARVENTANO, Staff Director
                                                              JAMES D. BARNETTE, General Counsel
                                                   REID P.F. STUNTZ, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel



                                                           SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS
                                                          JAMES C. GREENWOOD, Pennsylvania, Chairman
                                      MICHAEL BILIRAKIS, Florida             PETER DEUTSCH, Florida
                                      CLIFF STEARNS, Florida                 BART STUPAK, Michigan
                                      PAUL E. GILLMOR, Ohio                  TED STRICKLAND, Ohio
                                      STEVE LARGENT, Oklahoma                DIANA DEGETTE, Colorado
                                      RICHARD BURR, North Carolina           CHRISTOPHER JOHN, Louisiana
                                      ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
                                        Vice Chairman                        JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan,
                                      CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire           (Ex Officio)
                                      W.J. ‘‘BILLY’’ TAUZIN, Louisiana
                                        (Ex Officio)

                                                                                          (II)




                                                                                           2




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00002   Fmt 0486    Sfmt 0486   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 3 ===
                                                                                    CONTENTS

                                                                                                                                                                  Page
                                      Testimony of:
                                          Watkins, Sherron, Vice President of Corporate Development, Enron Cor-
                                            poration ..........................................................................................................    14

                                                                                                    (III)




                                                                                                     3




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199     PO 00026      Frm 00003       Fmt 0486      Sfmt 0486      W:\DISC\77991        pfrm17     PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 4 ===
VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00004   Fmt 0486   Sfmt 0486   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 5 ===
                                       THE FINANCIAL COLLAPSE OF ENRON—Part 3

                                                               THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 2002

                                                               HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
                                                        COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE,
                                                SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS,
                                                                                        Washington, DC.
                                        The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11 a.m., in room
                                      2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James C. Greenwood
                                      (chairman) presiding.
                                        Members present: Representatives Greenwood, Bilirakis,
                                      Stearns, Largent, Burr, Tauzin (ex officio), Deutsch, Stupak, Strick-
                                      land, DeGette, John, Rush, and Dingell (ex officio).
                                        Also present: Representatives Ganske, Markey, Green, and Jack-
                                      son-Lee.
                                        Staff present: Tom DiLenge, majority counsel; Mark Paoletta,
                                      majority counsel; Michael Geffroy, majority counsel; Peter Kielty,
                                      legislative clerk; Will Carty, legislative clerk; Brendan Williams,
                                      legislative clerk; Edith Holleman, minority counsel; Consuela
                                      Washington, minority counsel; Jonathan Cordone, minority counsel;
                                      and Chris Knauer, minority investigator.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Good morning. This hearing of the Oversight
                                      and Investigations Subcommittee of the Energy and Commerce
                                      Committee will come to order.
                                        The Chair recognizes himself for an opening statement.
                                        ‘‘I wish we could get caught. We’re such a crooked company.’’ Of
                                      all of the words in the now famous memo our witness sent to Ken-
                                      neth Lay in August of last year, these might be the most chilling.
                                        According to this morning’s witness, the person who uttered
                                      those words was a management level employee of Enron, a team
                                      player, a person who probably stood to lose a great deal in any fi-
                                      nancial collapse at Enron. What is the truth behind Enron’s pre-
                                      cipitous collapse?
                                        This morning we have before us, as our sole witness, Ms.
                                      Sherron Watkins, Enron’s Vice President of Corporate Develop-
                                      ment. Ms. Watkins has become known as the lone voice who sought
                                      to warn Enron Chairman and CEO Ken Lay that Enron was in
                                      danger of imploding ‘‘in a wave of accounting scandals.’’ Subse-
                                      quent events have proved the truth of that unvarnished assess-
                                      ment.
                                        But we now understand from evidence this committee has gath-
                                      ered in its investigation, from the materials contained in the Pow-
                                      ers Report, and from testimony of senior Enron officials at last
                                      week’s hearing, that these so-called aggressive accounting practices
                                      were used to hide an even larger business failure.
                                                                                          (1)




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00005   Fmt 6633    Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 6 ===
                                                                                          2

                                         Last week we took testimony from two senior Enron officials,
                                      Jordan Mintz and then treasurer, now Enron President and Chief
                                      Operating Officer, Jeffrey McMahon. They, too, anguished that
                                      something was terribly wrong at Enron, but were unable to deter-
                                      mine the full extent of the problems or the dangers ahead.
                                         Unlike them, our witness this morning was privy to substantially
                                      more evidence of the accounting practices used to hide various re-
                                      lated party transactions between Enron and what are known as the
                                      Raptor entities—special purpose entities owned by LJM2, the lim-
                                      ited partnership set up and run by Enron and its former Chief Fi-
                                      nancial Officer, Andrew Fastow. She will testify today that, in her
                                      opinion, these transactions were outright manipulations of Enron’s
                                      income statements, booking fictitious income, and hiding actual
                                      losses.
                                         Ms. Watkins took her concerns right to the top. She wrote a
                                      memo to Mr. Lay on August 15 that set forth in stark terms the
                                      seriousness of Enron’s situation and the dire consequences that
                                      would inevitably result if corrective action were not taken, and
                                      soon.
                                         We now know that Ms. Watkins also met with Mr. Lay not just
                                      once, as has been previously disclosed, but on two additional times
                                      in late October of last year, to further share her concerns and to
                                      urge that Enron restate its income statements for the past 2 years
                                      due to the deceptive transactions with the Raptors special purpose
                                      entities. Yet, until the Powers Report came out 2 weeks ago affirm-
                                      ing her analysis of the Raptors, no one at Enron, or Andersen ever
                                      sought to address these concerns.
                                         Indeed, the actions taken by Enron in October and November of
                                      last year to revise its earnings and shareholder equity numbers
                                      still fail to address many of the concerns raised by Ms. Watkins
                                      and confirmed by the Powers Report.
                                         Ms. Watkins also will describe today her meetings and conversa-
                                      tions with others throughout Enron’s corporate hierarchy, as well
                                      as with outside advisors. This included Mr. McMahon, Associate
                                      General Counsel, Rex Rogers, Vice President for Human Resources
                                      Cindy Olson, James Hecker, an Andersen audit partner, and Vin-
                                      son & Elkins managing partner Joe Dilg.
                                         Her initial meeting with Mr. Lay in August prompted an inves-
                                      tigation by Vinson & Elkins, assisted by Andersen, the very two
                                      parties Ms. Watkins urged Mr. Lay and others not to include in the
                                      review because of clear conflicts of interest. Not surprisingly, the
                                      report that Vinson & Elkins issued on October 15 was so flawed
                                      that Ms. Watkins seriously considered leaving the company.
                                         Instead, she persisted in her attempts to convince Mr. Lay of the
                                      enormity of the challenge facing Enron and the failure of outside
                                      experts to clearly state the facts. It wasn’t until October 31 that
                                      Ms. Watkins learned that a Special Committee of the Board of Di-
                                      rectors would examine Enron’s questionable business practices.
                                      This investigation has since become known as the Powers Inquiry.
                                         Ms. Watkins’ appearance and testimony before us today will be
                                      the first time anyone has had the opportunity to question her pub-
                                      licly about her own actions and how individuals at the highest level
                                      in the company responded to her warnings.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00006   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6633   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 7 ===
                                                                                           3

                                        Let me point out that Ms. Watkins is not a whistleblower in the
                                      conventional sense. She was, and is, a loyal company employee,
                                      who sought valiantly, and sadly in vain, to get the people in charge
                                      to face the facts and make the hard choices needed to save the com-
                                      pany. Ms. Watkins is still an Enron employee, and because of this
                                      fact has requested a subpoena compelling her testimony today.
                                        I want to point out, however, that she has been responsive to and
                                      very cooperative with our investigators. And I look forward to her
                                      sharing with the subcommittee and the American public, in her
                                      own words, how it came to be that, at the end, a once faithful em-
                                      ployee concluded that her company was cooking the books.
                                        Ms. Watkins, thank you for your help. We welcome your testi-
                                      mony.
                                        [The prepared statement of Hon. James C. Greenwood follows:]
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES C. GREENWOOD, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE
                                                              ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

                                         ‘‘. . . I wish we would get caught. We’re such a crooked company.’’
                                         Of all the words in the now famous memo our witness sent to Kenneth Lay in
                                      August of last year, these might be the most chilling.
                                         According to this morning’s witness, the person who uttered those words was a
                                      management level employee of Enron, a team player . . . a person who probably stood
                                      to lose a great deal in any financial collapse of Enron.
                                         What is the truth behind Enron’s precipitous collapse?
                                         This morning we have before us, as our sole witness, Ms. Sherron Watkins,
                                      Enron’s Vice President of Corporate Development. Ms. Watkins has become known
                                      as THE LONE voice who sought to warn Enron Chairman and CEO Ken Lay that
                                      Enron was in danger of imploding ‘‘. . . in a wave of accounting scandals.’’
                                         Subsequent events have proved the truth of that unvarnished assessment.
                                         But we now understand, from evidence this Committee has gathered in its inves-
                                      tigation, from the materials contained in the Powers’ Report, and from testimony
                                      of senior Enron officials at last week’s hearing, that these so-called ‘‘aggressive’’ ac-
                                      counting practices were used to hide an even larger business failure.
                                         Last week, we took testimony from two senior Enron officials, Jordan Mintz and
                                      then treasurer, now Enron President and Chief Operating Officer Jeffrey McMahon.
                                         They too anguished that something was terribly wrong at Enron, but were unable
                                      to determine the full extent of the problems or the dangers ahead.
                                         Unlike them, our witness this morning was privy to substantially more evidence
                                      of the accounting practices used to hide various related-party transactions between
                                      Enron and what are known as the Raptor entities—special purpose entities owned
                                      by LJM2, the limited partnership set up and run by Enron and its former Chief Fi-
                                      nancial Officer Andrew Fastow. She will testify today that, in her opinion, these
                                      transactions were outright manipulations of Enron’s income statements, booking fic-
                                      titious income and hiding actual losses.
                                         Ms. Watkins took her concerns right to the top. She wrote a memo to Mr. Lay,
                                      on August 15th that SET FORTH IN STARK TERMS the seriousness of Enron’s
                                      situation and the dire consequences that would inevitably result if corrective action
                                      were not taken . . . and soon.
                                         We now know that Ms. Watkins also met with Mr. Lay, not just once—as has
                                      been previously disclosed—but two additional times in late October of last year, to
                                      further share her concerns and to urge that Enron restate its income statements
                                      for the past two years due to the deceptive transactions with the Raptors special
                                      purpose entities. Yet, until the Powers Report came out two weeks ago, affirming
                                      her analysis of the Raptors, no one at Enron or Andersen ever sought to address
                                      these concerns.
                                         Indeed, the actions taken by Enron in October and November of last year to revise
                                      its earnings and shareholder equity numbers still fail to address many of the con-
                                      cerns raised by Ms. Watkins and confirmed by the Powers Report.
                                         Ms. Watkins also will describe today her meetings and conversations with others
                                      throughout Enron’s corporate hierarchy as well as with outside advisors.
                                         This included Mr. McMahon, Associate General Counsel Rex Rogers, Vice Presi-
                                      dent for Human Resources Cindy Olson, James Hecker (an Andersen audit partner)
                                      and Vinson & Elkins managing partner Joe Dilg.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002    Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00007   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 8 ===
                                                                                          4
                                         Her initial meeting with Mr. Lay in August prompted an investigation by Vinson
                                      & Elkins, assisted by Andersen—the very two parties Ms. Watkins urged Mr. Lay
                                      and others NOT to include in the review, because of clear conflicts of interest.
                                         Not surprisingly, the report that Vinson & Elkins’ issued on October 15th was so
                                      flawed that Ms. Watkins seriously considered leaving the company. Instead, she
                                      persisted in her attempts to convince Mr. Lay of the enormity of the challenge fac-
                                      ing Enron and THE failure of outside experts to clearly state the facts. It wasn’t
                                      until October 31 that Ms. Watkins learned that a special committee of the Board
                                      of Directors would examine Enron’s questionable business practices. This investiga-
                                      tion has since become known as the Powers Inquiry.
                                         Ms. Watkins appearance and testimony before us today will be the first time any-
                                      one has had the opportunity to question her publicly about her own actions and how
                                      individuals at the highest level in the company responded to her warnings.
                                         Let me point out that Ms. Watkins is not a ‘‘whistleblower’’ in the conventional
                                      sense. She was—and is—a loyal company employee, who sought valiantly and sadly,
                                      in vain, to get the people in charge to face the facts and make the hard choices
                                      needed to save the company. Ms. Watkins, indeed, is still an Enron employee, and
                                      because of this fact, has requested a subpoena compelling her testimony today.
                                         I want to point out, however, that she has been responsive to and very cooperative
                                      with our investigators.
                                         And I look forward to her sharing with the Subcommittee and the American pub-
                                      lic, in her own words, how it came to be that, at the end, a once faithful employee
                                      concluded that HER COMPANY WAS COOKING THE BOOKS.
                                         Ms. Watkins, thank you for your help and we welcome your testimony today.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Flor-
                                      ida, Mr. Deutsch, for his opening statement.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         And thank you, Ms. Watkins, for being here. You know, this is
                                      obviously our continuation of trying to understand what happened
                                      at Enron and really looking at it and looking at the future.
                                         And I really want to take a couple of seconds just thanking the
                                      chairmen of the subcommittee and the full committee, but also the
                                      staff. I think our staff has really done an incredible job over the
                                      last about 8 weeks or so. This subcommittee has a long history in
                                      the Congress of looking at issues of really cases of failures, of cor-
                                      ruption.
                                         And Chairman Dingell, who led this subcommittee for so many
                                      years, created almost a historic reputation for this subcommittee.
                                      And I believe that this hearing and this process that we are doing
                                      is part of that.
                                         You know, I’ve tried to put in perspective what we’re doing and
                                      where we hope to lead. And it’s not just an investigation for an in-
                                      vestigation’s sake. But I think all of us at this point, we know a
                                      lot more than we knew a week ago, a lot more than 2 weeks ago.
                                      The issues I think are much broader than just Enron. The issues
                                      really are our capital systems and the transparency in the account-
                                      ing system.
                                         And I think what we all understand is that our economy, which
                                      is the strongest economy in the history of the world, one of the rea-
                                      sons that we have that economy is transparency in the capital mar-
                                      kets and the public accounting system. And I don’t think there’s a
                                      question that that totally abysmally failed in the case of Enron. I
                                      mean, I think it’s factually accurate that it failed. That trying to
                                      understand Enron from its public documents I think was close to
                                      impossible. That those documents did not fairly represent the ac-
                                      tual state of the company.
                                         And the Secretary of the Treasury, when Enron initially filed for
                                      bankruptcy, said that, ‘‘Well, this is not a big deal. Companies go




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00008   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 9 ===
                                                                                          5

                                      bankrupt. They don’t go bankrupt. They’re successful.’’ I take great
                                      exception to that. There have been several major companies in
                                      America that have gone bankrupt since Enron. Kmart has gone
                                      bankrupt, Global Crossing has gone bankrupt. But there is a fun-
                                      damental difference.
                                         Public markets knew what was going on in those companies. It
                                      was transparent. It was reflected in equity value. People could un-
                                      derstand what was going on. In the case of Enron, that was not the
                                      case. The seventh largest company in America vaporized in literally
                                      a matter of weeks, and the house of cards fell.
                                         And as we’re looking at transaction after transaction after trans-
                                      action—and, again, the number at this point—our understanding is
                                      there were 4,000 of these partnerships, and the Raptors were prob-
                                      ably the largest, but just several—that the methods seemed to be
                                      continuously used again and again.
                                         I guess the concern we have, and I have—but I think all of my
                                      colleagues share—is, No. 1, you know, how do we protect our cap-
                                      ital markets from, No. 1, this never happening again? Because I
                                      think that is clearly our goal. That when people try to understand
                                      public companies they can understand. That is the whole point.
                                      But, No. 2, who else is doing this?
                                         And, obviously, I don’t think you are going to be able to tell us
                                      that today. But I think that is clearly, you know, a critical compo-
                                      nent that you, as someone who was watching what was going on,
                                      understood what was going on, and if there are other companies
                                      out there that are out there doing this, obviously people in those
                                      companies know it as well.
                                         And I guess one of the things that hopefully will happen is that
                                      it will immediately be reflected in statements in their filings to the
                                      SEC.
                                         Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                      nizes the Chairman of the full committee, the gentleman from Lou-
                                      isiana, Mr. Tauzin, for an opening statement.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me first thank
                                      you, Mr. Chairman, and the incredible work of the Democratic and
                                      Republican joint investigatory staff. You have done, I think, our
                                      country a great service, and you continue to do so with these hear-
                                      ings. And I deeply appreciate—I know I speak for all of the mem-
                                      bers—your personal commitment to this task.
                                         Let me first observe that as a result of these hearings and the
                                      incredible new information that our witness will provide us with
                                      today, I think America is learning what went wrong at Enron.
                                      More importantly, corporate executives across America are reas-
                                      sessing corporate management, and board members across America
                                      are beginning to ask hard questions and to become significantly
                                      more involved and concerned in the operations of their companies.
                                         The SEC has announced planned reforms. FASB has announced
                                      planned reforms. This subcommittee and the committee that we
                                      have assigned the job of jurisdiction over FASB and the accounting
                                      standards in America, shared by Cliff Stearns of Florida, is begin-
                                      ning the process of recommending legislation to our full committee.
                                         Yesterday, the Subcommittee on Energy and Air Quality of our
                                      committee examined the aspects of the Enron collapse on the en-




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00009   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 10 ===
                                                                                          6

                                      ergy markets of America, and we are investigating allegations of
                                      potential damage done. Generally, the news is good. The energy
                                      markets held up. Electricity flowed. Gas flowed. Somehow compa-
                                      nies worked around the financial collapse of Enron and continued
                                      to deliver energy at reasonable prices—in fact, lower prices—to the
                                      American public during this crisis.
                                         And today we will hear from an officer of the Enron Corporation
                                      who really knew and who really understood who the culprits were
                                      within her own company, and who did her best to make sure that
                                      those in control of her company, if they had been kept in the dark,
                                      were no longer in the dark, and understood the problems the com-
                                      pany faced.
                                         There is a doctrine in law called the last clear chance. It is a doc-
                                      trine that says that even if you are totally in the right on the high-
                                      way, if you had the last clear chance to avoid the accident, you can
                                      still be responsible for what happened.
                                         Our witness today will talk about how she attempted to give the
                                      leadership at Enron a last clear chance, not just to do what was
                                      right in correcting its filings with the American public and the in-
                                      vestors in this company, but to do what was right in getting rid of
                                      culprits, in assigning responsibility, in accepting responsibility, and
                                      in correcting the problems, in the hope that there was still a
                                      chance to save the corporation from the bankruptcy that it now
                                      faces.
                                         We will learn whether the company took that last clear chance.
                                      I don’t think there’s anything more prophetic in the document we
                                      have now received from our witness describing her evaluation of
                                      the culprits, of what had happened, who was responsible for it, and
                                      what had to be done if the company was going to have a chance
                                      to be saved.
                                         In the last paragraphs of that memo which our witness handed
                                      Mr. Ken Lay on October 30, I quote, ‘‘My conclusions if Ken Lay
                                      takes these steps. The bad news, this is horrific. Plaintiff attorneys
                                      will be celebrating. The trouble facing the company will be obvious
                                      to all. The good news, the wild speculations will slow down, if not
                                      cease. Nobody wants Ken Lay’s head. He is very well respected in
                                      business and the community.’’
                                         And then she identifies the culprits. ‘‘The culprits are Skilling,
                                      Fastow, Glisan, Causey, as well as Arthur Andersen, and V&E.’’
                                         In the final paragraph, we find, ‘‘My conclusions if we don’t come
                                      clean and restate. All these bad things will happen to us anyway.
                                      It is just that Ken Lay will be more implicated in this than is de-
                                      served, and he won’t get the chance’’—I might add, the last clear
                                      chance—‘‘to restore the company to its former stature.’’
                                         What we are learning and what will be confirmed today, I be-
                                      lieve, by this witness is that we have witnessed an incredible—an
                                      incredible collection of not only miscreants and potential criminal
                                      behavior, but a series of abuses, of accounting standards and prac-
                                      tices, a series of abuses of the American public investing—the in-
                                      vesting public in its confidence in this company, in its knowledge
                                      about its income and its debt, abuse that led to a horrible loss to
                                      its employees, not only their jobs but of their pensions, and abuses
                                      that have rocked Wall Street and the investment communities and
                                      the corporate boards of America.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00010   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 11 ===
                                                                                          7

                                         If there is any good news in all of this, it is that we are finding
                                      out what went wrong. We are really getting to the bottom of it, and
                                      we are learning how we might turn the corner and begin to make
                                      improvements in our laws and our rules to help make sure that no
                                      other company ever experiences this again.
                                         If there is other good news—and I say this with deep apprecia-
                                      tion, Ms. Watkins—it is the knowledge that there are people like
                                      you in this world who are willing to try to make it right, who un-
                                      derstand their fiduciary responsibility to their company, and are
                                      willing to go out on a limb, as you did, to make sure that people
                                      who could make a difference, who could change things, who could
                                      make it right, and who could save that company, did have at least
                                      a last clear chance to do it.
                                         And there is one other good news. I have a perspective that I
                                      think more and more members are beginning at least to share.
                                      There may be other problems in other companies in America. This
                                      is incredibly an aberration. I have never, in all of our years of
                                      watching companies succeed and fail and bankruptcies—and there
                                      have been some mighty big bankruptcies in this country—seen any-
                                      thing like this.
                                         When we are through examining it and responding to it, I think
                                      the American public will be well served by the process of learning
                                      from this experience and the changes we’re going to make. And the
                                      witness who comes before us will deserve, again, the appreciation
                                      of the American public for doing what she did and for standing out
                                      the way she has.
                                         And I deeply appreciate your being here, Ms. Watkins.
                                         Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and, before
                                      recognizing the ranking member of the full committee, would an-
                                      nounce that we have apparently two votes before us now. So after
                                      Mr. Dingell’s opening remarks, we will recess and make these two
                                      votes and come back.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. I am willing to do it whichever way you like, Mr.
                                      Chairman—go now or go later.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Well, I would welcome the gentleman’s opening
                                      statement right now, and the other members——
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Very well.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. [continuing] are free to go.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing,
                                      and I commend you and the committee for continuing the inves-
                                      tigation into the actions that caused Enron, once the seventh larg-
                                      est company in the country, to become the largest bankruptcy in
                                      the history of the country.
                                         Each hearing that we have held, and I expect we will be holding
                                      more, reveals more of the internal corruption that destroyed Enron.
                                      This corruption swept in Enron’s top management as well as its in-
                                      house and outside accountants and lawyers, all of whom reviewed
                                      and approved the transactions we discuss today. All of them appar-
                                      ently knew that Enron was pledging its stock to guarantee its own
                                      hedges with an alleged outside party.
                                         This is clearly a violation of all accounting procedures and prin-
                                      ciples, and apparently one that the Houston office of Arthur Ander-
                                      sen approved over the opposition of its Chicago office. It led directly




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00011   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 12 ===
                                                                                          8

                                      to a $1.1 billion reduction in Enron’s equity and a $700 million re-
                                      duction in earnings. These same people knew that a partnership
                                      run by Enron’s chief financial officer was benefiting greatly from
                                      these transactions. All of them, and an unquestioning Board of Di-
                                      rectors, did nothing.
                                        I want to thank Ms. Watkins for the heroic efforts she made to
                                      help Enron avoid this, in her own words, ‘‘implosion in a wave of
                                      accounting scandals.’’ Ms. Watkins took the actions that should
                                      have been taken months before by many others, both inside and
                                      outside Enron, with fiduciary duties to the company and to its
                                      shareholders. I applaud her. It is never easy to be a whistleblower,
                                      particularly in a company where the mentality did not encourage
                                      negative news and negative views. Bearers of bad news are often
                                      punished.
                                        Today, we are going to concentrate on the Raptor transactions,
                                      which have been described in the Report of the Special Committee
                                      as ‘‘extremely complex Raptor structured finance vehicles’’ designed
                                      to allow Enron to ‘‘avoid reflecting losses in the value of some mer-
                                      chant investments in its income statement.’’ We cannot fully under-
                                      stand the structure of these vehicles, but we know they are breath-
                                      taking in scope and breathtaking in audacity and in their impact.
                                        These four vehicles resulted in a write-down of equity, the re-
                                      statement of earnings, and the credit rating reduction that sank
                                      Enron. Although the Raptors were supposed to take the risk of
                                      losses in merchant investments, they actually guaranteed by
                                      Enron’s stock and used the appreciation in Enron’s stock value to
                                      increase earnings. This is a violation of all basic accounting prin-
                                      ciples.
                                        The accounting shenanigans that permitted such returns were
                                      instigated and/or approved by Andrew Fastow, Enron’s Chief Fi-
                                      nancial Officer; Richard Causey, Enron’s Chief Accounting Officer;
                                      Rick Buy, Enron’s Chief Risk Management Officer; Arthur Ander-
                                      sen; and by Vinson & Elkins, Enron’s outside counsel.
                                        The Raptors also benefited greatly LJM2, a special purpose enti-
                                      ty run by Mr. Fastow. Although they were supposed to hedge po-
                                      tential losses in some of Enron’s merchant investments, they actu-
                                      ally repaid LJM2’s total investment plus some very generous re-
                                      turns with Enron taking the total risk. As described in an LJM2
                                      presentation to its partners in October of 2000, Raptor III, for ex-
                                      ample, paid out $41 million on a $30 million investment in just 8
                                      days. This is an amazing 2,503 percent annual return for those in-
                                      vestors.
                                        I think it is important to note for the record, Mr. Chairman, that
                                      Mr. Fastow, Mr. Causey, Mr. Buy, and Arthur Andersen have all
                                      been removed from their positions, perhaps too late, but gone any-
                                      way.
                                        But Enron has supported Vinson & Elkins, which approved every
                                      single one of these deals for Enron, and then papered over Ms.
                                      Watkins’ allegations in a report finding not a single transaction
                                      with LJM was ‘‘contrary to Enron’s best interests,’’ to this day. The
                                      law firm’s written report was issued just 1 day before Enron an-
                                      nounced its equity write-down and earnings reductions based on
                                      the very Raptor transactions that Ms. Watkins brought to Kenneth
                                      Lay’s attention.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00012   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 13 ===
                                                                                          9

                                        I think it would be quite appropriate to devote a hearing to the
                                      role Enron’s legal counsel played in this fiasco that took $70 billion
                                      from the pockets of unsuspecting shareholders and employees. And
                                      I note that their role in this does no credit to the profession of
                                      which I take pride in being a part.
                                        But today I look forward to hearing from an extraordinarily cou-
                                      rageous woman who has been a bright spot in an otherwise sorry
                                      and outrageous saga. Ms. Watkins, we thank you.
                                        Mr. Chairman, I thank you.
                                        [The prepared statement of Hon. John D. Dingell follows:]
                                       PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN D. DINGELL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
                                                             FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

                                         Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing as the Committee continues its
                                      investigation into the actions that caused Enron, once the seventh largest company
                                      in the country, to become the largest bankruptcy in history. Each hearing that we
                                      have held—and I expect that we will hold several more—reveals more of the inter-
                                      nal corruption that destroyed Enron. This corruption swept in Enron’s top manage-
                                      ment, as well as its in-house and outside accountants and lawyers, all of whom re-
                                      viewed and approved the transactions that we are discussing today. All of them ap-
                                      parently knew that Enron was pledging its stock to guarantee its own hedges with
                                      an alleged outside party.
                                         This was a violation of all accounting procedures and apparently one that the
                                      Houston office of Arthur Andersen approved over the opposition of its Chicago office.
                                      It led directly to both a $1.1 billion reduction in Enron’s equity and a $700 million
                                      reduction in earnings. These same people knew that a partnership run by Enron’s
                                      chief financial officer was benefitting greatly from these transactions. All of them,
                                      and a unquestioning board of directors, did nothing.
                                         I want to thank Ms. Watkins for the heroic efforts she made to help Enron avoid
                                      this—in her own words—‘‘implosion in a wave of accounting scandals.’’ Ms. Watkins
                                      took the actions that should have been taken months before by others both inside
                                      and outside Enron, with fiduciary duties to the company and its shareholders. I ap-
                                      plaud her. It is never easy to be a whistleblower, particularly in a company where
                                      the mentality did not encourage negative news. Bearers of bad news are often pun-
                                      ished.
                                         Today we are going to concentrate on the Raptor transactions, which are de-
                                      scribed on the report of the special committee as ‘‘extremely complex Raptor struc-
                                      tured finance vehicles’’ designed to allow Enron to ‘‘avoid reflecting losses in the
                                      value of some merchant investments in its income statement.’’ We cannot today fully
                                      understand the structure of these vehicles, but we know that they are breathtaking
                                      in their scope and audacity—and in their impact. These four vehicles resulted in the
                                      write-down of equity, the restatement of earnings, and the credit rating reduction
                                      that sank Enron. Although the Raptors were supposed to take on the risk of losses
                                      in merchant investments, they were actually guaranteed by Enron stock and used
                                      the appreciation in Enron stock’s value to increase earnings.
                                         This is a violation of basic accounting principles. The accounting shenanigans that
                                      permitted such returns were instigated or approved by Andrew Fastow, Enron’s
                                      chief financial officer; Richard Causey, Enron’s chief accounting officer; Rick Buy,
                                      Enron’s chief risk management officer; Arthur Andersen; and Vinson & Elkins,
                                      Enron’s outside counsel.
                                         The Raptors also benefited greatly LJM2, a special purpose entity run by Mr.
                                      Fastow. Although they were supposed to hedge potential losses in some of Enron’s
                                      merchant investments—they actually repaid LJM2’s total investment plus some
                                      very generous returns with Enron taking the total risk. As described in an LJM2
                                      presentation to its partners in October 2000, Raptor III, for example, paid out $41
                                      million for a $30 million investment in just eight days. This was an amazing 2,503
                                      percent annual return for the investors.
                                         I think it is important to note for the record, Mr. Chairman, that Mr. Fastow, Mr.
                                      Causey, Mr. Buy, and Arthur Andersen have all been removed from their positions.
                                      Perhaps too late but gone anyway. But Enron has supported Vinson & Elkins,
                                      which approved every single one of these deals for Enron and then papered over Ms.
                                      Watkins’ allegations in a report finding that not a single transaction with LJM ‘‘was
                                      contrary to Enron’s best interests,’’ to this day. The law firm’s written report was
                                      issued just one day before Enron announced its equity write-down and earnings re-
                                      ductions based on the very Raptor transactions that Ms. Watkins brought to Ken-




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00013   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 14 ===
                                                                                          10
                                      neth Lay’s attention. I think it would be quite appropriate to devote a hearing to
                                      the role Enron’s legal counsel played in this fiasco that took $70 billion from the
                                      pockets of unsuspecting shareholders and employees.
                                        But today, I look forward to hearing from an extraordinarily courageous woman
                                      who has been a bright spot in an otherwise sorry and outrageous saga.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and the com-
                                      mittee will recess for approximately 20 minutes.
                                         [Brief recess.]
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The committee will come to order. The Chair
                                      recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Stearns, for an opening
                                      statement.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         And, Ms. Watkins, obviously, like other members, we would like
                                      to take the opportunity to welcome you to our committee, and we
                                      are pleased that you are willing to testify.
                                         Your status is perhaps not, as the press might outline, that you
                                      are a whistleblower. You are not the traditional whistleblower in
                                      the sense that you are still working for the company. And the way
                                      you did it was commendable, in the sense that you went to dif-
                                      ferent people and talked to them, and you asked for a transfer to
                                      another part of the company. But in a sort of semantic way, you
                                      are not a whistleblower in the traditional sense, and I am not sure
                                      if we have a word for—which describes when you stay within the
                                      company and work as you did, but it is—I think it was very effec-
                                      tive and helpful for us.
                                         I believe that employees such as yourself in no small measure
                                      contribute to the integrity of our commercial system by insisting
                                      that all participants play by the rules. And I think all Americans
                                      thank you for what you did.
                                         Second, I want to explore a number of substantive issues which
                                      you raise in your August 15, 2001, memo to Mr. Lay that touched
                                      upon the efficacy of our financial accounting standards. As part of
                                      the full committee’s Enron investigation, Chairman Tauzin has
                                      asked my subcommittee, which is Commerce, Trade, and Consumer
                                      Protection, to examine our accounting standards in light of the
                                      Enron collapse.
                                         As a matter of fact, my subcommittee just concluded a hearing
                                      which examined the adequacy and responsiveness of existing ac-
                                      counting standards. I believe, as it seems you may have believed
                                      also when you wrote the memo to Mr. Lay, that there is ample evi-
                                      dence that Enron, at a minimum, confused, obfuscated its true fi-
                                      nancial health from the investing public by using or possibly mis-
                                      using financial accounting standards.
                                         I now think there is enough evidence to suggest that Enron did
                                      not use special purpose entities such as Raptor as Generally Ac-
                                      cepted Accounting Principles would authorize it, but they used it
                                      to hide poor performing merchant investments, so that Enron
                                      would not have to show the declining values that existed on their
                                      income statement.
                                         Moreover, it appears that Enron reported the transfer of assets
                                      to SPEs as a sale and recognize them as such in its income state-
                                      ment, while it held the third party investors in the SPE harmless
                                      against the risk associated with those assets by pledging its stock
                                      as collateral.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00014   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 15 ===
                                                                                          11

                                         I believe this is what you alluded to in your memo when you
                                      wrote, and I am quoting, ‘‘If adequately explained, the investor
                                      would know that the entities described in our related party foot-
                                      note’’—and I assume you meant footnote number 16 of Enron’s
                                      2000 annual report—‘‘are thinly capitalized, the equity holders
                                      have no skin in the game, and all of the value in the entities come
                                      from underlying values of the derivatives. Unfortunately, in this
                                      case, there is a big loss in Enron stock and NP.’’
                                         So during the question and answer period, I hope we can further
                                      explore that. I, again, thank you very much for testifying.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and would
                                      urge each of the members, if they could, to keep their opening re-
                                      marks as brief as possible, so that we can move forward with the
                                      witness in view of the fact that we have votes and members will
                                      be leaving.
                                         The Chair recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Stupak, for an opening
                                      statement.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         I want to thank you, Ms. Watkins, for coming here today. Many
                                      of my colleagues and I truly appreciate your brave actions in in-
                                      forming Mr. Lay about the shady accounting that was going on in
                                      Enron. It is a shame that he and others on the Board, and in lead-
                                      ership positions at Enron, did not see these problems much earlier.
                                      Even now, there is a denial and a lack of acceptability of responsi-
                                      bility by Enron officials in all of the hearings we have had thus far
                                      to date.
                                         It is also a shame that even after you provided Mr. Lay with a
                                      road map of what was going on in Enron, as the Powers Report put
                                      it, they decided to hire inside counsel to do the investigation into
                                      the allegations. That counsel, Vinson & Elkins, was the very law
                                      firm that was responsible for providing advice on many of the ques-
                                      tionable transactions.
                                         It was no surprise that Vinson & Elkins, in summarizing their
                                      findings, stated that Ms. Watkins’ concerns were thoroughly inves-
                                      tigated but, quoting now, ‘‘found not to raise new or undisclosed in-
                                      formation.’’
                                         Mr. Chairman, we know that once a truly independent firm, one
                                      from outside the Enron family, was allowed to review the trans-
                                      actions, they came to a very different conclusion.
                                         Ms. Watkins, you mentioned in your interview with committee
                                      staff that when you met with Mr. Lay to discuss your memo you
                                      felt like the child who tells the emperor that he has no clothes. So
                                      I went out and got the book ‘‘The Emperor’s New Clothes.’’ And
                                      while you are to be commended for coming forward in August of
                                      2001, there was another emperor then, Jeffrey Skilling, who was
                                      running Enron prior to your August 15 letter. And I have a feeling
                                      he knew he had no clothes, and that is why—or that is what
                                      prompted his resignation.
                                         I would like to take just a moment to read you, if I may, the final
                                      page of Hans Christian Andersen’s story. I don’t believe he is any
                                      relation to Arthur Andersen.
                                         But the last page of the story goes like this. It says, ‘‘The em-
                                      peror shivered for it seemed they were right. But what could he do?
                                      After all, he was the emperor, and people expected him to be dig-




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00015   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 16 ===
                                                                                          12

                                      nified. I must continue to end the procession, he thought. So the
                                      emperor stood up just as tall, and his servants went on carrying
                                      the train that wasn’t there.’’
                                         Mr. Chairman, reading this, I can’t help but think of our last
                                      hearing last week with Mr. Skilling in his own parade, and his
                                      servants, Mr. Winokur and Mr. Jaedicke, following behind him car-
                                      rying his non-existent robe.
                                         I know we are all anxious to hear Ms. Watkins’ testimony. So I
                                      am going to take your advice. I look forward to your answering the
                                      questions we will put to you today.
                                         So, Mr. Chairman, with that, I will yield back my time.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and thanks
                                      him for not showing the picture of the unclothed emperor.
                                         The Chair recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
                                      Burr, for an opening statement.
                                         Mr. BURR. I thank the Chairman.
                                         Mr. Chairman, we have before us today a witness who I can—
                                      I believe can provide the most insight and helpful testimony we
                                      have yet to hear in piecing together this affair. With her back-
                                      ground as a CPA and a former employee of Andersen, many have
                                      described Sherron Watkins as being unique in her ability to bring
                                      light on this charade.
                                         I would add one more uniqueness about Ms. Watkins that was
                                      lacking in all of the other individuals who have chosen to come be-
                                      fore this committee—to stop the bleeding at Enron, to moral com-
                                      pass. In her now famous August memo, she brought to light what
                                      she saw as accounting improprieties, most noticeably in the Raptor
                                      transactions.
                                         Today she will share with us her observations and concerns that
                                      she raised with Enron executives, most notably Ken Lay, concerns
                                      that fell on deaf ears at the top of the company, while simulta-
                                      neously this one-time Giant fell to its knees.
                                         Mr. Chairman, I can detail, but others have done that. I think
                                      what best details the situation at Enron were the list of songs by
                                      the Texas native who just passed away, Waylon Jennings. One
                                      song might be ‘‘I Ain’t Living Long Like This,’’ ‘‘Wanted: The Out-
                                      laws,’’ ‘‘Momma Don’t Let Your Babies Grow Up to be Cowboys,’’
                                      or just ‘‘Some Good Ole Boys.’’
                                         And Andersen could best be described as ‘‘Are You Sure Hank
                                      Done it That Way?’’
                                         However, Waylon’s ballad ‘‘A Good-Hearted Woman’’ could not
                                      better describe the witness we have before us today. In all serious-
                                      ness, thank you, Sherron, for appearing before us. You are doing
                                      this committee and your fellow Enron employees a great service.
                                         In the New Testament, when Peter stepped out of the boat and
                                      walked on water, the miracle wasn’t the fact that he walked on
                                      water. No, the miracle was that he chose to put his faith in God
                                      and step out of the boat, a boat which was his protection but was
                                      bound to sink in troubled water.
                                         Thank you for choosing to step out of the boat today.
                                         I yield back.
                                         [Additional statements submitted for the record follow:]




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00016   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 17 ===
                                                                                          13
                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. STEVE LARGENT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
                                                                FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA

                                        Thank you Chairman Greenwood. As many of you know, this is my last day in
                                      Congress and I want to again, very briefly, thank the Chairman and the other mem-
                                      bers of the committee for their hard work and friendship over the years. Serving
                                      with you has been a high honor and privilege.
                                        When I ran for Congress in 1994 I believed, and still believe, that oversight was
                                      one of the most important functions of Congress. Much of the business of making
                                      sure our government is responsive and efficient happens in this committee. Over the
                                      years, this committee has dealt with many serious issues, but few have been more
                                      distressing, unexpected—and even shocking—than the scandal surrounding the col-
                                      lapse of Enron, the seventh largest corporation in the United States.
                                        This committee has a duty to displaced Enron workers, and to the American peo-
                                      ple, to connect as many dots as possible so we can determine what happened in this
                                      collapse and take whatever steps are necessary to ensure that something like this
                                      does not happen again. In the course of these hearings, as we try to untangle what
                                      appears to be a web of deceit, we may determine that this drama is nothing more
                                      than a story of simple robbery. It does appear, at this point, that Enron’s collapse
                                      was not brought about by anything other than those in the company who carefully
                                      constructed their own house of cards. Yet, I have full confidence that this committee
                                      will, in a careful and measured way, scour the laws that may have been cir-
                                      cumvented or disobeyed and tighten them so this type of fiasco can be avoided in
                                      the future.
                                        Again, I thank the Chairman and the other members for their friendship and
                                      dedication to serving the public on this committee. I look forward to hearing today’s
                                      testimony and, in particular, I want to commend Mr. Sherron Watkins for her cour-
                                      age in coming forward with her statement.


                                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. W.J. ‘‘BILLY’’ TAUZIN, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
                                                                  ENERGY AND COMMERCE
                                         Chairman Greenwood, your and the staff’s diligence in conducting these hearings
                                      must be commended. Although we have much more hard work ahead of us, there
                                      should be no question that this Subcommittee’s investigation into Enron’s financial
                                      collapse has begun to reveal what happened here and is serving a great public serv-
                                      ice.
                                         Let me also note that the Committee continues to move on other fronts to exam-
                                      ine whether legislative remedies are in order.
                                         Earlier this morning we began our Commerce, Trade, and Consumer Protection
                                      Subcommittee hearing, which is examining whether current financial accounting
                                      standards sufficiently protect investors. Yesterday, we held an Energy and Air Qual-
                                      ity Subcommittee hearing that examined the impact of Enron’s collapse on energy
                                      markets.
                                         Yesterday’s energy hearing revealed a fact that underscores a point I want to
                                      make about today’s hearing. In the energy hearing, we learned that, for all its size
                                      and market power, Enron ultimately had little effect on energy markets when it
                                      dramatically failed; the marketplace quickly adjusted, supplies were not signifi-
                                      cantly disrupted, neither were energy prices. This was some good news amidst all
                                      the sad news.
                                         Our O&I hearing, which today marks its third day of testimony focused on Enron,
                                      has revealed a deceptively simple lesson: that self-interested individuals—working
                                      in an ill-managed environment—were able to construct self-enriching schemes that
                                      effectively destroyed a company. This, in many respects, was an aberration, cer-
                                      tainly not representative of how most companies and corporations operate in Amer-
                                      ica, and certainly not representative of everybody who works in such companies.
                                         This morning, we have before us Sherron Watkins, one of several senior Enron
                                      employees we have come across in our investigation who attempted to call attention
                                      to these questionable partnerships and sham dealings. This, too, is a good news
                                      story, because it shows that, even among the culture of greed and corruption that
                                      appears to have permeated so many within Enron’s management, there were loyal,
                                      honest employees who attempted to stand up and put matters right. It seems, in
                                      the case of Enron, that there were not enough of these people in positions of influ-
                                      ence. Clearly those at the top, or in senior management, did not stand up.
                                         But I believe we should acknowledge that some senior employees did not try to
                                      hide matters; they did not shirk their duty to the company; they did not work to
                                      deceive the investing public. To the contrary, they stood up for their company, their




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00017   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6621   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 18 ===
                                                                                          14
                                      fellow employees, and the investing public, at great personal risk. They did the right
                                      thing, when it would have been so easy to close their eyes to it all.
                                         Ms. Watkins, as Chairman Greenwood pointed out, was so concerned about what
                                      she saw in Enron’s dealings with these related partnerships that she went to the
                                      person in charge of it all, Chairman and CEO Ken Lay, believing that would save
                                      the company.
                                         Her communication did set off action and inquiry within the company, but these
                                      were not enough to correct matters—indeed some action aimed to hide matters fur-
                                      ther from public view. This morning I look forward to learning more about the peo-
                                      ple involved in these decisions. These are people who, we now understand, did not
                                      believe Ms. Watkins, or who minimized her complaints. I look forward to discussing
                                      some of this with her this morning.
                                         In an interview with Committee investigators, Ms. Watkins has indicated that
                                      there are more widespread financial shenanigans that have yet to be reported. Also,
                                      it turns out she was more active in communicating concerns to the top than had
                                      previously been realized. I look forward to learning more about her late October con-
                                      versations with Mr. Lay and other individuals—conversations on the eve of Enron’s
                                      collapse.
                                         Ms. Watkins, welcome. I appreciate your cooperation with this Committee and
                                      hope your testimony will help us get even closer to the truth.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                      nizes himself for 10 minutes for questions.
                                         Ms. Watkins, when you and I—oh, I am sorry. I am sorry. It is
                                      a good thing we have staff here. Ms. Watkins, you are aware that
                                      this committee is holding an investigative hearing, and when hold-
                                      ing an investigative hearing it is our practice to take testimony
                                      under oath. Do you have any objections to taking your testimony
                                      under—giving your testimony under oath today?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, I don’t.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. The Chair then advises you that under
                                      the rules of this committee, and the rules of the House, you are en-
                                      titled to be advised by counsel. Do you choose to be advised by
                                      counsel today?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I do.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. And would you identify your counsel for me?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Mr. Philip Hilder.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. Sir, would you spell your last name,
                                      please?
                                         Mr. HILDER. Hilder, sir. H-I-L-D-E-R.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you.
                                         In that case, if you would please rise and raise your right hand,
                                      I will give you the oath.
                                         [Witness sworn.]
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. You may be seated. You are under oath, and
                                      you are recognized for your opening remarks. You probably want
                                      to pull that microphone over to you, and it is fairly directional.
                                            TESTIMONY OF SHERRON WATKINS, VICE PRESIDENT OF
                                              CORPORATE DEVELOPMENT, ENRON CORPORATION
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Okay. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, members of
                                      the subcommittee. I am Sherron Watkins. And thank you for the
                                      opportunity to address the subcommittee this morning.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Pull it up a little closer and speak right into
                                      it. There you go.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I am currently employed at Enron Corporation as
                                      a Vice President. By way of background, I hold a master’s degree
                                      in professional accounting from the University of Texas at Austin,
                                      and I have been a certified public accountant since 1983.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00018   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 19 ===
                                                                                          15

                                         I began my career in 1982 at Arthur Andersen as an auditor. I
                                      spent 8 years at Andersen in both the Houston and New York of-
                                      fices. I joined New York-based MG Trade Finance in 1990 to man-
                                      age their portfolio of commodity-backed finance assets. I held that
                                      position until October 1993.
                                         In October 1993, I was hired by Mr. Andrew Fastow and moved
                                      back to Houston to manage Enron’s newly formed partnership with
                                      CalPERS, the California Public Employee Retirement System. The
                                      partnership was the Joint Energy Development Investments Lim-
                                      ited Partnership, or JEDI. I held the JEDI management portfolio
                                      position until the end of 1996.
                                         From 1997 until early 2000, I worked for Enron International,
                                      primarily in the mergers and acquisitions group, which is also
                                      known as the corporate development group. In early 2000, I trans-
                                      ferred to Enron Broadband Services. I worked there until June of
                                      2001 in a variety of roles.
                                         In mid to late June of 2001, I went to work directly for Mr.
                                      Fastow, assisting in the corporate development work that had been
                                      put under his supervision after Cliff Baxter resigned in May of
                                      2001. I worked for Mr. Fastow in this new role until late August
                                      2001. I have since been reassigned into the human resources group
                                      with a variety of assignments.
                                         While working for Mr. Fastow in 2001, I was charged with re-
                                      viewing all assets that Enron considered for sale and determining
                                      the likely economic impact of sale. As part of the sale analysis, I
                                      reviewed the estimated book values and market values of each
                                      asset.
                                         A number of assets were hedged with an entity called Raptor.
                                      Any asset that was hedged should, for the most part, have a
                                      locked-in sales value for Enron, meaning that despite current mar-
                                      ket prices Enron should realize the hedged price with Raptor. It
                                      was my understanding that the Raptor special purpose entities
                                      were owned by LJM, the partnership run by Mr. Fastow.
                                         In completing my work, certain Enron business units provided
                                      me with analyses that showed certain of the hedged losses that had
                                      been incurred by Raptor were actually coming back to Enron. The
                                      general explanation was that the Enron stock backstopping the
                                      Raptor hedge had declined in value such that Raptor would have
                                      a shortfall and would be unable to fully cover the hedge price that
                                      it owed to Enron.
                                         I was highly alarmed by the information I was receiving. My un-
                                      derstanding as an accountant is that a company could never use
                                      its own stock to generate a gain or avoid a loss on its income state-
                                      ment. I continued to ask questions and seek answers, primarily
                                      from former co-workers in the global finance group, or in the busi-
                                      ness units that had hedged assets with Raptor. I never heard reas-
                                      suring explanations.
                                         I was not comfortable confronting either Mr. Skilling or Mr.
                                      Fastow with my concerns. To do so I believed would have been a
                                      job terminating move.
                                         On August 14, 2001, I was informed of Mr. Skilling’s sudden res-
                                      ignation and felt compelled to inform Mr. Lay of the accounting
                                      problems that faced Enron. I sent Mr. Lay an anonymous letter on
                                      August 14, 2001, in response to a request for questions for an up-




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00019   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 20 ===
                                                                                          16

                                      coming all-employee meeting to be held August 16 to address Mr.
                                      Skilling’s departure.
                                        At the all-employee meeting, Mr. Lay commented that our vi-
                                      sions and values had slipped, and that if any employee was truly
                                      troubled by anything at Enron, please bring those concerns to him
                                      or any number of the top management, including Cindy Olson,
                                      Steve Kean, and others.
                                        On August 16, I met with Ms. Olson to show her a copy of the
                                      letter and discuss it with her. She encouraged me to meet with Mr.
                                      Lay personally. Since Mr. Lay was traveling through the rest of the
                                      week, she said the meeting would probably take place the week of
                                      August 20.
                                        I was concerned that Mr. Lay was planning to fill the Office of
                                      the Chair over the weekend and that he might choose Mr. Fastow
                                      or Rick Causey, the Chief Accounting Officer. To voice my concerns,
                                      I met with Rex Rogers, Enron’s Associate General Counsel, on Fri-
                                      day, August 17, 2001. I provided Mr. Rogers with a version of the
                                      anonymous letter as well as two additional memos, all of which are
                                      part of the seven pages that this committee discovered in mid Jan-
                                      uary 2002.
                                        On Monday, August 20, 2001, Mr. Lay’s assistant scheduled a
                                      meeting for me to meet with Mr. Lay that following Wednesday,
                                      August 22, 2001. I subsequently held discussions with a former
                                      mentor at Andersen, James Hecker, and a long time friend and co-
                                      worker, Jeffrey McMahon, to vet my concerns before my meeting
                                      with Mr. Lay.
                                        I met with Mr. Lay on the afternoon of Wednesday, August 22,
                                      2001. The meeting lasted just over one half hour. I provided him
                                      with five memos I had drafted to help explain the problems facing
                                      the company. These five memos constitute the seven pages this
                                      committee discovered and subsequently disclosed on January 14,
                                      2002. Additionally, I provided Mr. Lay an analysis of the Raptor
                                      entity economics and a presentation prepared by Enron’s risk as-
                                      sessment and control group.
                                        I primarily used the memo titled ‘‘Summary of Raptor Oddities’’
                                      as talking points with Mr. Lay. My main point to Mr. Lay was that
                                      by this time Raptor owed Enron in excess of $700 million under
                                      certain hedging agreements. My understanding was that the
                                      Raptor entities basically had no other business aside from these
                                      hedges. Therefore, they had collectively lost over $700 million.
                                        I urged Mr. Lay to find out who lost that money. If he discovered
                                      that this loss would be borne by Enron shareholders via an
                                      issuance of stock in the future, then I thought we had a very large
                                      problem on our hands. I gave Mr. Lay my opinion that it is never
                                      appropriate for a company to use its stock to effect its income state-
                                      ment.
                                        At the conclusion of the meeting, Mr. Lay assured me that he
                                      would look into my concerns. I also requested a transfer as I was
                                      uncomfortable remaining as a direct report to Mr. Fastow.
                                        I intend to fully cooperate with the subcommittee, and I now wel-
                                      come the opportunity to answer any questions the members may
                                      have at this time.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. Thank you very much for your testimony, Ms.
                                      Watkins. We all thank you again for being here.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00020   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 21 ===
                                                                                          17

                                         The Chair recognizes himself for 10 minutes for inquiry.
                                         Ms. Watkins, when we spoke yesterday you described that in
                                      your earlier days working for Mr. Fastow, the special purpose enti-
                                      ties were basically legitimate. They seemed to be garden variety,
                                      securitized entities that were designed to serve legitimate financial
                                      purposes with which you had no qualms. And as you explained,
                                      Condor was one of those early SPEs that fit that category.
                                         As you described your time with the company, it seemed to me
                                      that it was like the story of the frog in the pot on the stove. That
                                      gradually, largely directed by Mr. Fastow, the rules of the game
                                      began to change, and the legitimacy of these entities and partner-
                                      ships began to be stretched until finally we end up with something
                                      like the Raptors, which seem to serve no legitimate, and perhaps
                                      not even a legal, purpose. It seemed to me that the difficulty was
                                      that the corporate culture was slowly acclimated to this transition
                                      from what was quite legitimate, to what was clearly not legitimate.
                                         Let me ask you this specific question. Is it your opinion that the
                                      Raptor transactions were nothing more than sheer income state-
                                      ment manipulation? And if you do think that, why do you say so?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. That is my opinion, and it is my opinion because
                                      true economic risk was not passed to a third party. Raptor owed
                                      Enron in excess of $700 million, and there was not an outside third
                                      party that bore that loss. It was going to be borne by Enron’s
                                      shareholders by an issuance of stock in the future.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Explain how that affected the income state-
                                      ments.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. The Raptor hedges were locking in, supposedly,
                                      sales value that Enron had on equity investments that it had
                                      made. The investments that were probably the more volatile was
                                      the tech investment in Avici and the New Power Company, a start-
                                      up that Enron had done.
                                         Those investments were hedged with Raptor. They had dropped
                                      significantly in value, and in the related party footnote in 2000 it
                                      mentions that Enron had recognized $500 million of revenue from
                                      the special entities’ offsetting of corresponding writedown in the eq-
                                      uity investment portfolio of Enron.
                                         I think that tended to make readers think that it was a $500
                                      million gain offset by a $500 million loss. Therefore, zero impact on
                                      the income statement. However, without the Raptor transactions,
                                      Enron would have had a $500 million loss not covered by any gains
                                      running through the 2000 income statement.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. As you came to understand this, prior to your
                                      first meeting with Mr. Lay, did you discuss these concerns with
                                      other employees at Enron?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. As I was doing my work and looking at these as-
                                      sets hedged by Raptor, my concern was that it seemed to be just
                                      common knowledge that the Raptor losses were backstopped by
                                      Enron stock. And an analysis was always looked at, what’s the
                                      value of Enron stock compared to the money Raptor owes us? And
                                      I was shocked that people could explain this to me with no concern
                                      in their voice, like there was some magic structure that Enron and
                                      Andersen had come up with to make this work.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00021   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 22 ===
                                                                                          18

                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Did you get the impression, or was it said to
                                      you by others that they thought that this was perfectly legitimate,
                                      or that it was shaky, but everyone is going along with the deal?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. There were people like Mr. McMahon and others
                                      that had expressed concerns about LJM and the transactions
                                      Enron was doing with LJM. But for the most part, people seemed
                                      to think there was some accounting rule that was allowing this to
                                      be acceptable. It was very common knowledge. It wasn’t hidden.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Did you watch Mr. Skilling’s testimony before
                                      this subcommittee last week?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I did.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Would you care to comment on how you reacted
                                      as you heard Mr. Skilling describe his awareness or lack of aware-
                                      ness or understanding of these transactions?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I would like to use Mr. Skilling’s own words
                                      to describe what I thought about his testimony. He was inter-
                                      viewed by Enron’s in-house newsletter in 2001. In the interview,
                                      Mr. Skilling was asked, ‘‘What is the best advice you ever re-
                                      ceived?’’ And his reply was, ‘‘If it doesn’t make any sense, don’t be-
                                      lieve it.’’
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Did you confront Mr. Skilling himself with this
                                      concern?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, sir, I did not.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. And why did you not?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I did not want to do that without the safety net
                                      of a job in hand. I felt like it would be an immediate job termi-
                                      nating move. Frankly, I thought it would be fruitless, that nothing
                                      would happen.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Did you have other experiences, or the experi-
                                      ences of others that led you to believe you might be putting your
                                      job on the line if you were to confront Mr. Skilling, or Mr. Fastow
                                      for that matter, with these concerns?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Basically, it appeared that the Raptor transactions
                                      had been going on for a number of years. My understanding was
                                      that Mr. Skilling was fully aware of them. He is a very hands-on
                                      manager. I had also heard rumors that people as close to him as
                                      Mr. Baxter had complained to him, and he had done nothing. So
                                      I really felt it was fruitless to go to Mr. Skilling.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Do you think it is possible that Mr. Skilling
                                      was unaware of the nature of these transactions?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, I do not.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Could you tell us why you think that is not
                                      possible? He seemed to have forgotten about them.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. He is a very intense, hands-on manager. He was
                                      very involved in Mr. Fastow’s endeavors, and I find it very hard to
                                      believe that he was not fully aware of transactions with Mr.
                                      Fastow’s partnerships.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Now, did Mr. Fastow learn that you had com-
                                      municated your concerns to Mr. Lay?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I did find out that he found out I was the writer
                                      of the anonymous letters, and that I had also met with Mr. Lay.
                                      I found that out August 30, 2001.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. And how did he respond? Did he name you Em-
                                      ployee of the Month?




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00022   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 23 ===
                                                                                          19

                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, Ms. Olson told me that she and Ken Lay
                                      were both highly alarmed by Mr. Fastow’s reaction. He wanted to
                                      have me fired. He wanted to seize my computer.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. He wanted to have you fired? He told people
                                      he wanted to have you fired?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. That is what Ms. Olson told me.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. And he wanted your computer?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. And did he obtain your computer?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. He did, but Ms. Olson basically said, ‘‘Let me send
                                      you to your office with an IT person. Here is a new laptop. Transfer
                                      whatever files you want on to the new one. Delete whatever ones
                                      you want to on the old one. We will just hand him the hardware.’’
                                      She said, ‘‘You don’t mind doing that, do you?’’ And I said, ‘‘No, I
                                      don’t.’’
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. So you pulled a fast one on Andy. Let us get
                                      to your face-to-face meeting with Mr. Lay. Could you describe for
                                      the committee how he reacted and what your impression of his re-
                                      action is, and particularly with regard to what extent it seemed to
                                      you, based on his comments, his reactions, that the news that you
                                      were bringing to him was surprising or not surprising, was alarm-
                                      ing or not alarming, and to what extent it seemed to you that he
                                      had an appropriate response that would have convinced you, given
                                      you some comfort that he was, in fact, going to deal with this.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, he tried to put me at ease. He knew this was
                                      probably difficult for me to do, and he recognized that. I handed
                                      him my set of documents and directed him to the Summary of
                                      Raptor Oddities document as a talking point. He seemed to take it
                                      very seriously. In fact, when he read the quote that I put in that
                                      memo about the manager level employee saying we are such a
                                      crooked company, he winced. You know, that seemed a painful
                                      comment to him.
                                         He was aware that these Raptor transactions had been presented
                                      to the Board, but I said my understanding of the way these things
                                      are generally presented, it is high level summaries, and I am not
                                      so certain that the true nature was fully disclosed. And he con-
                                      tended that I might be right, and by the end of the discussion, you
                                      know, he certainly said he would look into it and order an inves-
                                      tigation, and asked me, you know, what could he do for me, which
                                      is when I requested the transfer out of Mr. Fastow’s group.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. My time has expired.
                                         The Chair recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Dingell, for 10 minutes
                                      for purposes of inquiry.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, I thank you. Again, I commend you.
                                         Ms. Watkins, I want to commend you also. I hope you under-
                                      stand these questions are friendly, but our time is limited, so I,
                                      therefore, have to ask them in a way that gives you an opportunity
                                      to answer, where possible, yes or no.
                                         I will be working from a document which is entitled ‘‘Outlines of
                                      Points to Discuss with Ken Lay and Jim Derrick.’’
                                         Ms. Watkins, you specifically asked that Vinson & Elkins not do
                                      this investigation. That was because they had approved many of
                                      the LJM deals as attorney for Enron, is that correct?




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00023   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 24 ===
                                                                                          20

                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir, it is.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Now, I want to refer you to the document that I
                                      have just mentioned. This is a document which was prepared by
                                      Vinson & Elkins on the result of their investigation, and Jim Der-
                                      rick is Enron’s General Counsel, is he not?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, he is.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Ms. Watkins, and in this document it says that
                                      Jim Derrick decided not to engage an independent accountant as
                                      you had recommended. Is that correct?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. The caveat on the investigation was that they
                                      should not second-guess the accounting treatment. They would not
                                      do a detailed transaction analysis, and there would be no discovery-
                                      style investigation. Did you know that at this particular time or at
                                      some later time?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I was not aware that the investigation was being
                                      limited. I met with Vinson & Elkins on September 10 for roughly
                                      3 hours and had no indication that it was a limited investigation.
                                      I only discovered that it was limited when I read their October 15
                                      response, which was not provided to me. I read it off of this com-
                                      mittee’s web page.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. It is fair to say that this, then, was not much of
                                      an investigation, was it?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t think so.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Vinson & Elkins said that with all of these caveats
                                      there is no problem, except a cosmetic one, is that correct?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. That is what they concluded.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. And on page 7, Vinson & Elkins tells Ken Lay that
                                      Enron stock is being used to support transactions with Condor and
                                      Raptor. Enron was getting earnings through transactions with
                                      Raptor when it could be argued that there was no third party in-
                                      volved. And because of the falling value of both Enron stock and
                                      asset value, the question was raised as to who bears the loss.
                                         These are exactly the same questions you had asked earlier. Isn’t
                                      that so?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Now, then, Vinson & Elkins says at page 8 of the
                                      document, ‘‘Notwithstanding these bad cosmetics, Enron represent-
                                      atives uniformly stated that Condor and Raptor vehicles were clev-
                                      er, useful vehicles that benefited Enron.’’ What this says to me,
                                      that everyone—Vinson & Elkins, Ken Lay, Jim Derrick, and all of
                                      the people they interviewed—knew that these were not special pur-
                                      pose vehicles that bore risk. Is that correct?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It would appear to be so, yes.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. And they knew that they were in bad financial
                                      shape, did they not?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. And they had approved them, had they not?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. So when high level officials say they didn’t know
                                      about these vehicles, can that be true?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, they knew about the vehicles.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Now, what do you think all of these people ex-
                                      pected to happen at this point in September 2001?




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00024   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 25 ===
                                                                                          21

                                         Ms. WATKINS. I think what is interesting to note is that it says
                                      here, ‘‘The Raptor vehicles were clever, useful vehicles that bene-
                                      fited Enron.’’ I think that there was an understanding that Ander-
                                      sen and Vinson & Elkins had blessed these things. When I met
                                      with Rex Rogers on August 17, he said, ‘‘Sherron, how could you
                                      possibly be right? Andersen and Vinson & Elkins would not risk
                                      their firms giving us wrong advice. They have blessed these struc-
                                      tures.’’ And so I think that certain people at Enron thought that
                                      these were complex but clever, and that they were legitimate.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Now, so here we have a situation where Vinson &
                                      Elkins does—I think they had to—some kind of due diligence, or
                                      gave legal advice to Enron on these matters. Is that not so?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. The accountant was in the similar position, both
                                      as accountant and as consultant, is that not so?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, that is right.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. So am I fair in inferring from this that their state-
                                      ments about the character of these devices as being of benefit to
                                      Enron was in error?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, a benefit to Enron, if you consider that we
                                      were meeting financial statement targets that we had told investor
                                      analysts, but you can’t meet those targets falsely.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. So they were essentially representing them as
                                      being a benefit in the meeting of targets which could not be met.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. DINGELL. Mr. Chairman, in the interest of time, I would like
                                      to just ask unanimous consent to introduce the document to which
                                      I have referred.
                                         Again, Ms. Watkins, you are a woman of extraordinary courage.
                                      We thank you for your assistance.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Without objection, the document to which the
                                      gentleman from Michigan refers, and all of the other documents in
                                      the binder, will be made a part of the record.
                                         The Chair recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Tauzin, for 10 minutes.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         First, Ms. Watkins, I apologize that we scheduled this hearing on
                                      Valentine’s Day. We want to wish you Happy Valentine’s Day.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Thank you.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I want to refer to the document which you
                                      handed Ken Lay on October 30. That document has been widely
                                      publicized in the last several days. Some have characterized it as
                                      an attempt to describe a public relations effort to help the company
                                      through this problem.
                                         I want you to tell me whether the facts outlined in that docu-
                                      ment, to your best knowledge and belief, are true.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir. I was providing this to Mr. Lay as a con-
                                      cept on public relations. However, I felt it was a truthful public re-
                                      lations strategy, and it was something I felt should be said.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. The things you recommended that Mr. Lay
                                      say and do are based upon facts in this document that you believe
                                      to be true.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I do believe that Mr. Skilling and Mr. Fastow,
                                      along with two very well respected firms, did dupe Ken Lay and
                                      the Board.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00025   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 26 ===
                                                                                          22

                                          Chairman TAUZIN. You say that, ‘‘As CEO, Mr. Lay relied upon
                                      his COO, Mr. Skilling, as well as CFO Fastow and CAO Causey,
                                      to manage the details.’’ Is that correct?
                                          Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Is that accurate? Was Mr. Skilling expected
                                      to manage the details of these transactions?
                                          Ms. WATKINS. From all the records and the presentations that I
                                      have reviewed, Mr. Skilling was supposed to be an integral part of
                                      the controls and the review process with the LJM transactions.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Did you see Mr. Skilling’s testimony last week
                                      before this committee?
                                          Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir, I did.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Did you specifically hear his testimony re-
                                      garding the LJM approval sheets?
                                          Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I did.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Now, he testified that he never saw these
                                      sheets and he was not required to sign them. That is why he didn’t
                                      sign them. Is it your testimony that he, in fact, knew about these
                                      sheets?
                                          Ms. WATKINS. Well, all I can speak to is that it was Enron’s very
                                      strict policy, when completing transactions and deals, to have deal
                                      approval sheets, and there was never a name put on the approval
                                      block that was not required. And I don’t ever remember an in-
                                      stance where signatures were not obtained for every person listed.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. So that if Mr. Skilling’s name consistently ap-
                                      pears on the sheets, but it remains unsigned, it was not because
                                      he was not obligated to sign it. It was because he just didn’t sign
                                      it.
                                          Ms. WATKINS. That is correct.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Is that correct?
                                          Ms. WATKINS. That would be my understanding of our very strict
                                      procedures, yes.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. Were those procedures that Mr. Skilling
                                      would have understood?
                                          Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. You say also in the memo that Mr. Lay
                                      should admit that he trusted the wrong people. Are you saying that
                                      Mr. Lay was wrong to trust Mr. Skilling and Mr. Fastow and Mr.
                                      Causey with these details?
                                          Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir. I do believe they misserved Mr. Lay, the
                                      Board, Enron, and its shareholders.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. In fact, you go on to say that Ken Lay and
                                      his Board were duped by a COO who wanted the targets met no
                                      matter what the consequences, a CFO motivated by personal greed,
                                      and two of the most respected firms—Arthur Andersen and Com-
                                      pany and Vinson & Elkins—who had both grown too wealthy off
                                      Enron’s yearly business and no longer performed their roles as Ken
                                      Lay, the Board, and just about everybody on the street would ex-
                                      pect as a minimum standard for CPAs and attorneys. Do you be-
                                      lieve that statement to be true?
                                          Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir, I do.
                                          Chairman TAUZIN. You say further on the culprits are Skilling,
                                      Fastow, Glisan, Causey, as well as Arthur Andersen and Vinson &
                                      Elkins. Do you believe that statement to be true?




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00026   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 27 ===
                                                                                          23

                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir, I do.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Now, in Mr. Skilling’s testimony, he very spe-
                                      cifically denied any knowledge that in these transactions Enron
                                      Corporation had not properly transferred the risk to cover the
                                      losses. Do you believe that statement to be true?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, I do not. Mr. Skilling was a great proponent
                                      of looking to the markets to make sense of a transaction. And I
                                      doubt we could have hedged these volatile stocks with any true un-
                                      related third party at the prices that we were actually able to ob-
                                      tain from Raptor.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Is it your testimony, then, that Mr. Skilling
                                      must have known about the details of the Raptor transaction to
                                      know that risk had not transferred?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It is my opinion that he was probably aware that
                                      we could not have transacted at those prices with an unrelated
                                      third party, and the only reason Mr. Fastow was transacting with
                                      Enron through the Raptor transactions at those prices for volatile
                                      stocks was that Mr. Fastow could not lose money and he was back-
                                      stopped by Enron stock.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Now, Ms. Watkins, you made it as clear as I
                                      have ever seen anybody make it. You basically outlined for Mr. Lay
                                      what would happen if he did the right thing—he cleaned up this
                                      mess, reported correctly to his stockholders and investors, if he got
                                      rid of the culprits, and if he made these public statements on be-
                                      half of the corporation that he, in fact, was going to do everything
                                      to say his company.
                                         And that if he didn’t take that advice, you told him, ‘‘The worst
                                      is going to happen. It is going to happen anyhow. And Mr. Lay will
                                      be more implicated in this than is deserved.’’ What did you mean
                                      by that?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Mr. Lay was back at the helm as CEO, and it is
                                      my humble opinion that he did not understand the gravity of the
                                      situation the company was in.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Now, you explained to him, as the Chairman
                                      has outlined, in rather detailed form, what you thought was wrong
                                      with Raptors, what you thought was wrong with these trans-
                                      actions. Did he understand the gravity, the implications, of what
                                      you were telling him, in your opinion?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. In my opinion, I don’t think he did. And I have
                                      that opinion because at an October 23 all-employee meeting to dis-
                                      cuss the writedowns that had occurred in the third quarter there
                                      were several questions about Raptor and about the LJM trans-
                                      actions.
                                         And Mr. Lay likened the problem the company was now facing
                                      to a 1980’s problem when the Peruvian government nationalized an
                                      oil company Enron had to a J-block problem Enron had in 1997.
                                      And I don’t think an accounting manipulation problem is in any
                                      way related to a——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. You are saying he didn’t get it.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, I don’t——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. He didn’t get it. Now, as I understand your
                                      memo to him, you are basically telling him that these officials of
                                      his corporation were engaging in improper activities, were doing it
                                      in a way that he and his Board were being duped, kept in the dark.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00027   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 28 ===
                                                                                          24

                                      Who had the power to protect those people from discovery from Mr.
                                      Lay and his Board? Who had the power to allow these activities to
                                      go forward, by all of these employees, including investing them-
                                      selves in some of these outside partnerships and entities at great
                                      profit? Who had the power to let all of that happen and keep that
                                      information from the Board and Mr. Lay all that while?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. My opinion would be that would be Mr. Skilling.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. And, finally, Ms. Watkins, I refer you to the
                                      document entitled ‘‘Lessons Learned,’’ Tab 8. In that document
                                      there are three points—recognize the accounting hedge versus an
                                      economic hedge, corporation should consider hedging assets in
                                      Raptor to minimize credit capability/volatility, the new Raptor
                                      structure transferred risk in the form of stock dilution. Did you
                                      show this document to Mr. Lay?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I did.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Now, it contains some handwriting. Whose
                                      handwriting is that?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. That is my handwriting.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. The handwriting basically says to the final
                                      point, there it is. That is the smoking gun. You cannot do this.
                                      What did this mean?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, my concern was that this was a document
                                      Enron had produced. It was well known. What that bullet point is
                                      trying to say in plain English is that the new Raptor structure
                                      transferred income statement equity investment risk in the form of
                                      stock dilution. And you can never use your stock to affect the in-
                                      come statement.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. You just——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. You can’t do that.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. [continuing] can’t do that legitimately, legally.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. That is correct.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Where did you get this document?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. From the risk assessment and control group run
                                      by Mr. Richard Buy.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. And if I may, what was Mr. Lay’s reaction to
                                      this document when you showed it to him?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. He was concerned. He was concerned with every-
                                      thing I was telling him.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. There is another note you wrote on the second
                                      point. ‘‘The corporation isn’t Raptor. How could corporation con-
                                      sider anything at Raptor?’’ What did you mean by that?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, the bullet point just says the corporation
                                      should consider hedging assets in Raptor to minimize, you know,
                                      some problems. And if Raptor is supposed to be Mr. Fastow’s com-
                                      pany, then it is Mr. Fastow’s problem. Why should Enron Corpora-
                                      tion——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Not the corporation.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. [continuing] consider anything there? Exactly.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Even with this, you still say he didn’t get it?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t think so.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you, ma’am.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                      nizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Deutsch, for 10 minutes.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00028   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 29 ===
                                                                                          25

                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Thank you, Ms. Watkins. Someone reading
                                      through Enron’s statements, would they have a perspective that
                                      those statements fairly represent the status of the company prior
                                      to the bankruptcy?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t think so. I think that related party footnote
                                      is wholly inadequate in describing the transactions with Mr.
                                      Fastow’s partnerships.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Okay. So I think all of us would probably agree
                                      with what you just said. How was that able to happen? How were
                                      we able to get to the seventh largest company in America under
                                      what we consider general accounting principles that those state-
                                      ments are supposed to fairly represent what is going on in the com-
                                      pany? And you and me and I think anyone who has looked at this
                                      would come to the same conclusion that they do not. How did that
                                      happen?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It is inconceivable, and I don’t understand how it
                                      happened.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. I mean, obviously, it happened. I mean, at some
                                      point in time someone had to have had discussions between people
                                      at Enron and their accountants, Arthur Andersen, and their attor-
                                      neys, Vinson & Elkins. I mean, are you aware of discussions that
                                      would have allowed it to happen?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I can really just point to what Mr. Stupak said in
                                      the emperor’s new clothes. There were swindlers in the emperor’s
                                      new clothes discussing the fine material that they were weaving.
                                      And I think Mr. Skilling and Mr. Fastow are highly intimidating,
                                      very smart individuals, and I think they intimidated a number of
                                      people into accepting some structures that were not truly accept-
                                      able.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. This is somewhat of a side light, but I think some-
                                      thing significant. At the time that you were obviously aware of
                                      what was going on, I mean, that the statements of the company did
                                      not reflect, in fact, huge losses in the billions of dollars, so what
                                      the value of Enron was was—as reflected in its stock price was not
                                      its true value. And there were people, obviously, in Enron that
                                      knew about this.
                                         And, apparently, what we know—and I am trying to get a copy
                                      at this point, but it is a public domain at this point—that effec-
                                      tively dozens of management people were selling hundreds of mil-
                                      lions of dollars worth of stock at this period of time.
                                         So, obviously, people knew what was going on, because my recol-
                                      lection is that there was only one actual purchase with, you know,
                                      dozens of sales. Was that the sort of culture of what was going on
                                      in terms of the inside management at this point in time? Under-
                                      standing, in fact, what you uncovered and what we know now, that
                                      the value was not—that the liability of these Raptors was not re-
                                      flected in the statements.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It is hard for me to say about executives who sold
                                      stock, because so many of them thought that somehow or other this
                                      was legitimate. I am——
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Legitimate, but they also knew that there was an
                                      actual loss out there, and legitimate also that it seems as if every-
                                      one understood that the partnership could never make good on that
                                      loss. So there was—so people who actually understood the partner-




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00029   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 30 ===
                                                                                          26

                                      ships understood that eventually that loss was going to come back
                                      to Enron.
                                         I mean, it might have been legal, but as a practical matter, in
                                      terms of the value of the company, I can’t imagine how they
                                      wouldn’t know that that—there was going to be a day of reckoning
                                      at some point in time.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. You could be right. I can’t really speculate. Enron
                                      is a very arrogant place, with a feeling of invincibility. And I am
                                      not certain people felt like it was that imminent. They just felt like
                                      Mr. Fastow, along with the accountants, would come up with some
                                      magic in the future.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Was there any thought at all—I mean, because,
                                      again, I guess what I am hearing you say and when I look at it
                                      at this point, is that anyone—and I don’t think you had to be a
                                      Harvard MBA at this point or an Arthur Andersen partner to un-
                                      derstand that there were liabilities that were not reflected in the
                                      balance sheet of the company, huge liabilities, in the billions of dol-
                                      lars.
                                         And if you knew that and the market and the transparency in
                                      the public markets, you knew the stock was going to go down at
                                      some point. Was there any concern at all for shareholders for em-
                                      ployees that 100 percent of their life savings in 401Ks to retired
                                      people throughout the country who had investments in Enron stock
                                      who really have been devastated by this collapse of Enron? And
                                      was there any thought, any discussion, what this would mean to
                                      actual shareholders?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I never heard any discussions.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Did you have any sense at all that there was any
                                      concern for shareholders at all?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t recall any discussions of concerns like that.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. You have testified, and, you know, you have used
                                      the word I guess ‘‘improper.’’ I feel comfortable using the word ‘‘ille-
                                      gal,’’ because—and, you know, I guess sometimes I debate whether
                                      to go into, you know, what level of detail in terms of these trans-
                                      actions. But I think we have to go into some detail really to under-
                                      stand them and also for—just to have it on the record in this sense.
                                         The hedging, okay, Avici—all right. That would have been a nor-
                                      mal business decision. What was the original investment of Avici?
                                      Do you know the detail?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t have exactly what was originally——
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Do you have a ballpark number?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I really don’t. I think it was under $10 million.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Okay. And what was it—what was the price when
                                      the hedge was put into effect, the value, the——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I believe around $166 or $170 a share.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. So the value was $166 million at that point? Or
                                      more?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Enron’s value was probably in excess of $150 mil-
                                      lion by then.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Okay. So the idea was to hedge that increase. And
                                      what you have said and what you have testified to is, first of all,
                                      could they have gone to a legitimate third party, an investment
                                      bank, to buy—a derivative to buy a put for that—for the strike
                                      price? I mean, was that available?




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00030   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 31 ===
                                                                                          27

                                         Ms. WATKINS. I believe we had some hold restrictions on the
                                      stock, but probably there were some transactions, derivative trans-
                                      actions, that were available to us from unrelated parties.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Okay. And, again, just to kind of walk through
                                      this specific transaction, so in a ballpark number, what would an
                                      unrelated third party ask for to sell that type of put to lock in that
                                      gain? Just a ballpark number.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I don’t think you could have locked it in at
                                      that $170 price.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Right.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. There would have been a significant haircut to
                                      that price.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Right. Can you use real numbers?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. As much as, I would say, 30 or 40 percent.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Okay. And that strike price would be at what
                                      number?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Probably more like $120 or $110, maybe even
                                      lower. I am——
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Okay. And then, what was the price that was sold
                                      by the partnership, by the Raptor?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t believe that we have sold it. I believe Avici
                                      is selling for somewhere——
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. No, no. The put. The——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Oh, I think $170 a share.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. No, no. But what was the—what did it cost Enron
                                      to buy it from this partnership?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I am not familiar exactly what those details.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Ballpark about?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I don’t know exactly how the Raptor puts or
                                      fees were paid. I do know that approximately $35 million went to
                                      Mr. Fastow or went to LJM out of the Raptors, and that that was
                                      supposedly representing fees. But that was for all of the hedges.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Right. And I guess this is where, you know, I
                                      think that, you know, we have crossed the line of illegal activity,
                                      because what I hear you saying is that that transaction that you
                                      just described, which was one of many transactions, and basically
                                      there was this sort of cookie cutter of locking this in, and what ap-
                                      pears to have happened is Arthur Andersen and Vinson & Elkins
                                      basically gave approval for this cookie cutter in terms of basically
                                      locking in value. You lock in the gain on the balance sheet as a
                                      gain. Then you basically have this sham transaction, and that’s the
                                      whole point.
                                         What you seem to be absolutely, I think, convinced of, and what
                                      I am as well, is that if a third party would have sold it at a market
                                      price, and this sort of partnership which was headed by the CFO
                                      of the company, Mr. Fastow, as, you know, head of the general
                                      partnership, as the general partner, basically selling it to yourself.
                                      And it is at a different price than a third party price.
                                         By definition, you know, it is not an arms length transaction. I
                                      mean, by definition. If the price is so significantly different, that
                                      is No. 1. And, No. 2, what is absolutely clear—and I think, you
                                      know, just trying to elaborate on this a little bit, getting into some
                                      of the details—that there really—the transaction never really ex-
                                      isted, because as opposed to guaranteeing the gain this general




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00031   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 32 ===
                                                                                          28

                                      partnership—no one in this transaction ever—I mean, ever con-
                                      templated that the general partnership could ever guarantee the
                                      gain.
                                         I mean, it could only guarantee the gain if the stock went up and
                                      Enron’s stock went up. Is that accurate?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, it is. The saying around Enron was that
                                      heads Mr. Fastow wins, tails Enron loses.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. And that obviously is not a transaction.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. That is not a business transaction. I mean, that
                                      is not a transaction that—I mean, could you contemplate in any
                                      shape, manner, or form that there was a business purpose?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No. Other than making sure those losses were not
                                      borne by Enron’s financial statements, which is not economic.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired.
                                         The Chair would note the presence of the gentleman from Okla-
                                      homa, Mr. Largent, and would also note that this is his last day
                                      as a member of the U.S. House of Representatives. He has long
                                      been a valued, respected, and I would say admired member of this
                                      committee. We have valued his contribution. I understand that the
                                      gentleman does not have time to inquire, or he does?
                                         Mr. LARGENT. Mr. Chairman, all I wanted to do is ask unani-
                                      mous consent to submit my opening statement for the record.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Without objection, the gentleman’s opening
                                      statement will be part of the record, and the Chair and the com-
                                      mittee wishes him well in his future endeavors and recognizes the
                                      gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Burr, for 10 minutes to in-
                                      quire.
                                         Mr. BURR. I thank the Chair. We will miss Steve Largent.
                                         Sherron, once you started to look for the problems, how long did
                                      it take you to identify the degree of problems that existed in some
                                      of these transactions?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Actually, not very long. I did know from the foot-
                                      note that Enron had recognized $500 million of revenue in 2000
                                      from the Raptor hedging transactions. $500 million is a significant
                                      number when you look at our net income for 2000. As soon as I
                                      discovered that the losses at Raptor were backstopped by Enron,
                                      and that is the way the structure worked, I knew we had a very
                                      large problem.
                                         Mr. BURR. Could anybody charged with a review of what took
                                      place in these partnerships have missed it?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t think so, and I was highly alarmed that
                                      this had occurred and been allowed to go on for so long.
                                         Mr. BURR. Did you feel like the letter that you had sent to Mr.
                                      Lay really did lay out a blueprint of what people should look at if
                                      they were outside concerns looking in at these transactions?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I did.
                                         Mr. BURR. Let me go to the Vinson & Elkins—I think this was
                                      a preliminary outline that they used that Mr. Dingell just put in
                                      the record. It was used to discuss—to be a discussion draft with
                                      Mr. Lay and Mr. Derrick. And, specifically, I want to go to item D,
                                      caveats, first one. And in that it says, ‘‘No second-guessing of ac-
                                      counting treatment by AA.’’ Interpret that for me if you will.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00032   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 33 ===
                                                                                          29

                                         Ms. WATKINS. That they did not want Vinson & Elkins to make
                                      any—or give any opinions regarding whether the accounting treat-
                                      ment was proper, just assume that it was.
                                         Mr. BURR. Let me move to your meeting with Mr. Lay I think
                                      on August 22. You said you spent almost an hour. He seemed sur-
                                      prised by a lot of the things. But he made some commitments to
                                      you to look into it, didn’t he?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, he did.
                                         Mr. BURR. Having left that meeting, was there ever an exception
                                      that Mr. Lay made relative to these accounting discrepancies that
                                      you raised, that he wasn’t going to look at those but he might look
                                      at something else?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No. I understood that he was going to try to get
                                      to the bottom of my concerns.
                                         Mr. BURR. Is there any way that what you shared with him could
                                      have been heard in a way that you could do an independent review
                                      of these transactions, leaving out second-guessing accounting treat-
                                      ment and believe that you could fully understand what you had
                                      raised with him?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No. The point is the accounting treatment. The
                                      point is the accounting disclosures in the footnotes to the financial
                                      statements.
                                         Mr. BURR. When you left that meeting with Ken Lay, did it ever
                                      cross your mind that they would turn to somebody who already had
                                      a relationship with Enron, be it Vinson & Elkins or Andersen, to
                                      actually do the review of their own work?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I didn’t think they would choose V&E. I was
                                      slightly—well, more than slightly disappointed to find out that they
                                      subsequently did choose Vinson & Elkins to conduct the investiga-
                                      tion.
                                         Mr. BURR. Did Mr. Lay stress with you that he would have a re-
                                      view done that was independent or that was thorough?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. He stressed that he would get to the bottom of it.
                                      He would look into my concerns. He didn’t really go into detail as
                                      to what he was going to do to do that.
                                         Mr. BURR. Well, I think that this discussion outline for the meet-
                                      ing really lays out the no second-guessing of accounting treatment
                                      by Arthur Andersen, no detailed transaction analysis. And it seems
                                      that V&E was given very specific instructions, ‘‘We need you to
                                      produce a report. We need you to stamp it okay. But don’t raise
                                      any questions about any of these things that have been brought to
                                      our attention.’’ Is that pretty much what he did?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, it appears from this V&E document that
                                      they had a very limited scope.
                                         Mr. BURR. Sherron, prior to the release of V&E’s final report,
                                      they briefed you orally, I think on 10/16. Is that correct?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I think they had issued their report. I had not
                                      seen it. I didn’t see it until this year. They briefed me after the
                                      earnings release that morning.
                                         Mr. BURR. And was that the first time that you knew that Vin-
                                      son & Elkins had turned to Arthur Andersen to play a part in their
                                      review of the accounting discrepancies that you had raised that
                                      they had already signed off on?




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00033   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 34 ===
                                                                                          30

                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, that is—it was roughly a 2-hour meeting
                                      where Joe Dilg and Max Hendrick went through how they had con-
                                      ducted their investigation. The reason they said that they chose to
                                      have Arthur Andersen relook at their own work was in the interest
                                      of time, that the company wanted a speedy response, and no other
                                      accounting firm could get up to speed on these transactions very
                                      quickly.
                                         But they also told me other things that—where they had limited
                                      their investigation despite suggestions that I had given them on
                                      September 10 when we had initially met for 3 hours at the begin-
                                      ning of the investigation.
                                         Mr. BURR. What was your reaction to that?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I was highly alarmed. I did not think it was good
                                      advice for Mr. Lay. They told me that, you know, the conclusion
                                      was the accounting was appropriate when done. The cosmetics
                                      were bad, but it was appropriate. And I felt like that was—espe-
                                      cially since I knew that we had unwound these transactions and
                                      written off $1.2 billion in shareholder equity that very morning, we
                                      happened to close that day at $33 a share, about the same price
                                      we had opened with that morning. But my concern was that wasn’t
                                      going to stick.
                                         I gave it less than a 5-percent probability that this was going to
                                      go quietly, and I was highly concerned that not only had the Ti-
                                      tanic hit the iceberg, but we were already tilting.
                                         Mr. BURR. Is it safe to say you didn’t feel like the commitment
                                      that Mr. Lay had made to you to get to the bottom of it had suc-
                                      cessfully been accomplished?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, that is correct. I did not feel that.
                                         Mr. BURR. Sherron, one last question if I can, and it really deals
                                      with Enron management and their interaction between themselves
                                      and their audit firm. Are you aware at any point in that relation-
                                      ship, as these partnerships were created or as they fell, where
                                      Enron management in any way, shape, or form used anything per-
                                      suasive to encourage Andersen to turn their head or shut their
                                      eyes at the structure or the outcome of these partnerships?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t think it was a turn the head kind of deal.
                                      Mr. Rogers, when I met with him August 17, he did say, ‘‘Well, you
                                      know, we push our internal accountants quite hard.’’ He mentioned
                                      we probably push our outside auditors pretty hard. So he seemed
                                      to indicate that there was probably a lot of pressure that Enron put
                                      on Andersen to accept the structures that Enron was developing
                                      around the Raptor vehicles.
                                         Mr. BURR. And given the timing of the V&E briefing with you,
                                      which was 10/16, which was close to that financial reporting period,
                                      can you share with me what V&E said about the 10/16 earnings
                                      release?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. About the earnings release itself?
                                         Mr. BURR. About that current earnings release, what they said
                                      on 10/16. Did they address the earnings release?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well——
                                         Mr. BURR. I think it was a press statement that went out, and
                                      I think there was the announcement of the $577 million——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. We had a press release that we had unwound
                                      some of the LJM transactions and taken these writeoffs and reduc-




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00034   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 35 ===
                                                                                          31

                                      tions of shareholders equity in the third quarter. It was my opinion
                                      that we should restate, and Mr. Dilg responded, ‘‘Do you really
                                      think Mr. Lay should ignore the advice of his counsel in this mat-
                                      ter?’’
                                         Mr. BURR. Given that you are going through a release from
                                      Enron with a $577 million adjustment, and a writedown of $1.2 bil-
                                      lion in shareholder equity, how is that consistent with the report
                                      that V&E’s briefing you on that there is no problems?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, it was very surprising to me. I said, ‘‘Well,
                                      if you told Mr. Lay that the accounting was appropriate, why did
                                      we unwind these deals? Why take $1.2 billion writedown to equity
                                      if these deals are okay?’’ And their reply to me was that, ‘‘Well,
                                      that was a business decision. I believe Mr. Lay felt like that these
                                      transactions were a distraction from core business, and he just de-
                                      cided to unwind them.’’
                                         Mr. BURR. Sherron, thank you very much. I yield back.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                      nizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Stupak, for 10 minutes.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Ms. Watkins, thanks again for coming. Let me pick up a little bit
                                      where Mr. Burr just left off. In the financial statement, there was
                                      pressure there to approve these special SPEs and these trans-
                                      actions. And you said—the question about Enron putting pressure
                                      and you said, ‘‘Well, I am sure there is pressure on the internal
                                      auditors and external auditors.’’
                                         But before a financial statement goes public, doesn’t Arthur An-
                                      dersen have at least a fiduciary responsibility to say, ‘‘This ain’t
                                      right. It is not going in a financial statement before it is put out
                                      to the public?’’
                                         Ms. WATKINS. My understanding as a former accountant is that
                                      it is an odd situation. The accounting industry is paid by compa-
                                      nies requesting their services, but an accounting firm is supposed
                                      to keep their eye on who is relying on their opinions. Outside inves-
                                      tors are relying on their opinions. That is who they are there to
                                      protect, and they make an opinion that these financial statements,
                                      including the footnotes, fairly represent the financial condition of
                                      the company.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. And if these transactions are questionable, that may
                                      not fairly accurately represent the financial condition of the com-
                                      pany. And they really have the ultimate responsibility before it is
                                      released to the public to say yes or no to putting this in. Is that
                                      a fair statement?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, that is correct.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. How about Vinson & Elkins, would they have the
                                      same kind of responsibility on the financial statements?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t think law firms necessarily have the same
                                      responsibility.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. Let me take you back a few years. Eight
                                      years ago—you said for 8 years you worked with Arthur Andersen.
                                      While there are Arthur Andersen, did you have any document re-
                                      tention policy back then?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I am sure we did.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. Then let me ask the question this way. While
                                      at Arthur Andersen, how often did you see a memo or correspond-




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00035   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 36 ===
                                                                                          32

                                      ence from the higher-ups saying, ‘‘Just want to remind you all of
                                      our retention policy, i.e. destruction policy?’’
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t recall a lot of information about that. That
                                      was, of course, 14 or so years ago.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Sure.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. And I am sure the policies have changed.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Well, during your 8 years, did you ever remember
                                      receiving or seeing one of these memos saying, ‘‘Just want to re-
                                      mind you of our retention policy’’?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t recall necessarily——
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. [continuing] any specific memo on that.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. In your 8 years at Arthur Andersen, or while you
                                      were based in Houston, did you work on the Enron account then?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, I did not work on the Enron account.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. You took Cliff Baxter’s position as Vice Presi-
                                      dent under Mr. Fastow, correct?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, no. When Mr. Baxter resigned, the whole
                                      corporate development function was assigned and put under Mr.
                                      Fastow. So I went to work directly for Mr. Fastow helping him in
                                      that corporate development area.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Did you work under Mr. Baxter before then?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Indirectly, yes, I did.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Do you know why he retired?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It was to spend more time with his family.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. He wasn’t forced out of the company or any-
                                      thing like that?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Oh, no. No.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. Is it fair to say that these questionable trans-
                                      actions, the LJM and Raptor, would they possibly be discovered by
                                      the next Vice President who went in there?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I think they were very easy to discover.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. The facts weren’t really hidden.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. In response to a question from Mr. Dingell,
                                      if I heard you correctly, you said Cliff Baxter complained to Mr.
                                      Skilling. What did he complain to Mr. Skilling about?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. My understanding is that Mr. Baxter complained
                                      that it was inappropriate for a company of our size, of our stature,
                                      to do transactions with the CFO’s partnership. It was inappro-
                                      priate. It didn’t look good. We shouldn’t be doing transactions with
                                      the CFO’s partnership.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. And the CFO at this time was Mr. Fastow.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Mr. Fastow.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. In your opinion, why did Mr. Skilling then
                                      leave Enron on August 14, 2001?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It is my opinion that he could foresee these prob-
                                      lems, and he wanted to get as far away from it as possible.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. Again, some questions from Mr. Dingell. You
                                      indicated when asked about Raptor and LJM, the hedging, it was
                                      common knowledge how they were doing this. And that it really
                                      wouldn’t stand up, because they weren’t—their assets weren’t
                                      there. Common knowledge by whom?




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00036   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 37 ===
                                                                                          33

                                         Ms. WATKINS. The different business units that were hedging
                                      their assets with Raptor, as well as the global finance staff under
                                      Mr. Fastow.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. Mr. Dingell actually read a little bit from this
                                      one document which he placed in the record. I believe it is on page
                                      8. And it said, ‘‘Notwithstanding these bad cosmetics, Enron rep-
                                      resentatives uniformly stated that the Condor and Raptor vehicles
                                      were clever, useful vehicles that benefited Enron.’’ So my ques-
                                      tion—if they are pledged 100 percent with Enron stock, and then
                                      they couldn’t meet the hedges as the stock started to fall, therefore,
                                      they didn’t benefit Enron, the employees, or the shareholders of
                                      Enron, did they?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, they did not.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. I mean, clever but not legal and not benefiting
                                      Enron.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, that is correct.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Who did they benefit?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. You could possibly say that they benefited Enron,
                                      because it allowed Enron to meet projected financial targets, which
                                      kept Enron’s stock price inflated.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. So, then, that benefit then would go to Enron,
                                      but that benefit was then taken out of Enron, was it not?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. The problem I have with it is it keeps the stock
                                      price inflated. And you had Mr. Skilling saying our stock price was
                                      going to go to $120 per share. So you have people buying that in-
                                      flated stock price, thinking the stock price is going to go higher.
                                      Those are now new shareholders of Enron that certainly are not
                                      benefited by these transactions.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. Let me ask you this question, and by no
                                      means do I mean anything negative by it. But we have had testi-
                                      mony throughout about how certain employees benefited hand-
                                      somely financially from some of these transactions and being part
                                      of these SPEs. Were you ever offered an opportunity to join in one
                                      of these, or to be part of one?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, I was not.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. So it is fair to say, then, you didn’t invest in any
                                      of these SPEs like some did, like what, put $5,800 in and they end
                                      up coming back with a million within 2 months or 3 months?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, I did not.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. You indicated—well, let me go to this ques-
                                      tion. In number 8 here, it was in our book here, number 8, was the
                                      Raptor hedging strategy analysis risk and assessment control? And
                                      the Chairman asked you some questions about it. In fact, on one
                                      page, lessons learned, the new Raptor structure transferred risk in
                                      one—in the form of stock dilution. It is in your handwriting. There
                                      it is. That is the smoking gun. You cannot do this. And that is your
                                      handwriting.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, it is.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. Who produced this document?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Mr. Rick Buy’s risk assessment and control group.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. Do you know when he would have produced
                                      it?




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00037   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 38 ===
                                                                                          34

                                         Ms. WATKINS. I believe that this was produced during the first
                                      quarter of 2001 to address the fact that the Raptor structures were
                                      under water.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. So risk assessment or Mr. Buy produced this
                                      in the first quarter of 2001. Who would this be distributed to?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I am not completely certain of that. I believe it
                                      might have gone as high as the Finance Committee of the Board,
                                      but from reading the Powers Report, they do not appear to have
                                      seen this analysis.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. This was an internal document.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It certainly went to Mr. Fastow, and I would imag-
                                      ine that it also went to Mr. Skilling.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. How about Vinson & Elkins? Would they probably
                                      receive this?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Probably not.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Arthur Andersen?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Probably not.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. But you thought probably the Board of Direc-
                                      tors may have received this?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I thought so at the time when I was meeting with
                                      Mr. Lay. But from reading the Powers Report, it appears that they
                                      did not see this.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. So when you put in here your comments, or even
                                      the new Raptor structure transferred risk in the form of stock dilu-
                                      tion, not knowing anything about this, before I get—before all of
                                      this whole Enron thing, even I can pick it up now. Anyone who re-
                                      ceived this in the company should have realized there were serious,
                                      serious problems, and any accountant worth their weight in salt
                                      would certainly pick this up. Would they not?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It would certainly seem so. But it was so well un-
                                      derstood and so prevalent. That is why I called Mr. Hecker at An-
                                      dersen. I was about to meet with Mr. Lay, and I thought—well, I
                                      called him—but since I had not been in accounting for over 10
                                      years—to say, you know, could this ever be okay? And he said it
                                      didn’t sound right, and his words to me were, ‘‘Sherron, any ac-
                                      counting treatment must be clearly defensible if fully exposed. So
                                      if this is not clearly defensible when fully exposed, you are prob-
                                      ably correct and you should go see Mr. Lay.’’
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
                                      Chair thanks the gentleman.
                                         The Chair recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Stearns, for
                                      10 minutes for inquiry.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, again, let me com-
                                      mend you and also the staff for the prodigious amount of work they
                                      have done here.
                                         Just to get on the record that—it is more applicable to the com-
                                      mittee that I chair dealing with FASB—I just wanted to ask you
                                      some questions. There is ample evidence, as I noted, that Enron at
                                      a minimum used/abused financial accounting standards to confuse
                                      its true financial condition. In your view, is Enron indicative of a
                                      failure to implement GAAP, Generally Accepted Accounting Prin-
                                      ciples? Or failure of the Generally Accepted Accounting Prin-
                                      ciples—in other words, failure of the GAAP itself or the failure to
                                      implement these principles?




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00038   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 39 ===
                                                                                          35

                                         Ms. WATKINS. I think Enron had a failure to implement them,
                                      correct.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. So you don’t think there is anything generally
                                      wrong with GAAP itself? Do you think GAAP works?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It should work. In my opinion, I think somehow
                                      in this country our financial accounting system has morphed into
                                      the Tax Code. In tax accounting if you follow the codes, whatever
                                      result you get, you are justified in using that treatment.
                                         And financial accounting—a number of my accounting friends
                                      have said, ‘‘If you follow the rules, even if you get squirrelly re-
                                      sults, you have a leg to stand on.’’ And I am surprised that the fi-
                                      nancial accounting system has morphed into that, because you
                                      should still fairly represent your financial condition.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. This is, to me, a very important point. You know,
                                      what you are saying is that Enron’s problem was a flawed cor-
                                      porate strategy and simple old-fashioned bad assets, and that the
                                      accounting problems did not precipitate its collapse. Is that what
                                      you are saying?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, I do think the accounting problems precip-
                                      itated the collapse, because when the investing community was un-
                                      certain about our numbers, when they were driving the stock price
                                      down, almost everyone was aware that if the stock price dropped
                                      too low, if our investment grade rating fell away, there would be
                                      additional debt coming due. And we did have an old-fashioned run
                                      on the bank.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Okay. So, but you are saying that the GAAP
                                      worked, and it was—GAAP was not the problem. The account-
                                      ants—it was more the business strategy and how they used the ac-
                                      counting principles, how they implemented it.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. They did not implement them correctly.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Okay. So if you went to the American Institute of
                                      Accountants and talked to them, you wouldn’t recommend that
                                      they change anything with Raptor partnerships or LJM1 or 2 or
                                      anything? You would say that is not the problem.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. The accounting of these transactions I think was
                                      inappropriate. We should not have been able to——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. But that was because of the people—that was
                                      Fastow and his people.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. But it wasn’t Arthur Andersen.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, Andersen also signed off on the way we were
                                      implementing these accounting——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. But if Arthur Andersen was told something, and
                                      it was not the truth, they might accept it. Is it possible that Arthur
                                      Andersen has some culpability here because they signed off on it?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I think so, because they are charged with au-
                                      diting the results. And a sensitive related party transaction should
                                      get a lot of scrutiny and——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. So Arthur Andersen, in your opinion, signed off on
                                      something they shouldn’t have.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Do you think they knew what they were signing
                                      off on?




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00039   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 40 ===
                                                                                          36

                                         Ms. WATKINS. They sure should have known what they were
                                      signing off on.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Okay. Okay. So, you know, you have been an ac-
                                      countant, you told me in your opening statement, for 19 years. And
                                      yet you are the only one here out of this huge organization we have
                                      here. And, you know, we have talked to Jeffrey McMahon, who is
                                      President and Chief Operating Officer. He said he went to Skilling.
                                      We talked to Jordan Mintz, who is Vice President and General
                                      Counsel of Corporate Development. He tried to get Skilling to sign
                                      documents.
                                         Both Richard Buy, the Chief Risk Officer, and Richard Causey,
                                      the Chief Accounting Officer, all somehow were aware of this, and
                                      yet you are the only one standing here. And so when you went to
                                      Mr. Lay, and he came back and said he was going to—V&E was
                                      going to do an analysis, I think it was on October 31. Did he say
                                      anything to you about maybe firing Vinson & Elkins?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I met with Mr. Lay on October 30 and 31,
                                      and I was concerned that we needed to restate, come clean,
                                      and——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Because this is a key point. The report came back
                                      and everybody is ready to act on it and clean house and get this
                                      thing straightened out, right?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Isn’t that your impression?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, he had said at the time, ‘‘Well, we have fired
                                      Vinson & Elkins and Arthur,’’ which I was a little bit surprised.
                                      When I met with him the following day, he corrected that and said,
                                      no, that we had formed the Special Committee and hired a new law
                                      firm and a new accounting firm to look into my concerns.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. What was the new law firm’s name that he said
                                      he was going to hire after he replaced Vinson & Elkins?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. He first said it was Milner and something, which
                                      sort of surprised me because when the announcement came out it
                                      was Wilmer, Cutler. And that is an easy name to remember, and
                                      it gave me the impression that Mr. Lay was not making these deci-
                                      sions, someone else was. And they were just informing him of the
                                      decisions.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. So he told you earlier, though, that he was going
                                      to fire Arthur Andersen and V&E, right?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes. And I think he misunderstood, though,
                                      the——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. And who was telling him that, do you think?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t know. I am not privy to the inner workings.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. I talked to Mr. Skilling, and I talked to him briefly
                                      about Cliff Baxter. And I just want to ask you a question on this.
                                      In your memo, you said, ‘‘He complained mightily to Mr. Skilling,
                                      and all who would listen, about the inappropriateness of the trans-
                                      action with LJM.’’ Did Mr. Baxter discuss his concerns about these
                                      transactions with you?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Actually, the last time I spoke with Mr. Baxter
                                      was January 15 of this year. I phoned him to give him the heads
                                      up that my memo had been discovered and was in the press, and
                                      that it mentioned that executives had warned Mr. Skilling. So I




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00040   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 41 ===
                                                                                          37

                                      told Mr. Baxter that I had mentioned him specifically, and I read
                                      to him over the phone exactly what I had written about him.
                                         And he said, ‘‘Well, Sherron, you are right. You know, I was very
                                      concerned about these transactions.’’ He said, ‘‘But I tell you what.
                                      If I had known there was anything illegal about it, I would have
                                      pushed it further.’’
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Did Mr. Baxter tell you that he talked to Skilling
                                      frequently about this? I mean, you say mightily. Did he actually
                                      say, ‘‘I talked to him 10 times, 3 times, 1 time?’’
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I mean, he told me he spoke to him quite often
                                      about the inappropriateness of a company——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Okay.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. [continuing] of our stature——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Did Mr. Baxter ever tell Ken Lay—did Baxter ever
                                      say to you, ‘‘I also mentioned it to Kenneth Lay, because I was
                                      frustrated with Mr. Skilling?’’
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No. The way the culture worked, I don’t think any-
                                      one would have gone around Mr. Skilling to talk to Mr. Lay.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Okay. What about Jeff McMahon? Did you actually
                                      ever talk to him about any of these problems?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I did meet with Mr.——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Were you aware that Mr. McMahon—he was—he
                                      met with Skilling. He was the President and Chief Operating Offi-
                                      cer, former Treasurer of the company. He recently became Presi-
                                      dent. He said he told Mr. Skilling of his concern over the company’s
                                      many complex partnerships. Did you ever talk to him?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. On August 21, I met with Mr. McMahon for rough-
                                      ly 11⁄2 hours, and that is when he told me that he found the con-
                                      flicts to be something that—you know, too great for Enron.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Too great for Enron?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Mr. McMahon did not characterize it as a bonus
                                      discussion with me. He characterized it as more of an ultimatum
                                      that he was giving Mr. Skilling; ‘‘Make these changes or I can’t
                                      stay as Treasurer.’’ And as I recall Mr. McMahon telling me, he felt
                                      like that was a strong statement to Mr. Skilling. And, you know,
                                      a few days or weeks later he gets a call saying—from Mr. Skilling
                                      that Mr. Skilling wanted him to go join a new venture, Enron Net-
                                      works. And Mr. McMahon told me that he felt like Mr. Skilling was
                                      setting him up for a fall.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. I asked Mr. Skilling about Mr. McMahon and this
                                      conversation. He said, ‘‘We talked nothing about what you mention,
                                      Congressman. All we talked about was compensation.’’ I don’t know
                                      if you heard Mr. Skilling say that.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, it sounds like that is the truth but not the
                                      whole truth.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Right. So Mr. Skilling is trying to convince me they
                                      are talking about the bonus for Mr. McMahon, and that is all they
                                      talked about. Yet it was clear to me, in all of the information we
                                      had, that Mr. McMahon was telling him all about the stuff that
                                      you just know about. And that is what you are saying. When you
                                      talked to Mr. McMahon, he told you the same thing, that he talked
                                      to him all about these partnerships.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. The Raptor transactions had not been done, I don’t
                                      think, or I am not completely aware. Mr. McMahon told me he did




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00041   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 42 ===
                                                                                          38

                                      not talk about accounting issues as much as there were—these
                                      deals were likely not benefiting Enron shareholders. They were
                                      likely benefiting Mr. Fastow and not Enron shareholders.
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Okay. So that is directly opposite to what Mr.
                                      Skilling to us. And you are telling us that Mr. McMahon told you
                                      that, and Mr. McMahon has also told us that is what he told him.
                                      So I think it is clear at this point that there is two witnesses here
                                      that do not agree with what Mr. Skilling has said.
                                         I think my time is up, Mr. Chairman. Unless Ms. Watkins would
                                      like to clarify.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman——
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Did you want—Ms. Watkins, did you want to clar-
                                      ify anything?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I just wanted to add that I also heard from
                                      one of Mr. Baxter’s close friends that he had a conversation with
                                      Mr. Skilling in March of 2001. Mr. Baxter’s recollection of the
                                      meeting was that he told Mr. Skilling, ‘‘We are headed for a train
                                      wreck, and it is your job to get out in front of the train and try
                                      to stop it.’’
                                         Mr. STEARNS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Colo-
                                      rado, Ms. DeGette, for 10 minutes, and would note that at the end
                                      of her questioning we will recess for approximately 20 minutes for
                                      the vote.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Ms. Watkins, before I ask my questions, I just want to welcome
                                      you and let you know how impressed I was by your memos and by
                                      your testimony. And when I was reading this, I felt sort of a bond
                                      with you. First, I thought, well, maybe it was because we were both
                                      women of about the same age working in the male-dominated
                                      fields. I thought, no, it is not that.
                                         Then I said maybe it is because we are both moms, because
                                      moms tend to get—you know, you can figure out if someone is tell-
                                      ing the truth. But then I realized, no, it is not that. What it is is
                                      both of our mothers were teachers, as I understand. Your mother
                                      taught accounting. My mother taught kindergarten. And then I re-
                                      alized that both perfectly prepared us for the careers we were going
                                      to embark on.
                                         And I really want to thank you for coming.
                                         I want to ask you, did you write these memos, Ms. Watkins, all
                                      by yourself?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I did.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. So if someone said that you ghost—that someone
                                      else, like Mr. McMahon, ghostwrote these memos, that would not
                                      be true?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. That is not true.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. And you wrote these because you were concerned
                                      about the future of the company and the future for the share-
                                      holders, didn’t you?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Were you aware that Mr. Fastow told the Vinson
                                      & Elkins investigators that it was his belief that you were acting
                                      in conjunction with a person who wanted Mr. Fastow’s job?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I think that is ludicrous.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00042   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 43 ===
                                                                                          39

                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Do you think—it is not true, is it? Are you sur-
                                      prised Mr. Fastow might think that?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I am not surprised he would think that.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Why not?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I understand that he and Mr. McMahon had a
                                      rather contentious relationship.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. And so you think he was referring to Mr.
                                      McMahon.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. Now, you worked for Arthur Andersen for
                                      8 years, but it was a long time ago, right?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. And you are a CPA, right?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I am.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Now, let me ask you this. How long had you been
                                      working for Mr. Fastow before you figured out that there were
                                      problems with the Raptor SPEs?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I would say about 3 or 4 weeks.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. So all these people who said these were very com-
                                      plex transactions, and there wasn’t much transparency, it didn’t
                                      take an accounting genius, although I am sure you are one, but,
                                      I mean, you figured it out in 3 or 4 weeks, right?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I had the advantage of hindsight where
                                      these structures were clearly under water, and also I was never
                                      shown the complex transactions. I just knew what the facts were.
                                      Raptor owed us $700 million. No one had lost that money. Enron
                                      shareholders were going to pay for it in the future. So I didn’t need
                                      to see the structure. I knew that——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Right.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. [continuing] that wasn’t kosher.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Even Congresspeople like us can figure that out.
                                      So, now, you said that information—in your testimony you said the
                                      information gathered from co-workers helped you come to the con-
                                      clusion that the Raptor SPEs were finally untenable. It was pretty
                                      common knowledge in discussion among the co-workers about these
                                      entities, correct?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, it was.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Can you tell me how widespread the concern was?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. The Enron global finance staff knew about it, and
                                      various business units that had sold assets to Raptor knew about
                                      it. There were whole sections of Enron, the pipeline group, the
                                      trading group, that had no idea about it. But in a handful of groups
                                      it was widespread knowledge.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. But what about your group? I mean, did people
                                      talk about this commonly? How many people are we talking about?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I think a fair number. One of the things I asked
                                      Vinson & Elkins to do was to look at a—a survey had been con-
                                      ducted by Mr. Lay over the Labor Day weekend. And I knew of at
                                      least a dozen people who had typed in serious concerns about our
                                      accounting.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. You knew a dozen people who had typed in con-
                                      cerns.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00043   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 44 ===
                                                                                          40

                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Ms. Watkins, would you be willing to share those
                                      names with this committee?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I can share certainly at least two, because they are
                                      in the documents that you are releasing today.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Would you be willing to, as part of our investiga-
                                      tion, to share the rest of them?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I can share Jeff Donahue, who was the Man-
                                      aging Director in Charge of Corporate Development.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Okay.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Tim Detmering, a Managing Director in Corporate
                                      Development; Michelle Nezi Marvin, one of the business unit peo-
                                      ple who had hedged assets with Raptor.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Jeff McMahon.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t know whether he typed in comments.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Oh, he didn’t type—but he was concerned, right?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Cliff Baxter was concerned.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. If you have other names, perhaps you could work
                                      with your counsel and with our staff, because that would help us
                                      in our investigation.
                                         I am wondering if you can try to characterize the atmosphere in
                                      the global finance group and maybe elsewhere in Enron. Did every-
                                      body know what was going on, but everybody was too afraid to do
                                      anything about it?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It was rather widespread knowledge that Mr. Ray
                                      Bowen was complaining about the Raptor structures and LJM. And
                                      Mr. Fastow called him in and gave him, as Mr. McMahon puts it,
                                      a high decibel grilling. And so that I think made others—it was
                                      like an off limits subject. You just didn’t even want to discuss it
                                      around the water cooler.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. So it wasn’t that everybody certainly at your level
                                      knew but didn’t care. It is that they were afraid to come forward.
                                      Would that be a fair characterization?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Now, why is it that you think Mr. Skilling knew
                                      about these issues?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Because he was an intense, hands-on manager.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. What is that? Can you give us a couple of exam-
                                      ples of financial transactions you saw Mr. Skilling get involved in
                                      hands-on?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, for instance, in 1996 when I was still man-
                                      aging the JEDI partnership, we had equity investments in var-
                                      ious—primarily oil and gas-related companies. That was the year
                                      we adopted fair value accounting, which meant that, as an exam-
                                      ple, if we paid $100 million for an investment, an oil and gas com-
                                      pany, and they drilled a dozen wells that were all successful, if our
                                      models showed us that we now thought that company was worth
                                      $150 million, we would write that company up by $50 million and
                                      recognize $50 million in the income statement.
                                         Well, a lot of the models were based off the multiples at which
                                      E&P companies trade. They were based off comparable analysis in
                                      the public marketplace. Mr. Skilling was very concerned that if the
                                      multiples that might have been at a high of seven or eight




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00044   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 45 ===
                                                                                          41

                                      cyclically moved down to, say, three or four, then our own models
                                      would force us to take a writedown. He sat in on a number of meet-
                                      ings where I was present, where we were trying to devise a real
                                      hedging strategy to avoid placing those losses on the income state-
                                      ment.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. So he was involved hands-on——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. [continuing] personally in——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. [continuing] accounting meetings talking about ac-
                                      counting treatments of transactions. Now, you saw the transaction
                                      sheets that the Chairman showed you before that had the signa-
                                      ture sheet, signature line for his approval. Would it, in your experi-
                                      ence, be like Mr. Skilling to not sign those?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No. The procedures around our approval sheets
                                      were cast in stone.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. And were they used in many transactions?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes. Any capital expended at Enron above a cer-
                                      tain amount had a deal approval sheet, and the procedures were
                                      very well identified, and I never recall an instance where the ap-
                                      provals indicated via the approval signature block were not ob-
                                      tained. And no approvals——
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. So if someone sent those to Mr. Skilling, and he
                                      didn’t sign them, in your opinion that would be intentionally?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No deal could be done without all of those approv-
                                      als. And quite often it was a verbal approval over the phone, and
                                      then it was always followed up by a signature.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Great. Thank you very much. Thank you for com-
                                      ing today. I really appreciate it.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. In the gentlelady’s remaining time, Mr.
                                      Skilling’s testimony here last week was that while there was a line
                                      provided—his term was there was a line provided for his signature,
                                      the form provided for his signature, that he was advised that his
                                      signature was not required. Are you aware of any such distinction
                                      with regard to those deal sheets?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No. Those deal sheets were cast in stone. If it was
                                      an either/or, it would say one of the following two signatures are
                                      required. If the name was listed in the signature block, it was re-
                                      quired.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. It was required. And there was never any pro-
                                      vided for, as if he could sign it if he felt like it?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, it was a requirement.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Do you know anything about Jordan Mintz’s ef-
                                      forts to get him to sign the sheet?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I did not know of those until I heard his testimony
                                      here last week.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
                                         The committee will recess for approximately 15 minutes.
                                         [Brief recess.]
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The committee will come to order.
                                         The Chair recognizes Mr. Strickland for 10 minutes for purposes
                                      of inquiry.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00045   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 46 ===
                                                                                          42

                                         Ms. Watkins, toward the end of 1999, while you were working for
                                      Enron International representing the Caribbean region, you nego-
                                      tiated the sale of Promigas, an Enron asset, to a special purpose
                                      entity known as White Wing. Is that correct?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes. It is also known by its project name, which
                                      is Condor.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Okay. Enron’s Caribbean region decided to sell
                                      Promigas to White Wing because Enron’s risk and finance depart-
                                      ments had put out the word that all divisions should sell merchant
                                      assets to White Wing by the end of the third and fourth quarters
                                      of 1999. Besides that mandate, was there any other reason for
                                      Enron to sell Promigas to White Wing at that time?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, there was not.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Ms. Watkins, would you please briefly explain
                                      what a merchant asset is for the benefit of this committee?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Enron has both merchant assets and strategic as-
                                      sets. Merchant assets are assets considered held for sale, that we
                                      have bought for investment purposes and that we generally do not
                                      intend to hold on to for any length of time. Merchant assets could
                                      be fair valued, meaning they could be written up to estimated mar-
                                      ket value, while strategic assets, if they were worth more than
                                      Enron had paid for them, those gains could not be recognized until
                                      we sold or disposed of the asset.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Okay. Now, Enron decided to sell its merchant
                                      assets to White Wing in order to increase its cashflow. Was there
                                      any other reason for this decision?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I believe that the assets sold to Condor White
                                      Wing, the merchant assets, generated—I know they generated
                                      funds flow from operations for Enron, and I believe that to be one
                                      of the sole purposes for selling assets into Condor White Wing.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Okay. In fact, cashflow had become a big con-
                                      cern for Enron, had it not?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, that is correct.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Now, Wall Street analysts began to distrust
                                      Enron’s increasingly complex earnings statements, so they started
                                      examining the company’s cashflow. After all, cash is cash. How-
                                      ever, since Enron had been manipulating its earnings, its cashflow
                                      would appear inadequate compared to its inflated earnings state-
                                      ments. This was a problem for Enron, was it not?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I am not certain that Enron was manipu-
                                      lating its earnings at that point in time. But for a commodity trad-
                                      er where you would routinely mark-to-market positions, you can
                                      have earnings that represent the discounted fair value of 10 years
                                      worth of profits. You recognize that in the first year, but you would
                                      only have cashflow of, say, one-tenth of that profit in that year.
                                         That is probably not an unheard of phenomena with trading com-
                                      panies, but trading companies have PE multiples in the 12 to 14
                                      range. Enron enjoyed a much larger price to earnings multiple and
                                      did not want to be characterized as a normal trading company.
                                         The analysts were concerned that our funds flow from operations
                                      was significantly lower than our earnings. It was a financial per-
                                      formance statistic that they were concerned about, and Enron at-
                                      tempted to fix that first, fairly legitimately, by securitizing con-
                                      tracts and selling them out to outside third parties.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00046   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 47 ===
                                                                                          43

                                         I might want to correct a statement that Congressman Green-
                                      wood made earlier. I do think that the Cactus vehicles, the contract
                                      to asset securitization vehicles that we did in the early 1990’s and
                                      1995/1996 were legitimate, were legitimate securitizations.
                                         Condor, however, I think was one of the first special purpose ve-
                                      hicles that was backstopped by Enron stock that was kept off bal-
                                      ance sheet, and I think one of the main purposes of Condor White
                                      Wing was to generate funds flow from operations for Enron.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. So, and correct me if I say something that you
                                      think is factually inaccurate, but it seems that Enron planned to
                                      increase its cashflow by selling these merchant assets to White
                                      Wing during the third and fourth quarters of 1999.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. That is correct, yes.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Did Enron provide any guarantees to White
                                      Wing for these transactions that you know of?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. The White Wing structure was set up such that
                                      if the assets that were sold to White Wing were not liquidated and
                                      were not sufficient to repay the investors in White Wing, then that
                                      structure was backstopped by Enron stock.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. So this was a transaction where Enron guaran-
                                      teed an investment with its own stock? Is that a factually correct
                                      statement?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. These vehicles have been schematically depicted in
                                      The Wall Street Journal and in the Houston Chronicle and a num-
                                      ber of press. It supposedly is legitimate. I don’t quite understand
                                      how these things can be off balance sheet when you have a claw
                                      back to the company and to the company’s own stock, but somehow
                                      or other they appear to be available for use.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. And I am impressed with your background and
                                      your training, and I sit here and I hear you say that. And I am
                                      wondering at what point is there some authority that has the abil-
                                      ity to explain why something that appears to be illegitimate may
                                      be legitimate. Is that a puzzle to you as a professional CPA and
                                      a person who is deeply knowledgeable about financial transactions?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, the Condor structure troubled me. The fact
                                      that it was off balance sheet troubled me. The fact that we were,
                                      you know, getting funds flow from operations, the financial per-
                                      formance statistic from this structure troubled me. And while I was
                                      working in the Caribbean business unit, we were instructed that
                                      we now had new targets. They were funds flow targets, and we
                                      needed to find a way of selling our merchant assets into Condor
                                      White Wing.
                                         It was almost like something that was on paper, not real, be-
                                      cause the business unit continued to manage the asset. The
                                      counterparty never understood that we had supposedly sold it. And
                                      there was an unspoken understanding that we could buy it back
                                      at some point in the future.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Now, after Enron sold Promigas to White Wing,
                                      who managed and operated that company?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. The Caribbean business unit. It stayed with the
                                      Caribbean business unit.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. And that was Enron?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, that is Enron. But it was not White Wing per-
                                      sonnel that managed it. It was Enron personnel who managed it.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00047   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 48 ===
                                                                                          44

                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. In fact, the people involved in the day-to-day
                                      functioning of Promigas didn’t even know they had been—that it
                                      had been sold, is that——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. That is correct.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Is that correct?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. That is correct.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Ms. Watkins, who was the general partner of
                                      White Wing? In other words, who ran White Wing?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I believe it was something called an Osprey, or
                                      something, but it was an Enron entity that was the general partner
                                      of White Wing.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Would it be possible for you to identify for the
                                      committee the individuals who were involved in running this?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. The administrative running of White Wing was
                                      under Mr. Andrew Fastow, and I believe he had Cheryl Lipschutz
                                      running the Condor White Wing structure.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Okay. Enron sold these assets to White Wing
                                      at book value.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Compared to market value, is book value a reli-
                                      able indicator of an asset’s true worth?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. The transactions were supposed to be sold into
                                      White Wing at market value. I believe they were all transacted at
                                      book value, and we documented the fact that book values were
                                      close approximations of market values at that time.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Will the gentleman yield for 1 second?
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. I would yield.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Cheryl Lipschutz was the secretary to the Board
                                      of Directors of Enron at that time, right?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Was she employed by Enron?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. She was employed by Enron under Mr. Andy
                                      Fastow.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Okay. I just wanted to clear that up, that Mr.
                                      Fastow was in charge and Cheryl Lipschutz was running it, and
                                      they were both working for Enron.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Ms. DEGETTE. Thank you.
                                         Thank you.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Thank you. I have just a couple more questions,
                                      Ms. Watkins.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. You have just a couple more seconds.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. One more question, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Wall Street analysts were beginning to doubt Enron’s deceptively
                                      complex earnings statements, so they began to look at Enron’s
                                      cashflow as a more reliable indicator of the condition of the cor-
                                      poration. To make sure its cashflow appeared proportional to its
                                      earnings, Enron decided to increase its cashflow. Is that correct?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired.
                                         Mr. STRICKLAND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Ms. Watkins, when you were involved in this
                                      transaction to sell assets to Condor, was there discussion or agree-




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00048   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 49 ===
                                                                                          45

                                      ment about whether or not those assets could be sold back, and
                                      whether there were documents that would reflect that?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. As I recall, there were extensive conversations be-
                                      cause Promigas was an important asset for the region. We were le-
                                      gally selling it to this White Wing structure. Legally, we were los-
                                      ing control of the asset, and there was a lot of discussion that we
                                      wanted it back, we drafted some documents that would be trigger
                                      points where the business unit could buy it back.
                                        My understanding was that Mr. Causey instructed our business
                                      unit that there could be nothing in writing that the business unit
                                      could buy it back, or Andersen would not let us have the sale treat-
                                      ment that we were getting in the funds flow statement.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. And that was the purpose of that, because you
                                      would——
                                        Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. If the charade was evident, you wouldn’t be
                                      able to get a tax trade.
                                        Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                        Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Illi-
                                      nois, Mr. Rush, for 10 minutes.
                                        Mr. RUSH. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ms. Watkins.
                                      This is certainly very pleasing that you are here. Your testimony
                                      has been forthright, and I would say without any kind of value in
                                      terms of Ms. Temple’s testimony. I am diametrically opposed to the
                                      kind of testimony that Ms. Temple presented to this committee,
                                      and it is certainly appreciative by the committee, at least one mem-
                                      ber of the committee, and I believe that it is appreciative—your
                                      testimony is appreciative—is appreciated by the American public.
                                        On what date did you first speak with Cindy Olson or commu-
                                      nicate with her in any way about your concerns about the natural
                                      condition of Enron?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. On the afternoon of August 16, following the all-
                                      employee meeting that had been held that day.
                                        Mr. RUSH. And how many times did you speak with her about
                                      your concerns, and approximately during what time period?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. She encouraged me to meet with Mr. Lay, which
                                      I did do. I then subsequently transferred into Ms. Olson’s group.
                                      I did not have lengthy conversations with her after that about my
                                      concerns. I had expressed them to Mr. Lay, and I thought that was
                                      the best place to discuss them.
                                        Mr. RUSH. So did you read your various letters—or did Ms.
                                      Olson, rather, read your—the various letters that you sent to Mr.
                                      Lay and the attachments?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. I only showed her the anonymous letter, the one
                                      page. I did not provide her with copies of the other memos. If she
                                      obtained them elsewhere, I don’t know.
                                        Mr. RUSH. And what was her response when you showed her the
                                      anonymous letter?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. She clearly understood that this was a serious
                                      problem, and she said that it would be best if I explained it person-
                                      ally to Mr. Lay.
                                        Mr. RUSH. Okay. At what time did you—in your earlier testi-
                                      mony, you indicated that you had a discussion with Ms. Olson
                                      about Mr. Fastow’s desire to have you terminated. At what point




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00049   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 50 ===
                                                                                          46

                                      in the aforementioned series of discussions did you have that—ex-
                                      press that concern to Ms. Olson?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. When I met with Mr. Lay on the 22nd, I was leav-
                                      ing for a small vacation that Friday, coming back the following
                                      Thursday. When I came into the office August 30, I had messages
                                      to immediately go see Ms. Olson, and that is when she told me that
                                      Mr. Fastow had wanted to have me fired, and wanted to seize my
                                      computer.
                                         Mr. RUSH. Okay. Did she in any way indicate to you the attitude
                                      displayed by Mr. Fastow? I mean, was he—his demeanor, or how
                                      did she exactly—how did she relate to you what he had said? What
                                      was his frame of mind? If you can——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. She didn’t give me a lot of details. She just said
                                      that he was behaving in a way that was somewhat shocking to her
                                      as well as Mr. Lay.
                                         Mr. RUSH. And what is Ms. Olson’s relationship with the Enron
                                      Corporation?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I believe she is a Senior Vice President or an Exec-
                                      utive Vice President.
                                         Mr. RUSH. Is she associated at all with the stock fund at Enron?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I was not aware of it. I have since seen, in some
                                      testimony, that she is a trustee. But I was not aware of her posi-
                                      tion with regards to the 401K plan.
                                         Mr. RUSH. And if she was a trustee at the time when this all was
                                      occurring, do you think that she had any fiduciary obligation to at
                                      the very least make an investigation into your claims, pursuing
                                      your claims?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I think she probably understood that they were
                                      being investigated and by a professional law firm. I am sure she
                                      was waiting to see the results of that investigation.
                                         Mr. RUSH. And can you be more specific about your concern—
                                      about what you said to her about your concerns about Enron’s fi-
                                      nancing? I mean, what was her response to you? Did you—how did
                                      she respond? And did she indicate in any way that she had heard
                                      these same kind of concerns from other Enron employees?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, after Enron declared bankruptcy, or even as
                                      we were heading up to it, she seemed to indicate that no one could
                                      have seen this coming. She said, in fact, that I was the only one
                                      that had any kind of inkling that we were in the bad condition that
                                      we were in. So I don’t think she had evidence from anyone else, or
                                      opinions from anyone else, about our condition.
                                         Mr. RUSH. Yes. My time is running down, but I am really—I
                                      want to—if you could just explain to the committee about the cul-
                                      ture there at Enron. It seems to me that everybody from the Presi-
                                      dent to the parking lot knew that there was—parking lot attendant
                                      knew that there was something going on there. I mean, explain to
                                      us about the culture that was prevalent there in the company.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I certainly think it was fairly well known
                                      about the Raptor transactions within the global finance unit and
                                      within the business units that hedged with Raptor. I don’t think
                                      it was well known throughout the company.
                                         And the culture in Enron was voted most innovative. It was
                                      voted one of the best places to work. It was the job to have in
                                      Houston. The atmosphere was electric. It was fun. You were sur-




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00050   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 51 ===
                                                                                          47

                                      rounded by bright people, energized to change the world. You felt
                                      somewhat invincible. And, yes, people were arrogant, and it was—
                                      did have a trader kind of mentality that was sometimes tough to
                                      live with. But it was always a fun place to work.
                                         Mr. RUSH. And most people were conscious about their upward
                                      mobility in the company, and they thought that the company would
                                      be a place to move up fairly quickly, is that——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Everyone was very conscious of what they were
                                      contributing in the last 6 months. The performance ranking system
                                      judged you on what you contributed to the company in the last 6
                                      months. No old tapes. In that sense, it was very competitive.
                                         Mr. RUSH. And Mr. Fastow and Mr. Skilling and others could
                                      very easily manipulate that type of concern to have people to over-
                                      look some of the transgressions that they—that we are looking into
                                      right now? Is that your opinion?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Enron paid its people very well. The stock had
                                      been performing very well. I think there was a concern by most
                                      people that you didn’t want to rock the boat.
                                         Mr. RUSH. Do you have any relationship, any subsequent rela-
                                      tionship to the bankruptcy, to some of the Enron employees who
                                      had been fired from Enron, some of the lower level employees?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I know several people who have been let go.
                                         Mr. RUSH. And do you—there is the issue regarding their sever-
                                      ance pay. Are you familiar with those——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Or lack thereof.
                                         Mr. RUSH. Or lack thereof, right. Can you expound on what you
                                      think is the problem with their severance pay, and what is the—
                                      why is it at this point in time there are some former Enron employ-
                                      ees who have made tremendous amounts of money, and who have
                                      very generous severance pay, and then there are others who have
                                      been forced to live in ways that they never imagined that they
                                      would have to live because of the fact that they don’t have the sev-
                                      erance pay? Do you see a problem there? And what is the nature
                                      of the problem? And how would you recommend that we go about
                                      resolving the issue?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, recently it was disclosed, maybe at
                                      Salon.com, the retention bonuses that were paid the week before
                                      the bankruptcy. Some of the amounts I find shocking for 90 days’
                                      retention, and I do not believe that it was in the best interest of
                                      creditors to—yes, we should retain certain people, but I don’t think
                                      they needed to be paid, 3 and 4 times their base salary to stay for
                                      90 days.
                                         I think it is an insult to the 4,000 people that were let go with
                                      $4,000 checks that there are a handful of people, more than a
                                      handful, that were paid $600,000, $1.5 million, $2 million,
                                      $450,000. I mean, gargantuan sums of money to agree to stay at
                                      Enron for 90 days. I am appalled by that list.
                                         Mr. RUSH. Thank you.
                                         I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recog-
                                      nizes the gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Ganske, for 10 minutes.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         And thank you, Ms. Watkins, for coming to the committee. You
                                      know, I am outraged at what has happened with Enron. Employ-




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00051   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 52 ===
                                                                                          48

                                      ees, pensioners, investors, they have seen their nest eggs dis-
                                      appear, and they speak about unbearable grief. In Iowa, we had—
                                      I have spoken to a lot of former employees of the natural gas com-
                                      pany that was based in Omaha, merged with the Houston Natural
                                      Gas Company, became Enron, and they have lost everything.
                                         I mean, there was even a suicide when a former executive who
                                      left the company with millions couldn’t deal with the collapse of the
                                      company. So this is really serious. I do not think this is—that the
                                      problems we are seeing with Enron are just an issue of corporate
                                      greed in one company. I think that, you know, we are seeing prob-
                                      lems with companies like Global Crossing, Elon. They took—you
                                      know, gave the money to someone else, took some of it back, count-
                                      ed the income as revenue without counting the outgo as expense.
                                         Amazon has resorted to pro forma accounting. Shares in Tyco
                                      dropped 50 percent on questions of its accounting. So this is a big,
                                      big deal, the biggest bankruptcy in our Nation’s history.
                                         I applaud the full chairman—the chairman of the full committee
                                      and the chairman of this investigative committee on doing this.
                                         Now, Ms. Watkins, just briefly, in a minute, tell me, what was
                                      your job around the time that you went to Ken Lay? What were
                                      you supposed to be doing for the company?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I was gathering a list of all assets that we might
                                      consider for sale and looking at the economic impact of sale. So I
                                      was looking at the book value, the market value, what kind of gain
                                      or loss we might get if we were able to sell that asset for its market
                                      value.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. So you started—with that information, you started
                                      to piece together this whole scenario. Is that what happened?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, yes, because a number of assets were hedged
                                      with Raptor. And my understanding of a hedge is that means you
                                      have got a locked in sales value. And so some of these assets, most
                                      notably Avici and New Power, the market values were significantly
                                      below our book value. But since we had the assets hedged, that
                                      should have been really no concern of Enron’s. It should have been
                                      hedged with Raptor.
                                         And the business units that were helping me pull together this
                                      information kept showing me losses, that should have been
                                      Raptor’s, coming back to Enron.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. Okay. Were you also hearing, you know, scuttlebutt
                                      around the company about some of these things that you were see-
                                      ing?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Not accounting impropriety scuttlebutt, just pret-
                                      ty——
                                         Mr. GANSKE. Did you ever hear, you know, at the water cooler
                                      about somebody who made an investment of $10,000, $15,000——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. [continuing] and got millions?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, I did not.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. Okay. So you are gathering all of this information
                                      together. Did you ever have any trouble getting the information?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. On the structures and the way they actually
                                      worked, no, I did not. It was readily apparent people had various
                                      analyses and presentations that they provided me.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00052   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 53 ===
                                                                                          49

                                        Mr. GANSKE. So then you write this letter to Ken Lay and you
                                      say, ‘‘I am incredibly nervous that we will implode in a wave of im-
                                      pending scandals.’’ I want to read this full paragraph. ‘‘Is there a
                                      way our accounting gurus can unwind these deals now? I have
                                      thought and thought about how to do this, but I keep bumping into
                                      one big problem. We booked the Condor and Raptor deals in 1999
                                      and 2000. We enjoyed a wonderfully high stock price while many
                                      executives sold stock.
                                        ‘‘We then try and reverse and fix the deals in 2001, and it is a
                                      bit like robbing the bank in 1 year and trying to pay it back 2
                                      years later. Nice try, but investors were hurt. They bought at $70
                                      to $80 a share looking for $120, and now they’re at $38 or worse.
                                      We are under too much scrutiny, and there are probably one or two
                                      disgruntled pre-deployed employees who know enough about the
                                      funny accounting to get us into trouble.’’
                                        When you wrote this letter to Mr. Lay, what was going through
                                      your mind? Were you afraid?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. Well, I wanted to impress upon him that this was
                                      something that was likely to happen. We were downsizing. We had
                                      at this point maybe let go at least 400 or 500 people and——
                                        Mr. GANSKE. But this is bad news. Okay? And you are writing
                                      this—you know, you originally wrote this anonymously.
                                        Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                        Mr. GANSKE. Okay. This is really bad stuff. I mean, were you
                                      worried that if you go to the President with this type of stuff that
                                      this could affect you personally?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. I certainly was not going to go to Mr. Skilling. I
                                      believed, and I still believe, that Mr. Lay is a man of integrity. He
                                      didn’t shoot the messenger. I am still at Enron. And I felt like I
                                      could bring the concerns to him.
                                        Mr. GANSKE. Did you put a personal copy of this somewhere out-
                                      side of the company? Did you keep this—a copy of this memo some-
                                      where else?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. I did. And the day I sent it to Mr. Lay anony-
                                      mously I also sent it in an envelope to Mr. McMahon with my
                                      name on it. And I talked to him about it that day.
                                        Mr. GANSKE. Did you keep a copy for your own personal files?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I did.
                                        Mr. GANSKE. And where did you keep those files? At home?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. No.
                                        Mr. GANSKE. At work?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. No. In a lock box.
                                        Mr. GANSKE. In a lock box. So you were enough concerned about
                                      this that you wanted to put this somewhere where it couldn’t be
                                      destroyed.
                                        Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                        Mr. GANSKE. Were you worried about your own personal safety?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. At times. Just because the company was a little
                                      bit radio silent back to me, so I didn’t know how they were taking
                                      my memos, or the investigation.
                                        Mr. GANSKE. Why would you be worried about your personal
                                      safety?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. Because it was the seventh largest company in
                                      America.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00053   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 54 ===
                                                                                          50

                                         Mr. GANSKE. And you were dealing with really—a really power-
                                      ful problem.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. And a really powerful company. I just have to ask
                                      you this. When you first learned about this problem at Enron, did
                                      you own stock?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I have stock in the 401K plan, and I have stock
                                      options.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. Did you sell any of that stock?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I did.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. When did you sell it?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I routinely diversified and did not hold that much
                                      Enron stock or stock options. I did sell $31,000 worth of stock in
                                      late August, and then I sold net to myself around $17,000 of stock
                                      options in early October.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. And you sent this first—these memos to Mr. Lay
                                      when?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. August 15.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. So around the time that you sent these memos,
                                      after you had gathered this data and gotten to know the financial
                                      situation of the company, you sold some stock. Why did you sell it?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I could have sold in July at $45. I actually sold
                                      in October more out of a knee-jerk reaction to September 11. When
                                      the markets reopened after the terrorist attacks, most stocks did
                                      decline. Enron declined into the low 20’s. I had virtually no stock
                                      options that were in the money in the low 20’s.
                                         In early October, we moved into the mid 30’s and even high 30’s,
                                      and I had two blocks of stock options that were then in the money.
                                      And I just, I think as many others, I felt some panic and need to
                                      get cash because you just felt like, you know, when was the next
                                      attack? What would that impact be on the stock market?
                                         Mr. GANSKE. So you sold $30,000 at one time and $17,000 at an-
                                      other time?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. So $47,000. When you found out—when you gave
                                      the second memo and had the meetings with Mr. Lay, and then as
                                      we have heard from testimony today, you know, you were con-
                                      cerned that, you know, it was going back to the same law firm,
                                      kind of looked like it was a cover up, things weren’t happening too
                                      much. Did you ever think about, you know, going to Treasury, Jus-
                                      tice, the SEC, blowing the whistle on this? This is—you know, you
                                      have outlined potentially criminal behavior.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. A co-worker of mine asked whether I had done
                                      this, and she asked whether or not I would consider going to the
                                      SEC on this. And I said I don’t want to hasten our demise. There
                                      are 20,000 employees here whose livelihood is at risk. If it appears
                                      that I hastened the demise of the company, I might be targeted by
                                      them. They might confuse the problem as something I caused. I did
                                      not want to hasten the demise.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. When you had your conversations with Mr. Lay, did
                                      he ask you not to share this information with anyone?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. He did ask me had I taken it outside; had I taken
                                      it to the SEC or the press, and I said no, I had not done so. And




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00054   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 55 ===
                                                                                          51

                                      he said, ‘‘Can you please give us time to investigate?’’ And I said,
                                      ‘‘Oh, most definitely.’’
                                         Mr. GANSKE. Did he give you a timeline? Did you ask him for a
                                      timeline?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I did not ask him for a timeline. But he seemed
                                      to indicate that they would look into it rather quickly.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. Well, we all know, and you as an accountant could
                                      see the problems coming. I mean, you wrote about it an impeding
                                      implosion. This must have weighed quite heavily on your mind in
                                      terms of thinking about what would happen both to your fellow em-
                                      ployees as they were locked in, and investors around the country.
                                         Tell me what you were feeling about that time, specifically on
                                      whether you had an ethical obligation to let this be known.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I wasn’t thinking legally. I really felt like I could
                                      not go outside of the company. Enron was full of bright people.
                                      There were maybe calm ways of addressing this. Having it hit the
                                      press in an inflammatory way would definitely hasten the demise.
                                         And I wanted to make sure that we had researched everything
                                      thoroughly, because what I wanted to do was restate, come clean,
                                      but with some contingency plans how to make sure our trade
                                      counter parties had confidence in our survival, maybe shore up
                                      some equity and finance deals, knowing that we were going to face
                                      hard times.
                                         But to go to the press, or to go to the SEC, would not have given
                                      Enron a chance to try to fix it calmly. And most definitely this
                                      news would have been inflammatory, and we would be in the same
                                      position we are in right now.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The time of the gentleman has expired.
                                         Mr. GANSKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Before I recognize Mr. Markey for questions, I
                                      just wanted you to clarify something, Ms. Watkins. The Powers Re-
                                      port indicated that you had not cooperated, or had not participated
                                      in that investigation. Is that the case?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, not actually. They called me for the very
                                      first time December 13 and wanted to interview me the following
                                      week. I was actually a little surprised that it took them so long
                                      to——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. It took them 2 months. Is that right?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. [continuing] to call me, yes.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Any indication why it took them 2 months,
                                      since you were so essential?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I had just hired Mr. Hilder. Enron was offering an
                                      attorney to represent me that was also representing Mr. Causey
                                      and Mr. Buy. I was not comfortable using that attorney, so I had
                                      spoken with Mr. Hilder. He was not up to speed yet on the issues.
                                      So we did meet with the Special Committee the week before Christ-
                                      mas, but just to say that we needed to reschedule. They indicated
                                      that they were trying to look at evidence first before they con-
                                      ducted interviews.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Mas-
                                      sachusetts, Mr. Markey, for 10 minutes.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Thank you, Ms. Watkins. Pinocchio had a conscience called
                                      Jiminy Cricket. Every time Pinocchio ignored Jiminy Cricket his




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00055   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 56 ===
                                                                                          52

                                      nose grew longer and longer. You were the conscience of this cor-
                                      poration. You warned them. And when they ignored your advice,
                                      they had to tell more lies. And the longer they told those lies was
                                      the more jeopardy that investors and employees of Enron were
                                      placed in.
                                         Now, what you have done is really very courageous. You are a
                                      hero. But being a whistleblower is something that can test the
                                      strength of the strongest person. It can buckle their knees. And I
                                      have a feeling that this is just the beginning of a process for you
                                      in terms of the stress that you are going to be under.
                                         I just want you to know that for my part, and I think I speak
                                      for every member of this committee, that if actions that you feel
                                      are unwarranted are being taken against you because of what you
                                      are doing here that you should let us know. They did the same
                                      thing to the Morton Thiokol whistleblowers that spoke of the O-
                                      ring. They demoted them. They punished them. But once Congress
                                      intervened, that was rectified within a day. So you should let us
                                      know that.
                                         Now, in both your August 15 and August 22 letters to Mr. Lay,
                                      you warned that, ‘‘We do have valuation issues with our inter-
                                      national assets and possibly some of our Enron Energy Services
                                      and mark-to-market positions.’’
                                         Now, we know that Enron has created thousands of special pur-
                                      pose entities. Do you believe that there may be some mark-to-mar-
                                      ket valuation problems involving transactions with any of these
                                      other special purpose entities that were constructed?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t believe so. A number of the special purpose
                                      entities that Enron has are somewhat routine. Enron did hire the
                                      best and the brightest, and a lot of them were structures so if we
                                      did want to sell an international powerplant, we had a number of
                                      subsidiaries that might appeal to a European buyer, an Asian
                                      buyer. Some of them were very legitimate, just to provide us all the
                                      options we might want to pursue some time in the future.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. How about Enron’s international assets? Do you
                                      think there could be some mark-to-market valuation problems
                                      there?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Not so much mark-to-market, but in accounting if
                                      you have a long-term asset on your balance sheet that you feel is
                                      permanently impaired, you must write that down. And I believe
                                      there may be some problems with some of Enron’s international as-
                                      sets.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. And how does that problem manifest itself?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. If it appears that you will not achieve over time
                                      the value you have paid for a particular asset, you must write it
                                      down. So that would be an income statement impact when you re-
                                      alize you have got the valuation problem.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. So, in other words, if they mark to the model, and
                                      it turns out the model is not working——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. That is on our fair value assets.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Right.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Most of the international assets were not nec-
                                      essarily fair value assets. Those tended to be the domestic ones. We
                                      do have some domestic assets that are fair value that are marked
                                      to a model that is somewhat subjective.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00056   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 57 ===
                                                                                          53

                                         Mr. MARKEY. Okay. Now, Mr. Skilling has told us that he wasn’t
                                      involved in the March 2001 Raptor transactions. The Powers Com-
                                      mittee reports that others at Enron say he was. And Powers is crit-
                                      ical of Mr. Skilling’s failure to assure that the Raptor losses were
                                      properly accounted for in the first quarter of 2001. Do you have any
                                      knowledge of Mr. Skilling’s involvement with or participation in
                                      the Raptor vehicles?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No, I do not.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. You do not. Now, in October of 2000, Mr. Fastow
                                      convened a meeting of the LJM partners to review their activities.
                                      Mr. Skilling is listed as a guest speaker. On page 7 of the presen-
                                      tation document for this meeting, Mr. Fastow says that the reason
                                      Enron needs private equity is because ‘‘energy and communications
                                      assets typically do not generate earnings or cashflow within the
                                      first 1 to 3 years, and investments dilute Enron’s current earnings
                                      per share and its credit rating ratios.’’ Do you agree with that?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Some energy and communication assets generate
                                      cashflow. But I guess he means our—Enron’s energy and commu-
                                      nication assets——
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Yes.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. [continuing] were not generating cashflow.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. And you agree with that.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Now, the proposed solution in that document was
                                      ‘‘to deconsolidate assets’’ and ‘‘create structures which accelerate
                                      projected earnings and cashflows.’’ Now, you had run the JEDI
                                      partnership and had sold a Colombian asset to White Wing to in-
                                      crease cashflow. Would you agree that this was the purpose of
                                      Enron’s SPE?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. The purpose of the Condor SPE appeared, in my
                                      opinion, to be to generate funds flow. As far as LJM, I am mainly
                                      familiar just with Raptor and the Raptor special purpose entities.
                                      And it does appear that that—that those were created solely to en-
                                      sure that certain losses that should flow through our income state-
                                      ment were masked.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. All right. If you could turn to page 9, where it says
                                      that private equity can also be used for ‘‘earnings generation.’’ You
                                      found that to be true on the Raptors SPEs, didn’t you?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. You did. Now, Mr. Skilling told us under oath that
                                      while he was at Enron he was not aware of—and this is what he
                                      told the committee—‘‘any financing arrangements designed to con-
                                      ceal liabilities or inflate profitability,’’ and that, again, ‘‘the off bal-
                                      ance sheet entities or SPEs that have gotten so much attention are
                                      commonplace in corporate America, and, if properly established,
                                      they can effectively shift risk from a company’s shareholders to oth-
                                      ers who have a different risk-reward preference. As a result, the
                                      financial statements issued by Enron, as far as I know’’—this is
                                      Mr. Skilling speaking—‘‘accurately reflected the financial condition
                                      of the company.’’
                                         So, in your option, was Raptor IV ‘‘a financing arrangement de-
                                      signed to conceal liabilities or inflate profitability?’’
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I would focus in on his comment that we did
                                      these deals to shift risk and return to an entity that wanted to bear




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00057   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 58 ===
                                                                                          54

                                      that differing risk and return. The risk and return scenario that
                                      Enron didn’t want to bear transferred to a special purpose entity.
                                      We know from the Powers Report that there was no real economic
                                      risk transferred to Raptor.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Do you believe that he knew the actual financial
                                      condition of the company? Mr. Skilling, that is.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I do.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. You do. Here on the LJM2 approval sheet, we have
                                      Skilling signing off at Tab 2. Doesn’t that mean to you that Mr.
                                      Skilling was involved in Raptor?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. On these transactions where he is signing off, he
                                      should be. I am looking at one that says Jeff Skilling, Joe Sutton,
                                      with no signature. But maybe it was—oh, I don’t know who that
                                      is that signed it. But if there was a signature block on these sheets
                                      it had to be filled.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Okay. So, yes, that would be back on the first, sec-
                                      ond, page 3, fourth page. It says LJM approval sheet, page 3. And
                                      the bottom is Executive Jeff Skilling, with his signature next to it,
                                      March 12, 2001. Can you see that?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. March 12, 2001. That is under Tab 2?
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Yes. It is in Tab 2, page 3.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Now, what does that indicate inside the corporate
                                      structure, as you know it, when a signature like that is under——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, he is approving Raptor IV. And I am sure
                                      he was well versed with what this meant.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Are you sure?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. He typically was very well versed.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. So in your opinion, then, at the very top of the com-
                                      pany these men were well briefed with regard to what was going
                                      on inside of these special purpose entities.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It would be my opinion that Mr. Skilling would be
                                      very well briefed about these transactions.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. Well, again, I thank you.
                                         And, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
                                         Mr. MARKEY. [continuing] the last couple of years, and I thank
                                      you for your courage.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Before recognizing the gentleman from Texas,
                                      the Chair is going to exercise the prerogative because the Chair
                                      has to turn the gavel over to someone else.
                                         Ms. Watkins, in your interview with V&E, you discussed that
                                      Fastow was, in effect, blackmailing banks to become investors in
                                      LJM. What did you mean by that?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I had heard from friends that worked at Chase
                                      and Credit Suisse and Bank of America that Mr. Fastow was al-
                                      most somewhat threatening, that if you didn’t invest in LJM,
                                      Enron would not use you as a banker or an investment banker
                                      again. That he was threatening the institutions, that to get Enron
                                      business they should invest in LJM.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Did that appear to be a successful strategy?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. By the investors that are in LJM2, yes, it ap-
                                      peared to work.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00058   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 59 ===
                                                                                          55

                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. And how about Mr. McMahon. He told us
                                      about promises that were made to the banks. Did he participate in
                                      that?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I just remember from his testimony last
                                      week that he was——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Did he——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. [continuing] he was asked about——
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Did you discuss this issue with McMahon?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. He and I discussed that Mr. Fastow used strong-
                                      arm tactics occasionally.
                                         Mr. GREENWOOD. Okay. The Chair recognizes the gentleman
                                      from Texas, Mr. Green, for 10 minutes.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         And, Ms. Watkins, I have some questions. But, first, I had some-
                                      body from Houston send me an e-mail. Well, it actually came from
                                      another Member of Congress, and the young lady actually worked
                                      in Houston. And she said this, ‘‘Capitalism is if you have two cows,
                                      and you sell one and buy a bull, and your herd multiplies, and the
                                      economy grows and you sell them to retire on the income.’’
                                         And now you have Enron capitalism. You have two cows. You
                                      sell three of them to your publicly listed company using letters of
                                      credit opened by your brother-in-law at the bank, and then execute
                                      a debt equity swap from an associated general offer so that you get
                                      all four cows back with tax exemptions for five.
                                         The milk rights of the six cows are transferred via an inter-
                                      mediary to a Cayman Island company secretly owned by your CFO
                                      who sells the rights to all seven cows back to your listed company.
                                      And the annual report says the company owns eight cows with an
                                      option for six more.
                                         When I saw this late last night, of course, we ran until 3, and
                                      I thought after hearing all of the testimony that we have heard be-
                                      fore today, that is about what it sounds like. And your testimony
                                      is very refreshing, in all honesty. And like a lot of members, I, you
                                      know, respect you and admire you for being willing to put your job
                                      on the line to go up to the CEO and say, you know, ‘‘We have a
                                      problem.’’
                                         And, you know, after reading Vinson & Elkins’ response, they
                                      didn’t respond like it should have been, and your testimony has al-
                                      ready showed that.
                                         Let me turn, if you could, to Tab 2 in your book. And what it
                                      is it is your memo that you sent to Mr. Hecker, because at our first
                                      hearing we actually had Arthur Andersen here and talked about
                                      your memo. Were you surprised—I know as a former Arthur An-
                                      dersen employee—how quickly Mr. Hecker communicated your con-
                                      cerns to Andersen’s management?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I am looking at Tab 16, and it is a memo from
                                      Mr. James Hecker dated August 21. I phoned him as he——
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. Yes, it is Tab 2 on mine. It is Tab 16 on yours.
                                      Okay.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I phoned him, as it says, more like a sounding
                                      board to talk to him about my concerns before I met with Mr. Lay.
                                      I was thinking it was just something between us. In hindsight, I
                                      realized the severity of what I was concerned about was something
                                      that probably would induce him to do something about it. And I




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00059   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 60 ===
                                                                                          56

                                      read this when this committee released this document a few weeks
                                      ago.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. And when you spoke with him, you said—and
                                      you told me you thought it would be confidential, or just between
                                      you and him, or——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I didn’t say confidential necessarily, but I
                                      was just trying to run some things by him. I did not realize he had
                                      written a memo until this year.
                                         Mr. GREEN. I guess in most organizations, though, if somebody
                                      brings something to my attention that impacts my company, or
                                      partnership in this case, you know, I would expect him to be able
                                      to go to someone else and say, ‘‘By the way, there is a problem that
                                      has been brought up, and it is my job to pass this on, so somebody
                                      in a decisionmaking capacity higher than mine can do it.’’
                                         How long did you work with Arthur Andersen?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Eight years.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Oh. So it was a number of years. Was it your experi-
                                      ence that the practice groups tended to be sensitive about internal
                                      allegations of accounting irregularities during your 8 years?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. If I was still an auditor at Arthur Andersen, and
                                      I got a call like mine, I would be highly concerned with the con-
                                      versation and the topics that I brought up with Mr. Hecker.
                                         Mr. GREEN. So it would circulate in the office and——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It doesn’t surprise me that he, after reading this,
                                      talked to the people that he did, and that he did try to bring a lot
                                      of attention to my concerns.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Yes. And were you surprised that it actually made
                                      it all the way up to Chicago?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Not really. Mr. Hecker indicated to me during our
                                      call that he hoped I wasn’t right, because he didn’t think their firm
                                      could stand another scandal following Waste Management and
                                      Sunbeam.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Yes. And we have discussed that before at our hear-
                                      ings. I guess the Andersen folks who are here developed some type
                                      of ‘‘I don’t remember’’ and ‘‘I don’t recall’’ illnesses it seems like
                                      people get when they come into our committee room.
                                         When you worked at Arthur Andersen—and I appreciate your in-
                                      sights on what has happened—but it seems like they weren’t as
                                      forthcoming as maybe they should have been, having been notified
                                      last August, and maybe even questions before your memo to Mr.
                                      Hecker.
                                         In most of your memos, you have almost always provided a list
                                      of additional people to speak with about collaborating your views.
                                      And you have been documenting, saying, ‘‘This is just my opinion,
                                      but here is other folks that can collaborate.’’ Are there people in
                                      the Enron food chain that—who would be helpful to our sub-
                                      committee to talk to that maybe if we haven’t had the oppor-
                                      tunity—our investigators—is there anyone that you know of that
                                      you may not have shared with our committee staff?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I think I have mentioned most of the names to the
                                      staff—and also here today—that would be useful.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. Let me—another question. If you will turn to
                                      page 37. Okay. I am sorry. If you will—I am sorry, Tab 26. The




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00060   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 61 ===
                                                                                          57

                                      agenda for the LJM investments from October 26, 2000, annual
                                      partnership meeting.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Okay.
                                         Mr. GREEN. I know that you haven’t seen this document before.
                                      But I think you can shed some light on this for us. Now, on page
                                      37 of this report, sample investments, Raptor I, their first bullet
                                      points to—or reads in relevant part that Raptor is a structured fi-
                                      nance vehicle, capitalized with Enron stock, derivative in LJM eq-
                                      uity, that will enter into derivative transactions with Enron related
                                      to investments in Enron’s merchant investment portfolio.
                                         How can an entity that is capitalized with Enron stock derivative
                                      legitimately enter into a derivative transaction with Enron? And
                                      how can Enron book that income from these transactions?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, the main issue, too, is that it was primarily
                                      capitalized with an Enron stock derivative. And the LJM equity
                                      had been completely offset by a cash fee paid to LJM. Under that
                                      structure I don’t see how it could have been legitimate.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. And, again, this is the annual partnership
                                      meeting of October of 2000. In your memo in August, and what we
                                      have seen from the Powers Report that there was even information
                                      in the spring of 2001—so, you know, it was before your memo—and
                                      now we have the original—the annual partnership meeting—and I
                                      have to admit, I was a business major. But I couldn’t make heads
                                      or tails about how you could quantify this. I appreciate your an-
                                      swer.
                                         On page 38, sample investments, Osprey. The first bullet point
                                      reads to relevant part that Osprey is a partner in an investment
                                      vehicle that purchases merchant assets from Enron. It is capital-
                                      ized with 50 million shares of Enron stock. If an entity were cap-
                                      italized with Enron stock, and Enron stock sold assets—Enron sold
                                      assets to that entity, is Enron essentially selling assets to itself
                                      again?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Osprey and Condor and White Wing are all the
                                      same vehicle. And this is the Condor that I was referring to in my
                                      memos that I was uncomfortable with.
                                         Mr. GREEN. So the answer to the question is, if an entity were
                                      capitalized with Enron stock, and Enron sold assets to the entity,
                                      is Enron essentially selling assets to itself?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. In this instance, there were significant outside in-
                                      vestors.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. And they could fall back on the assets for repay-
                                      ment.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. But it was also structured that if the assets were
                                      not sufficient to repay the debt investors, they also had the stock.
                                      Supposedly, this is a legitimate accounting structure. I am not
                                      happy with it. I think if there is a claw back to the company, to
                                      its own stock, it should not be off balance sheet. And the debt that
                                      came into Condor or White Wing or Osprey was used to purchase
                                      assets, and Enron got funds flow from operations treatment from
                                      that.
                                         And I think if it had been a consolidated special purpose entity,
                                      it would have been funds flow from borrowings. And those are two




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00061   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 62 ===
                                                                                          58

                                      very different funds flow items, in terms of how an analyst would
                                      evaluate the company.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Okay. The second bullet points out that this struc-
                                      ture created a synthetic, multi-billion dollar balance sheet for
                                      Enron that deconsolidated assets to generate funds flow. If, in fact,
                                      these structures created synthetic balance sheets for Enron that in-
                                      dicated an increase in funds flow, would this be intentionally de-
                                      ceptive to investors, in your opinion?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes. In my opinion, it would.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Ms. Watkins, you said earlier that the push to sell
                                      assets and increase cashflow began in the third and fourth quar-
                                      ters of 1999?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir.
                                         Mr. GREEN. So now 11⁄2 years later, in its continued effort to arti-
                                      ficially increase its cashflow, Enron is selling its assets at inflated
                                      prices to partnerships of which its senior executives are the general
                                      partners. These partnerships are either capitalized with or guaran-
                                      teed by Enron stock, and this was done to improve the optics of
                                      Enron’s balance sheet in order to deceive Wall Street analysts and
                                      investors.
                                         I know that is a long phrase. But do you think these—in your
                                      opinion, these partnerships were either capitalized or guaranteed
                                      this was done to improve the optics. And I love the terminology,
                                      ‘‘the optics of Enron’s balance sheets to deceive Wall Street ana-
                                      lysts and investors.’’
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It appears that some of these vehicles were used
                                      for financial statement manipulation.
                                         Mr. GREEN. Thank you.
                                         Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Again, thank you for being here, and I have been proud to read
                                      the articles about a Texas lady who is willing to do that.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I thank the gentleman.
                                         I think we have gone through the roster of members who are
                                      qualified to ask questions. I want to acknowledge for the record,
                                      however, the presence, once again, of Congresswoman Sheila Jack-
                                      son-Lee, who is not a member of our committee, and, therefore, not
                                      entitled to participate with questions but who has been an extraor-
                                      dinary participant through all of these hearing processes on behalf
                                      of the citizens of her community who have been so devastated by
                                      this collapse.
                                         And again, Congresswoman Lee, we welcome you and thank you
                                      for your attendance and your participation, physically and I know
                                      emotionally, in these hearings. Thank you.
                                         Let me, before we wrap, put a few questions into the record, Ms.
                                      Watkins, that I think are important as well because the answers
                                      will tell us a little bit about who was taking responsibility for what
                                      was going on and who was not. I want to focus on the gentleman
                                      who held the position of Executive Vice President and Chief Risk
                                      Officer.
                                         Now, would you describe for us the function of the Chief Risk Of-
                                      ficer in the corporation?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Mr. Buy supervised our credit department.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. And his name is Rick Buy, right?




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00062   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 63 ===
                                                                                          59

                                        Ms. WATKINS. Rick Buy, yes. He supervised our credit depart-
                                      ment, our risk assessment and control group, and he was in charge
                                      of our risk management policy that was presented to the Board
                                      each year.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. So he was—according to our documents—re-
                                      sponsible for identifying, quantifying, controlling risk in both
                                      Enron’s trading activities and their investment opportunities,
                                      right?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. This would include all of these special entities
                                      and partnerships that Enron was engaging in, right?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. Yes, that is correct.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Now, did you ever have a conversation with
                                      him about the precarious financial condition of Enron and its reli-
                                      ance upon these questionable deals to continue to meet the earn-
                                      ings projections?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. I had worked with Mr. Buy during the time period
                                      where I was managing the JEDI portfolio. I have also had discus-
                                      sions with him. He was a former co-worker and friend. The week
                                      leading up to my meeting with Mr. Lay, Mr. Buy was on vacation,
                                      and I actually phoned him. I was trying to use him as a sounding
                                      board as well.
                                        I told him a bit about my concerns and that I had a meeting
                                      scheduled with Mr. Lay. I asked him if I could fax him my mate-
                                      rials to get his opinion about——
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. But did you tell him that, in fact, some of the
                                      materials had come from his own shop?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. No. But I just told him I had some memos that
                                      I wanted to fax him and have him look at.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Did you identify those memos, or explain to
                                      him what they might say or——
                                        Ms. WATKINS. I told him I was very concerned about the Raptor
                                      transactions, that we had very large accounting issues, and that it
                                      was not appropriate to be backstopping these Raptor losses with
                                      Enron stock.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. So you offered to send him all of this. What
                                      was his response?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. He said he would rather not see it.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Now, he would rather not see it? And his job
                                      was the risk officer for the corporation?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. And so I suppose you didn’t send it to him,
                                      then?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. No, I did not.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. So the Chief Risk Officer of the corporation
                                      was in a see no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil position?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. It was——
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. He didn’t want to see the documents?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. It would appear that would be the case.
                                        Chairman TAUZIN. Now, did he tell you anything about the pre-
                                      carious financial condition of Enron and its reliance upon these
                                      deals?
                                        Ms. WATKINS. Mr. Buy expressed the opinion to me, as early as
                                      maybe even 1997/1998, that he felt like Enron was one or two




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00063   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 64 ===
                                                                                          60

                                      quarters away from disaster. Now, he had different reasons for
                                      that, but that was because we were a trading company. Trading
                                      companies usually it is hard to predict earnings. You have to de-
                                      pend upon volatility in the marketplace.
                                         And we were so dead set on predicting our earnings, and the
                                      street had become accustomed to us predicting our earnings. So he
                                      just felt like if we ever missed our earnings targets people, i.e. the
                                      analysts and the investing community, would look at us under a
                                      microscope and that he was concerned that would put us in in a
                                      disastrous position.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. So here is the Chief Risk Officer who has ex-
                                      pressed to you concerns that you may be a quarter away from dis-
                                      aster because of Enron’s reliance upon these transactions, who says
                                      to you, ‘‘Don’t send me the documents illustrating your concerns
                                      that there are serious problems with these transactions.’’ How did
                                      you react to that?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I was disappointed because I felt like he was in
                                      a position to help us disclose these things with Mr. Lay.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. And you weren’t going to get any help at all
                                      from him.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Right.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Now, you were part of an investor conference
                                      call on October 23. Now, to put it in perspective, this is about the
                                      time that you are discussing with Mr. Lay your concerns and bring-
                                      ing them to him attention?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, it was after the earnings release, which
                                      talked about the $1.2 billion shareholder reduction.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. October 16, right?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. October 16. We had an October 23 investor call
                                      that was open to the public, and I just listened in.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Right. Now, I understand that Mr. Causey
                                      and Mr. Lay were members of that conference call.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, that is right.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. And you had a chance to listen in to the con-
                                      versations. Were the Raptors discussed in that conference call?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes. An analyst asked the question, ‘‘Okay. Enron
                                      has unwound these Raptor transactions. You have written off the
                                      transactions in the third quarter of 2001. If they had never existed
                                      at all, what would have been the income statement impact for the
                                      year 2000?’’ And Mr. Causey responded that there would have been
                                      little or no impact, because we could have done these transactions
                                      elsewhere.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Was that a true statement?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I don’t think so, and the Powers Report doesn’t
                                      think so either.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Did Mr. Lay have any comments on that
                                      point?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, Mr. Lay parroted Mr. Causey word for word.
                                      And I felt like that was a statement he didn’t necessarily know,
                                      and it was unwise to parrot the Chief Accounting Officer on that
                                      statement.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Now, here Mr. Causey and Mr. Lay are on a
                                      conference call with investors telling them that if the Raptors had
                                      not been a part of Enron there would have been no impact on the




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00064   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 65 ===
                                                                                          61

                                      income statement. You believe that to be false. Did you express
                                      your concerns about these statements following that conversation?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, I did go into Ms. Olson’s office, and I said,
                                      ‘‘You need to warn Mr. Lay that he should not make comments like
                                      that unless he knows it to be a fact.’’
                                         Mr. TAUZIN. Did you make notes of those conversations?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I did.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Have you supplied those notes to the com-
                                      mittee?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I have them. I believe my attorney was going to
                                      supply them later.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I would appreciate it if you would supply
                                      those notes that we might have them as part of the record. Without
                                      objection, that will be so ordered One final thing I want to get on
                                      the record, Ms. Watkins, that I think is awfully important, too.
                                      Once you were identified as the author of the anonymous letter you
                                      first sent, did any of the executive offices of Enron, of the 50th floor
                                      up, ever contact you to discuss with you what you had written? Did
                                      anybody praise you for coming forward from the 50th floor? Was
                                      there a difference between the reaction of Enron employees below
                                      the 50th floor, as opposed to those in charge on the 50th floor and
                                      above?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, the reaction from the employees that have
                                      been laid off has been just fantastic. They are very supportive. And
                                      then, I would say from 90 percent of the employees that are still
                                      there the reaction is also very positive. From the 50th floor, I have
                                      only had one person give me an ‘‘atta girl’’ so to speak, and that
                                      was Mr. Ray Bowen.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. One final thing. This is very important, obvi-
                                      ously, for you and for us. Will you agree to inform us immediately
                                      if, as a result of your coming forward to testify before this com-
                                      mittee, and your willingness to come forward to Mr. Lay with your
                                      concerns as you have, if any retaliatory action is threatened or pro-
                                      posed or suggested in terms of your employment and your position
                                      with Enron?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. All right. We thank you for that, and we as-
                                      sure you we will be watching that extraordinarily carefully.
                                         Are there any requests for additional questions?
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. The gentleman from Florida.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Just a couple of very specific followups. In your
                                      discussion with staff yesterday, you stated that you believed that
                                      Enron should have taken additional writeoffs beyond those in the
                                      November 8 restatement. Could you explain that?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, the Raptor vehicles that I wrote about, that
                                      were all associated with LJM2, they were unwound and written off
                                      in the third quarter of 2001. And they have yet to be restated.
                                      Those should be unwound as if they never existed, and they should
                                      restate 2000 results in the first quarter of 2001.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. What is the significance of taking additional write-
                                      offs, especially since Enron is now in bankruptcy proceedings?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It is the appropriate thing to do for a public com-
                                      pany. We are still publicly traded and under SEC rules.




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00065   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 66 ===
                                                                                          62

                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. And just a couple very quick followup questions.
                                      Is your sense that there was complicity with the auditors, Arthur
                                      Andersen, and, in a sense, with Vinson & Elkins as well, or was
                                      there basically fraud to both your accountants and your attorneys?
                                      In other words, was this a cooperative effort with Enron manage-
                                      ment to basically come up with these ideas? Or was the representa-
                                      tion to the accountants and the attorneys misinformation?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It is my opinion that Enron transaction account-
                                      ants, most notably Ben Glisan, helped come up with the structure
                                      and come up with the support for the structure, and then convinced
                                      Andersen that it worked.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. So they knew—what you are really saying is, in
                                      your opinion, they knew—it was not that Enron was holding back
                                      what the actual structure of the transaction was.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Oh, I think they understood the structure, yes.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. And the issues in terms of Enron being the guar-
                                      antor and all of those issues?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. You mentioned something, obviously, very dis-
                                      turbing. That you, in fact, felt fear of your personal safety. Did you
                                      do anything to follow up based on that fear?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I did actually talk with some Enron security per-
                                      sonnel. I was a little bit concerned that I had—in effect, Mr.
                                      Fastow potentially lost his job because, you know, I brought up
                                      these concerns. And I actually talked to Enron security personnel
                                      about whether I should do anything different, more concern that
                                      Mr. Fastow might be vindictive.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Did they give you any advice to take specific ac-
                                      tion?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Just general security advice on——
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Did Mr. Fastow exhibit any, you know, violent be-
                                      havior——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. [continuing] erratic behavior that would lead——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. No. It is just I did not feel very much support. I
                                      did feel like I was a little bit of a lone fish swimming upstream,
                                      and so it starts to wear on you that it is you against them. And
                                      I was a little bit concerned.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Are you convinced that Mr. Baxter’s death is a
                                      suicide, or is it possible that there was another, you know, more
                                      nefarious activity?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I am sure the authorities have reported that cor-
                                      rectly.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Is there any doubt in your mind?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Probably not.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Doubt in your mind about that it was a suicide?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes. I believe it probably was.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. If you say ‘‘probably,’’ there is doubt.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. It is just a sensitive topic that I would rather not
                                      comment on.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Okay. Let me—the last thing, is submit for the
                                      record a list of transactions of Enron management. This is some-
                                      thing we talked about previously. It is actually a list of trans-




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00066   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 67 ===
                                                                                          63

                                      actions of sales of Enron stock through the end of last year, total-
                                      ing $1.1 billion.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Without objection, the document will be part
                                      of the record.
                                         Mr. DEUTSCH. Total of 17 million shares. You know, obviously,
                                      none of these shares were sold at zero, at a dollar, at $5, at $10.
                                      And I guess, you know, these people were wise enough or lucky
                                      enough to sell stocks before the facts that you have described and
                                      that we have uncovered became public.
                                         And it is either they were all very lucky or, in fact, they were
                                      trading on inside information, as it appears from the outside look-
                                      ing in.
                                         Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Thank you very much.
                                         I would also ask that the record include the transcript of the con-
                                      ference call referred to in our recent questions as part of the
                                      record. Without objection, it is so ordered.
                                         The gentleman, Mr. Stupak, is recognized for questions.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a few questions, if
                                      I may.
                                         But before I do that, I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
                                      Dingell, Mr. Deutsch, Mr. Greenwood. We have had about five or
                                      six hearings now. They have been good hearings. We have all been
                                      working together on this debacle, if you will, and things have gone
                                      quite well. And I would also like to mention our personal staffs, es-
                                      pecially committee staff. They work long and hard to help get us
                                      prepared and work——
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Will the gentleman yield?
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Sure.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. There is a personal interest story. I know he
                                      is going to get upset with me for saying it, but the gentleman who
                                      is in charge of our investigative staff, Mark Paoletta recently went
                                      through lung surgery, serious lung surgery, a surgery he was at-
                                      tempting to put off while this investigation was proceeding. And I
                                      had to threaten to fire him to make him—in fact, go to his father
                                      and threaten to fire him if he didn’t go to the hospital and take
                                      care of his lung surgery. He took care of it this weekend, and he
                                      is back to work already.
                                         The staff has done marvelous work, and Mr. Paoletta is particu-
                                      larly to be accorded our appreciation for his sacrifice of self to get
                                      this job done. And we thank you, Mark.
                                         I thank the gentleman.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. And we all appreciate Mark being back and helping
                                      throughout this whole ordeal that we have been going through.
                                         Ms. Watkins, something has been sort of bugging me, and I have
                                      asked this question before and never really got an answer. Maybe
                                      you can shed some light on it. In one of the transactions, Mr. Cop-
                                      per, in a very short period of time, made like about $2 million. And
                                      the records and everything we have seen says there is no reason
                                      why he should make $2 million in about 2 months, no indication
                                      of what was the consideration for the compensation.
                                         But yet he made that money, and I believe it was on the South-
                                      ampton deal, and maybe it was on the unwinding of Chewco or
                                      something like that. Just how would someone get paid $2 million




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00067   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 68 ===
                                                                                          64

                                      in this whole deal? I mean, how would you handle that on the
                                      books?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. All I know about those transactions were what I
                                      have read in the Powers Report. And I would probably agree with
                                      the Powers Report that it does raise questions when you can have
                                      such large returns in such a short period of time.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. What books handled that loss? The Enron books or
                                      Southampton? Would you know?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, if Enron was purchasing an interest——
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Right.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. [continuing] for instance, a Chewco interest or——
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Which they are supposed to have been.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. If you are buying back an asset, that goes on your
                                      books at the price you paid.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Paid.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. So it is not an income statement item. It is not
                                      necessarily a loss for Enron and a gain for Mr. Copper. It could be
                                      an asset purchase by Enron that provided a gain to Mr. Copper.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Sounds like just the way to pass through some
                                      money real quickly, right? After you did your memo and Vinson &
                                      Elkins reviewed—did their investigation if you will, on or about Oc-
                                      tober 15, they said that a broader investigation was not necessary
                                      and it was just bad cosmetics, and we can see our way through
                                      that.
                                         But then, the very next day, on October 16, is when Enron an-
                                      nounced that, due to accounting errors and restructuring related to
                                      transactions involving LJM2, it was revising its shareholder equity
                                      numbers downward by $1.2 billion and posting a third quarter loss
                                      in excess of $500 million. And then, it went on, and you didn’t be-
                                      lieve at that time, even despite the October 16 announcement, that
                                      the whole story had been told about the looming financial and ac-
                                      counting crisis involving all of these partnerships and these PSEs.
                                         And then, on November 8, Enron stated its intent to redo their
                                      financial statements for the past 4 years due to additional account-
                                      ing problems, again, with the LJM and Chewco partnership.
                                         Now, despite all of these actions, October 15 and November 8, do
                                      you believe that we have learned all of the problems that are there,
                                      or are there still some things that you believe must be done to real-
                                      ly come clean here with the American people and the stock and
                                      faith that people had in this company called Enron?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. The only people at Enron saying there is a prob-
                                      lem are the people hired from the Powers Report and myself.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. So despite all of the restatement of accounting and
                                      restatement of financial statements, again, the Powers Report and
                                      you, so——
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, the Raptor transactions have not been re-
                                      stated yet.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. So what concerns would you still have, then, about
                                      the transparency or the accuracy of Enron’s financial statements
                                      besides the Raptor hasn’t been fully restated?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, the Raptor transactions need to be fully re-
                                      stated and——
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Anything else?




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00068   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 69 ===
                                                                                          65

                                         Ms. WATKINS. Well, there was another memo written by an em-
                                      ployee from Enron Energy Services. It was disclosed in the press.
                                      I think it outlined how Enron solved its EES mark-to-market valu-
                                      ation issues that I raised at the first part of my anonymous letter.
                                      And that needs to be looked at. That is segment reporting. I am
                                      sure they actually bore the loss in the wholesale group, but that
                                      segment reporting was important to Enron in 2001.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Well, it seems like the October 16 reevaluation if
                                      you will was a result of your efforts, and it is our understanding
                                      between October 16 and November 8 you continued to push Ken
                                      Lay and others to do further restatements. So maybe after your
                                      testimony today we can expect some more restatements from Enron
                                      or some coming clean on Raptor or something like that. Hopefully,
                                      because we really want to get to the bottom of this. And what are
                                      all of the problems here? Let us get it on the table. They are in
                                      a bankruptcy situation, and we want to get this thing moved on.
                                         That brings me to my next question. In the minutes, and
                                      throughout some testimony and some of the flowcharts we have
                                      seen throughout here, there is mention of Enron Europe, the
                                      Southern Cone, which would be South America, Brazil, Australia,
                                      Japan. If we are seeing all of these problems here in this country
                                      related to Enron, do you know of any problems that others are see-
                                      ing overseas? What has happened over there in Australia?
                                         In Brazil, they were particularly concerned about the devaluation
                                      of their currency there and how it would affect Enron. So the
                                      Enron collapse, how has it affected things overseas? If you know.
                                         Ms. WATKINS. I am not—I was in Enron International, but most
                                      of the international assets are hard assets. They are accrual-based
                                      assets. They are fairly traditional. In a country like Brazil that has
                                      devaluation concerns, it might mean that we don’t achieve the U.S.
                                      dollar cash price that we paid, but I don’t know of anything that
                                      would indicate any kind of financial statement manipulation re-
                                      lated to those assets.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. I am looking at your memo. It is dated October 30,
                                      2001, 4:45. I am on the second page. It looks like it is Tab Number
                                      21. And I am looking on the bottom of page 2, it says, ‘‘Note.’’ Are
                                      you with me?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. It says, ‘‘Note: After restatement, the good
                                      news is that our core trading business is solid with strong numbers
                                      to report. The bad news, EBS was losing big money in 2000. The
                                      big losses then start until 2001, and EES did not start making a
                                      profit in 2000.’’ So how would—were the shareholders ever made
                                      aware of any of this?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. My concern when I was making this point was
                                      that Enron Broadband and Enron Energy Services were our growth
                                      vehicles. They were supposedly one of the reasons why we were en-
                                      joying a high PE multiple. And we did finally report to investors
                                      that EBS was losing money, large amounts of money in 2001. But
                                      the Raptor hedge on Avici made EBS look like it had only lost $50-
                                      or $60 million in 2000 when actually it was more like $250 million.
                                         And it was very important to Enron that we announce that
                                      Enron Energy Services was profitable in 2000. Without the New
                                      Power hedges, EES was not profitable in 2000. This would have




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00069   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 70 ===
                                                                                          66

                                      significantly impacted our PE multiples and our stock price in the
                                      year 2000.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. So it is fair to say if—if you started losing money
                                      in 2000, it really wasn’t reported until 2001. So you probably had—
                                      you have at least 12 months. So, basically, the shareholders
                                      weren’t told the truth here what was going on with this situation.
                                      Is that a fair statement?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. That is a fair statement.
                                         Mr. STUPAK. Okay. With that, Mr. Chairman, I have nothing fur-
                                      ther. Thank you.
                                         And thank you again.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. I thank you very much, Mr. Stupak.
                                         As we conclude, I note, Ms. Watkins, that on that same memo
                                      you make the point that Lay should meet with top SEC officials,
                                      and that Key Lay and Enron needed to support one of the SEC’s
                                      long-term objectives of requiring that the ‘‘Big 5’’ accounting firms
                                      rotate off their large clients on a regular basis as short as 3 years.
                                      Do you stand by that recommendation?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, I do. As an investor in the U.S. stock market,
                                      I would feel a lot more comfortable knowing that public companies
                                      had to rotate their accounting firms every 3 years.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. It is a recommendation we receive from a
                                      number of sources as we go forward.
                                         Let me make several observations. First of all, that you sort of
                                      stumbled on the Raptors. You are not here saying that is all that
                                      may have been wrong. There may be other things in other trans-
                                      actions that are you not aware of that may need some inquiry. Is
                                      that correct?
                                         Ms. WATKINS. Yes, sir.
                                         Chairman TAUZIN. Second, that as I said at the beginning of this
                                      hearing, we are going to try to move as rapidly as we can from this
                                      inquiry into an actual examination of solutions. And the commit-
                                      tees are beginning to do that. One of them met today; one of them
                                      met yesterday. And Mr. Greenwood and Mr. Stearns, in fact, have
                                      been asked by the committee to actually begin putting a set of rec-
                                      ommendations together for the committee to look at.
                                         And your thoughts, as you have been asked before by some mem-
                                      bers, in regards to your observations and recommended changes we
                                      might make, are certainly welcome, and we would appreciate it.
                                         Ms. Watkins, your testimony stands for itself. It doesn’t need a
                                      whole lot of elaboration or editorial comment. But I do want to
                                      make one. And that is that your testimony, your activities in re-
                                      gard to Enron, actually call all of us to examine the notion of cor-
                                      porate loyalty. There are some, I assume, who believe corporate
                                      loyalty is protecting the corporation against all harm, even when
                                      it is doing something wrong.
                                         You have demonstrated, for us, a different definition of corporate
                                      loyalty, a different definition of fiduciary responsibility to a cor-
                                      poration, that includes responsibility to its shareholders and inves-
                                      tors. And I want to compliment you for that.
                                         There are mothers and fathers listening to these hearings, and
                                      who have heard your testimony, and now have an experience, I
                                      think, upon which to hopefully teach their sons and daughters who
                                      are going to work for American corporations about the notion of




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00070   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 71 ===
                                                                                          67

                                      corporate loyalty that you bring to the table this morning, the no-
                                      tion that corporate loyalty means owning up to mistakes for the
                                      sake of the proper relationship with investors and consumers, and
                                      confronting them directly, and reporting them and dealing with
                                      them forthrightly.
                                         Would that the last clear chance you gave the leadership of
                                      Enron been accepted and taken, apparently that didn’t happen, but
                                      you at least stood for that proposition. And, again, I commend you
                                      for that. I hope that sons and daughters of American citizens follow
                                      your example, frankly, and adopt your concept of corporate loyalty
                                      as a mantra.
                                         As I said, we are learning from these hearings. I think corporate
                                      America is learning from these hearings. And I truly believe, as
                                      Mr. Greenwood does, that when we complete them—and our work
                                      is not yet finished—but when we complete them we will together,
                                      Democrats and Republicans on this committee, be able to propose
                                      a set of reforms, together with the reforms that I know corporate
                                      America itself is talking about instituting, and agencies of our gov-
                                      ernment are talking about instituting, that is going to build better,
                                      clearer, more responsible lines of communication and information
                                      and disclosure and investor confidence in this country.
                                         If that is a result of this mess, then perhaps our country will be
                                      much better for it in the end, and you will have contributed might-
                                      ily to that process. For that, I thank you.
                                         And unless there is any other business to come before the com-
                                      mittee, the Chair announces that the record will stay open for 30
                                      days.
                                         Ms. Watkins, your testimony was under oath, of course. And if
                                      you and your attorney will carefully review it, if there are any ad-
                                      ditional comments or clarifications or additions you want to make
                                      to the record, the record is open for 30 days. We may have addi-
                                      tional questions we would like to submit to you in writing to which
                                      you might respond.
                                         We will be in touch with you in that regard. Again, thank you
                                      for your extraordinary cooperation and for your contributions.
                                         The hearing stands adjourned.
                                         [Whereupon, at 4:06 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
                                         [Additional material submitted for the record follows:]




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00071   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 72 ===
                                                                                          68




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.001




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00072   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 73 ===
                                                                                          69




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.002




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00073   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 74 ===
                                                                                          70




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.003




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00074   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 75 ===
                                                                                          71




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.004




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00075   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 76 ===
                                                                                          72




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.005




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00076   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 77 ===
                                                                                          73




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.006




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00077   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 78 ===
                                                                                          74




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.007




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00078   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 79 ===
                                                                                          75




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.008




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00079   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 80 ===
                                                                                          76




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.009




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00080   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 81 ===
                                                                                          77




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.010




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00081   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 82 ===
                                                                                          78




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.011




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00082   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 83 ===
                                                                                          79




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.012




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00083   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 84 ===
                                                                                          80




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.013




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00084   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 85 ===
                                                                                          81




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.014




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00085   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 86 ===
                                                                                          82




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.015




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00086   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 87 ===
                                                                                          83




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.016




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00087   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 88 ===
                                                                                          84




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.017




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00088   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 89 ===
                                                                                          85




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.018




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00089   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 90 ===
                                                                                          86




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.019




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00090   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 91 ===
                                                                                          87




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.020




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00091   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 92 ===
                                                                                          88




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.021




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00092   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 93 ===
                                                                                          89




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.022




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00093   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 94 ===
                                                                                          90




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.023




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00094   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 95 ===
                                                                                          91




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.024




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00095   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 96 ===
                                                                                          92




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.025




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00096   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 97 ===
                                                                                          93




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.026




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00097   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 98 ===
                                                                                          94




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.027




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00098   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 99 ===
                                                                                          95




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.028




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00099   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 100 ===
                                                                                          96




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.029




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00100   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 101 ===
                                                                                          97




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.030




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00101   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 102 ===
                                                                                          98




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.031




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00102   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 103 ===
                                                                                          99




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.032




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00103   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 104 ===
                                                                                      100




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.033




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00104   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 105 ===
                                                                                      101




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.034




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00105   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 106 ===
                                                                                      102




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.035




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00106   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 107 ===
                                                                                      103




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.036




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00107   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 108 ===
                                                                                      104




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.037




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00108   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 109 ===
                                                                                      105




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.038




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00109   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 110 ===
                                                                                      106




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.039




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00110   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 111 ===
                                                                                      107




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.040




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00111   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 112 ===
                                                                                      108




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.041




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00112   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 113 ===
                                                                                      109




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.042




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00113   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 114 ===
                                                                                      110




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.043




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00114   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 115 ===
                                                                                      111




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.044




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00115   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 116 ===
                                                                                      112




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.045




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00116   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 117 ===
                                                                                      113




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.046




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00117   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 118 ===
                                                                                      114




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.047




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00118   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 119 ===
                                                                                      115




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.048




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00119   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 120 ===
                                                                                      116




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.049




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00120   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 121 ===
                                                                                      117




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.050




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00121   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 122 ===
                                                                                      118




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.051




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00122   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 123 ===
                                                                                      119




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.052




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00123   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 124 ===
                                                                                      120




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.053




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00124   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 125 ===
                                                                                      121




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.054




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00125   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 126 ===
                                                                                      122




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.055




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00126   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 127 ===
                                                                                      123




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.056




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00127   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 128 ===
                                                                                      124




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.057




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00128   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 129 ===
                                                                                      125




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.058




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00129   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 130 ===
                                                                                      126




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.059




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00130   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 131 ===
                                                                                      127




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.060




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00131   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 132 ===
                                                                                      128




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.061




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00132   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 133 ===
                                                                                      129




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.062




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00133   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 134 ===
                                                                                      130




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.063




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00134   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 135 ===
                                                                                      131




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.064




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00135   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 136 ===
                                                                                      132




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.065




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00136   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 137 ===
                                                                                      133




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.066




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00137   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 138 ===
                                                                                      134




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.067




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00138   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 139 ===
                                                                                      135




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.068




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00139   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 140 ===
                                                                                      136




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.069




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00140   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 141 ===
                                                                                      137




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.070




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00141   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 142 ===
                                                                                      138




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.071




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00142   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 143 ===
                                                                                      139




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.072




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00143   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 144 ===
                                                                                      140




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.073




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00144   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 145 ===
                                                                                      141




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.074




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00145   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 146 ===
                                                                                      142




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.075




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00146   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 147 ===
                                                                                      143




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.076




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00147   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 148 ===
                                                                                      144




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.077




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00148   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 149 ===
                                                                                      145




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.078




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00149   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 150 ===
                                                                                      146




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.079




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00150   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 151 ===
                                                                                      147




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.080




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00151   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 152 ===
                                                                                      148




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.081




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00152   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 153 ===
                                                                                      149




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.082




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00153   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 154 ===
                                                                                      150




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.083




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00154   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 155 ===
                                                                                      151




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.084




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00155   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 156 ===
                                                                                      152




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.085




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00156   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 157 ===
                                                                                      153




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.086




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00157   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 158 ===
                                                                                      154




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.087




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00158   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 159 ===
                                                                                      155




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.088




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00159   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 160 ===
                                                                                      156




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.089




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00160   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 161 ===
                                                                                      157




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.090




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00161   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 162 ===
                                                                                      158




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.091




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00162   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 163 ===
                                                                                      159




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.092




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00163   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 164 ===
                                                                                      160




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.093




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00164   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 165 ===
                                                                                      161




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.094




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00165   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 166 ===
                                                                                      162




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.095




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00166   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 167 ===
                                                                                      163




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.096




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00167   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 168 ===
                                                                                      164




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.097




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00168   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 169 ===
                                                                                      165




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.098




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00169   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 170 ===
                                                                                      166




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.099




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00170   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 171 ===
                                                                                      167




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.100




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00171   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 172 ===
                                                                                      168




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.101




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00172   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 173 ===
                                                                                      169




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.102




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00173   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 174 ===
                                                                                      170




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.103




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00174   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 175 ===
                                                                                      171




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.104




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00175   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 176 ===
                                                                                      172




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.105




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00176   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 177 ===
                                                                                      173




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.106




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00177   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 178 ===
                                                                                      174




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.107




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00178   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 179 ===
                                                                                      175




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.108




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00179   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 180 ===
                                                                                      176




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.109




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00180   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 181 ===
                                                                                      177




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.110




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00181   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 182 ===
                                                                                      178




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.111




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00182   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 183 ===
                                                                                      179




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.112




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00183   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 184 ===
                                                                                      180




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.113




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00184   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 185 ===
                                                                                      181




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.114




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00185   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 186 ===
                                                                                      182




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.115




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00186   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 187 ===
                                                                                      183




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.116




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00187   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 188 ===
                                                                                      184




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.117




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00188   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 189 ===
                                                                                      185




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.118




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00189   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 190 ===
                                                                                      186




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.119




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00190   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 191 ===
                                                                                      187




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.120




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00191   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 192 ===
                                                                                      188




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.121




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00192   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 193 ===
                                                                                      189




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.122




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00193   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 194 ===
                                                                                      190




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.123




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00194   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 195 ===
                                                                                      191




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.124




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00195   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 196 ===
                                                                                      192




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.125




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00196   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 197 ===
                                                                                      193




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.126




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00197   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 198 ===
                                                                                      194




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.127




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00198   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 199 ===
                                                                                      195




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.128




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00199   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 200 ===
                                                                                      196




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.129




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00200   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 201 ===
                                                                                      197




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.130




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00201   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 202 ===
                                                                                      198




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.131




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00202   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 203 ===
                                                                                      199




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.132




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00203   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 204 ===
                                                                                      200




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.133




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00204   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 205 ===
                                                                                      201




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.134




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00205   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 206 ===
                                                                                      202




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.135




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00206   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 207 ===
                                                                                      203




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.136




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00207   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 208 ===
                                                                                      204




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.137




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00208   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 209 ===
                                                                                      205




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.138




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00209   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 210 ===
                                                                                      206




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.139




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00210   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 211 ===
                                                                                      207




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.140




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00211   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 212 ===
                                                                                      208




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.141




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00212   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 213 ===
                                                                                      209




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.142




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00213   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 214 ===
                                                                                      210




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.143




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00214   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 215 ===
                                                                                      211




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.144




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00215   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 216 ===
                                                                                      212




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.145




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00216   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 217 ===
                                                                                      213




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.146




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00217   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 218 ===
                                                                                      214




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.147




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00218   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 219 ===
                                                                                      215




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.148




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00219   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 220 ===
                                                                                      216




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.149




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00220   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 221 ===
                                                                                      217




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.150




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00221   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 222 ===
                                                                                      218




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.151




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00222   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 223 ===
                                                                                      219




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.152




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00223   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 224 ===
                                                                                      220




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.153




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00224   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 225 ===
                                                                                      221




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.154




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00225   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 226 ===
                                                                                      222




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.155




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00226   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 227 ===
                                                                                      223




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.156




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00227   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 228 ===
                                                                                      224




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.157




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00228   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 229 ===
                                                                                      225




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.158




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00229   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 230 ===
                                                                                      226




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.159




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00230   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 231 ===
                                                                                      227




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.160




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00231   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 232 ===
                                                                                      228




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.161




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00232   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 233 ===
                                                                                      229




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.162




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00233   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 234 ===
                                                                                      230




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.163




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00234   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 235 ===
                                                                                      231




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.164




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00235   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 236 ===
                                                                                      232




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.165




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00236   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 237 ===
                                                                                      233




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.166




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00237   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 238 ===
                                                                                      234




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.167




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00238   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 239 ===
                                                                                      235




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.168




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00239   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 240 ===
                                                                                      236




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.169




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00240   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 241 ===
                                                                                      237




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.170




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00241   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 242 ===
                                                                                      238




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.171




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00242   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 243 ===
                                                                                      239




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.172




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00243   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 244 ===
                                                                                      240




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.173




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00244   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 245 ===
                                                                                      241




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.174




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00245   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 246 ===
                                                                                      242




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.175




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00246   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 247 ===
                                                                                      243




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.176




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00247   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 248 ===
                                                                                      244




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.177




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00248   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 249 ===
                                                                                      245




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.178




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00249   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 250 ===
                                                                                      246




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.179




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00250   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 251 ===
                                                                                      247




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.180




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00251   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 252 ===
                                                                                      248




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.181




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00252   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 253 ===
                                                                                      249




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.182




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00253   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 254 ===
                                                                                      250




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.183




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00254   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 255 ===
                                                                                      251




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.184




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00255   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 256 ===
                                                                                      252




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.185




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00256   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 257 ===
                                                                                      253




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.186




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00257   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 258 ===
                                                                                      254




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.187




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00258   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 259 ===
                                                                                      255




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.188




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00259   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 260 ===
                                                                                      256




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.189




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00260   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 261 ===
                                                                                      257




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.190




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00261   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 262 ===
                                                                                      258




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.191




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00262   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 263 ===
                                                                                      259




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.192




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00263   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 264 ===
                                                                                      260




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.193




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00264   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 265 ===
                                                                                      261




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.194




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00265   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 266 ===
                                                                                      262




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.195




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00266   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 267 ===
                                                                                      263




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.196




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00267   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 268 ===
                                                                                      264




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.197




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00268   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 269 ===
                                                                                      265




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.198




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00269   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 270 ===
                                                                                      266




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.199




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00270   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 271 ===
                                                                                      267




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.200




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00271   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 272 ===
                                                                                      268




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.201




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00272   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 273 ===
                                                                                      269




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.202




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00273   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 274 ===
                                                                                      270




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.203




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00274   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 275 ===
                                                                                      271




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.204




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00275   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 276 ===
                                                                                      272




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.205




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00276   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 277 ===
                                                                                      273




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.206




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00277   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 278 ===
                                                                                      274




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.207




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00278   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 279 ===
                                                                                      275




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.208




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00279   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 280 ===
                                                                                      276




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.209




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00280   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 281 ===
                                                                                      277




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.210




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00281   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 282 ===
                                                                                      278




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.211




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00282   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 283 ===
                                                                                      279




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.212




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00283   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 284 ===
                                                                                      280




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.213




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00284   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 285 ===
                                                                                      281




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.214




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00285   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 286 ===
                                                                                      282




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.215




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00286   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 287 ===
                                                                                      283




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.216




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00287   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 288 ===
                                                                                      284




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.217




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00288   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 289 ===
                                                                                      285




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.218




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00289   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 290 ===
                                                                                      286




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.219




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00290   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 291 ===
                                                                                      287




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.220




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00291   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 292 ===
                                                                                      288




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.221




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00292   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 293 ===
                                                                                      289




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.222




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00293   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 294 ===
                                                                                      290




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.223




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00294   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 295 ===
                                                                                      291




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.224




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00295   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 296 ===
                                                                                      292




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.225




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00296   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 297 ===
                                                                                      293




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.226




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00297   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 298 ===
                                                                                      294




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.227




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00298   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 299 ===
                                                                                      295




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.228




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00299   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 300 ===
                                                                                      296




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.229




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00300   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 301 ===
                                                                                      297




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.230




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00301   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 302 ===
                                                                                      298




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.231




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00302   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 303 ===
                                                                                      299




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.232




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00303   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 304 ===
                                                                                      300




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.233




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00304   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 305 ===
                                                                                      301




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.234




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00305   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 306 ===
                                                                                      302




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.235




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00306   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 307 ===
                                                                                      303




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.236




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00307   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 308 ===
                                                                                      304




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.237




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00308   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 309 ===
                                                                                      305




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.238




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00309   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 310 ===
                                                                                      306




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.239




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00310   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 311 ===
                                                                                      307




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.240




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00311   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 312 ===
                                                                                      308




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.241




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00312   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 313 ===
                                                                                      309




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.242




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00313   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 314 ===
                                                                                      310




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.243




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00314   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 315 ===
                                                                                      311




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.244




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00315   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 316 ===
                                                                                      312




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.245




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00316   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 317 ===
                                                                                      313




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.246




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00317   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 318 ===
                                                                                      314




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.247




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00318   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 319 ===
                                                                                      315




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.248




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00319   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 320 ===
                                                                                      316




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.249




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00320   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 321 ===
                                                                                      317




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.250




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00321   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 322 ===
                                                                                      318




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.251




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00322   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 323 ===
                                                                                      319




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.252




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00323   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 324 ===
                                                                                      320




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.253




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00324   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 325 ===
                                                                                      321




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.254




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00325   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991

=== PAGE 326 ===
                                                                                      322




                                                                                                                                            g:\graphics\77991.255




VerDate May 23 2002   11:43 Jul 02, 2002   Jkt 010199   PO 00026   Frm 00326   Fmt 6633   Sfmt 6602   W:\DISC\77991   pfrm17   PsN: 77991
