
=== PAGE 1 ===
REPORT OF INVESTIGATION OF
ENRON CORPORATION AND RELATED ENTITIES
REGARDING FEDERAL TAX AND COMPENSATION ISSUES,
AND POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

VOLUME I: REPORT

Prepared by the Staff
of the
JOINT COMMITTEE ON TAXATION

At the Request of
Senator Max Baucus
and
Senator Charles E. Grassley
of the
SENATE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE

February 2003

JCS-3-03


=== PAGE 2 ===

=== PAGE 3 ===
REPORT OF INVESTIGATION OF
ENRON CORPORATION AND RELATED ENTITIES
REGARDING FEDERAL TAX AND COMPENSATION ISSUES,
AND POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

VOLUME I: REPORT

Prepared by the Staff
of the
JOINT COMMITTEE ON TAXATION

At the Request of
Senator Max Baucus
and
Senator Charles E. Grassley
of the
SENATE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE

February 2003

JCS-3-03


=== PAGE 4 ===

=== PAGE 5 ===
JOINT COMMITTEE ON TAXATION

108TH CONGRESS, 1ST SESSION

SENATE HOUSE
MAX BAUCUS, Montana, WILLIAM M. THOMAS, California,
Chairman Vice Chairman
JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER IV, West Virginia PHILIP M. CRANE, Illinois
TOM DASCHLE, South Dakota E. CLAY SHAW, Jr., Florida
CHARLES E. GRASSLEY, Iowa CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah FORTNEY PETE STARK, California

Lindy L. Paull, Chief of Staff
Bernard A. Schmitt, Deputy Chief of Staff
Mary M. Schmitt, Deputy Chief of Staff

=== PAGE 6 ===

=== PAGE 7 ===
TRANSMITTAL LETTER

Senator Max Baucus

Senator Charles E. Grassley
Senate Committee on Finance
Washington, DC 20510

Dear Senators Baucus and Grassley:

By this letter, I am hereby transmitting to you an official report of the investigation of the
staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation relating to Enron Corporation and related entities,
which was prepared pursuant to your request dated February 15, 2002. This investigation took
nearly a year to complete. The Joint Committee staff spent countless hours reviewing documents
and other information, interviewing individuals relevant to the investigation, and preparing this
Report, while at the same time continuing to perform the normal legislative duties with which the
Joint Committee staff is charged.

Each member of the Joint Committee staff contributed to the investigation. However,
special recognition must be given to certain members of the Joint Committee staff who devoted
much of their time during the last year to the investigation. Mary Schmitt, Sam Olchyk, and
Carolyn Smith coordinated all aspects of the Joint Committee staff work on the investigation and
were each primarily responsible for certain aspects of the investigation. Other Joint Committee
professional staff members who also had primary responsibility for the investigation include E.
Ray Beeman, Nikole Clark, Robert Gotwald, Brian Meighan, David Noren, Cecily Rock, Carol
Sayegh, Ron Schultz, and Allison Wielobob. Other professional staff members who contributed
to the investigation include Roger Colinvaux, Patrick Driessen, Deirdre James, Laurie Matthews,
Patricia McDermott, Pamela Moomau, John Navratil, Oren Penn, and Tara Zimmerman.
Recognition is provided to the administrative and support staff who assisted with the
investigation, including Jean Best, John Bloyer, Sean Corcoran, Kathleen Dorn, Jayne Gribbin,
Debra McMullen, Neval McMullen, Kristine Means, Tracy Nadel, Melissa O’Brien, Lucia
Rogers, and Patricia Smith. A special thanks goes to Christine Simmons, whose skill at pulling
together an enormous document made the Joint Committee staff's work much easier.

The Joint Committee staff gratefully acknowledges the contribution of Christopher
Hanna, Professor of Law, Southern Methodist University, who contributed to the Joint
Committee staff investigation as a consultant and was particularly helpful in assisting the Joint
Committee staff understand Enron’s complex tax transactions. In addition, Claire Merkine who
was with the Joint Committee staff for six months under a special fellowship program with the
New York University School of Law, also assisted in the investigation.

Sincerely,

Lindy L. Paull
Chief of Staff

=== PAGE 8 ===

=== PAGE 9 ===
CONTENTS

Page

INTRODUCTION... cceecescsccsecssesseseeseeseeesseseeescesevseescsacsesseeesseeseacscesassacaceaeeseesesaeeseeaeenseesenseaees 1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......ccccscsesssssssesesessesesescescsesesesesesesesssucsceseseacaeseaeseesscecsesareeacaeseeseeeaeneas 2
A. General Overview of the Investigation 0.0.0... sessccscsseseescseeeesssceeeecseeeesceceseeeteeeeeeeseenees 2
WEES COPCIONSR CD OL taeeeunersrsrsesrerssearersnstsrsnerestsntnestsnsnstsmnesrtntresterersnsemesteeteertremtrseetneneenreneeraees 2

2. Methodology and scope of Joint Committee staff investigation... eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 2

B. Enron’s Business Operations and Tax-Motivated Transactions .......... cc sssessceeeeeseseeseeeeeeeeee 5

1. Summary of selected tax information 5
2. Enron’s development and use of tax-motivated structured transactionS...........:cseeeeeees 8
3. Enron’s foreign subsidiaries and other entities ...........cccccsssessssssssessessseseseseeseseseseseseenes 11

C. Pension and Compensation Arrangementt...........csscsssssesesesssesssstssesssseesessesessscsescsesesesseeneees 12
1. OVErVICW 0... eee e cece eeseseeeeteneeeeeeeeees

2. Enron’s qualified retirement plans
3. Other compensation arrangements

D. Summary of General Observations ...........c.ccccesessscscsssesessesseseessssesseessesssseseecssasassesseeseneees 16
Summary of Findings and Recommendations .......... ccc eessssceeseececeseeeeceeesctersceceaeeteeseeeees 17

1. General findings relating to business tax matters......... 17

2. Specific recommendations relating to business tax issues.. 18

3. General findings relating to pensions and compensation........

4. Findings and recommendations relating to pensions and compensation cvesstusstnseuseune 19
PART ONE: GENERAL OBSERVATIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND FINDINGS. .....21
I. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ...0.... ee eeecsscsceseeeeeeeescesesecseesssceseseeseaescenceaseneaseneeseeaeeeeeeeeeeseesees 21

Il. GENERAL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS RELATING TO BUSINESS TAX

MATTERS ......eseccssessssesesessssesessesesesessesesessseesssesasesesessesesesssesssessesessssescssssesesnssescsnassusseseasseeneaeanas 25
A. General Findings Relating to Business Tax Matters ..........cccccsssssesssssssssssessssersseseseeeeenenes

1. Cost-benefit analysis with respect to tax motivated transactions... .

PD BUSINCSS\PULDOSe peceesnersetsensnsennersnsnenretnretmtarsrentnersstrensrmetsrentvarsretersrtenetetenreenrereeereneeraraeey

3. ACCOMMOAMATION PALties...... ce ecsceseseesesesesstscsesesseeesessseeteeecsssesseceseaeeeeaesseaseceeteeseeeees
4. Tax advisors

6. Disclosure of tax-motivated transactions we
7. Continued use of certain structured transactiOnS..........cccsecssesscsssseseesssccesesseeeseseeseeeceaees 26

=== PAGE 10 ===
B. Recommendations Relating to Corporate Tax ISSUES .........::sseeseseseseseeesesesesesenssteneneeeeesaees 27
1. Curtail duplication of losses ve
2. Strengthen rules preventing acquisitions made to evade or avoid Federal income tax ...27
3. Strengthen the extraordinary dividend rules ...........-..seesssesssseseeseeeeseseeseeseeeeneeeeneseeneeneneses 28
4. Provide guidance on the replication of earnings and profits in a consolidated group .....28

C. Recommendations Relating to Partnership Tax ISSUES ...........s.ccssseseesseeesesestenesesneneseneeneeeees 29
1. Strengthen disclosure of disguised sales............. .29

2. Strengthen partnership allocation rules .............scsessesessesesseseenees .29

3. Provide guidance regarding transfers of partial partnership interests .............s:sseserees 29

4. Provide rules for the appropriate interaction between partnership rules and corporate
stock nonrecognition TUles ........c.ccecessesesseseeeseeseeneseensseeneneeneaeeneseensanensaneneesessensteseenensaneees 29

D. Recommendations Relating to International Tax Issues
1. Modify the rules for allocating subpart F income .............sesessesesseseees
2. Modify the interaction between the subpart F rules and the passive foreign investment

COMPANY TUES oe eesecscsseseseesesseseeeseeneneenceeenecnsssensstsnsetsneetsseetssesnsnsseeneseeseeesecensseeasaneneees 31
3. Strengthen the earnings stripping TUleS ..........-eceeeeses esses estesesesseseenesenenneneesesneeneaneaeentees 32
4. Require annual information reporting with respect to disregarded entities ..............+0+0+ 32
E. Recommendation Relating to Financial Asset Securitization Investment Trusts .. “
1. Repeal financial asset securitization investment trust TU]eS .............-sessssesesesesseesneeseeeneens
F. Recommendation Relating to Corporate-Owned and Trust-Owned Life Insurance............. 34
1. Repeal grandfather rules for pre-June 20, 1986 CONtraCtS..........ssessecsecesseestesneeeseeseeseeneenes 34
G. Recommendations Relating to Structured Financing Transactions ...........::ecsesseeseeseeeeeeees 35
1. Modify the rules relating to the characterization and treatment of debt and equity......... 35
2. Modify the rules relating to disqualified indebtedness ..............s..ssessssesseseeesneeseeeeeenenes 35

III. PENSION AND COMPENSATION OBSERVATIONS, FINDINGS, AND
RECOMMENDATIONS .........::ccsessssesssssesesessesssseesseesesssececeseeesesssenenenesesenenenensnenensessnsenssenenenseees 37

A. General Observations with Respect to Pensions and Compensation .........-.-scsesseseseeseseeress 37

B. Findings and Recommendations Relating to Pension and Compensation Arrangements .... 39
1. Cash balance plane... sssssssssssssessssseesesesssnsseseeeseenenserenenenessassnsnsssseenensseecssceseneassereenenes
2. Blackout periods under qualified plans.......
3. Investments under the Enron Savings Plan. 2
4. Nonqualified deferred compensation ........s.seececsesessessesteatsanesnesssseeessnseneesneessenseenennes
5. Stock-based COMPeENSAION ...........ceccsecseseseseeseseeseeseseeeenensacetenesescsssesnssssssceeeseseeneateneseesenees
6. Employee loan ..........:cceceeeeeeee
7. Split-dollar life insurance contracts...
8. Limitation on deduction of compensation in excess Of $1 MillioN ..........seseeeeeeees 43

ii

=== PAGE 11 ===
PART TWO: GENERAL BACKGROUND INFORMATION ......ccccssssseseesserereeeeeneneseenenenees 44
I. BACKGROUND AND METHODOLOGY...........ccccccccsseseseseeseeneeeeneneeseseeeeeaeteneeesseeeeneeasenees 46
A. Background Information Relating to Joint Committee on Taxation Staff Investigation
Of EMrOM oo. cececsscesesscsscsscsscescseecesceseeseeecsesessesssecsecsecsscseescesseseeesessesseeseseesesseeceseesseeseessessseesaes 46
B. Methodology and Scope of Joint Committee Staff Investigation ............sssssseeeeeteeteseeees 49
IL. HISTORY OF THE COMPANY ........ccccscsssssseseseseseesssssesssesescsssesenesesenesesesesenenssenenennseneneneneees 58
A. Background ......seecessssessssssssssseseeseeseeseeseeseenecsenecneeneesecsscnssncssassassanassssnsssscsssscenesnessnesneanenessens 58
B. History of Business Operations...........essececscsesecsesesessseesesesssseessssenssnssseseeseneeseeneensansseanenenetags
1. Formative years and the 1985 acquisition of Houston Natural Gas.............sesssessecsseseeees
2. Transition from natural gas company to diversified energy company: 1986-1995 -
3. Transformation to a marketing and logistics company: 1996-2001 ..........-:ssesecseeeseseteees
C. Recent Financial History ..........ccecsesscsssesesesseeceesesesenesensnessseeseseesnsaeenenenenenensnenscssseesssseeeeees
1. Use of off-balance sheet entities to enhance financial performance measures =
2. Financial performance and liquidity issues ............ssesesssesesessesesesseseetesessseeteneeeneenenenenenees
3. Accounting irregularities, adjustments, and non-recurring charges to earnings for
financial reporting periods 1997 to 2001 .........eseseseeesessessessessessnesnessennesssenesseasentenenees 81
4. Illiquidity and failed merger attempts during November 2001 ............:sssesssessesesseeneesees 85
5. Bankruptcy reorganization and present CONItION............s.seseseseeseseseeseeseseeseneseseeneneetenes 86
D. Enron’s Federal Income Tax POSition..........ccsssscsesssesesesesenenesesesensseneeeeeenenenenssneneneneneeeeeees 90
1. Enron’s consolidated Federal income tax filings 0.0.0.0... ec ecesseseseseeeeeeeeeseseeseeeeneeeneees 90
2. Interaction between Enron and the Internal Revenue Service ..........:.ccsseceeseseceeeeeeeetenees 93

3. Enron’s Federal income tax payMents ...........:cceceseeeeeeees 98
4. Enron’s reported present Federal income tax POSitiON.............sssssesseseeseeseeseeseseeseeneens 100
5. Federal income tax claims in Enron’s bankruptcy proceeding ............scseseecssererereteeetes 100

iii

=== PAGE 12 ===
PART THREE: DISCUSSION OF SELECTED TAX-MOTIVATED TRANSACTIONS

AND BUSINESS ARRANGMENTS USED BY ENRON ........ccccssessssereseserereeeneeeeeeensneneseneneees 100
I. STRUCTURED TAX-MOTIVATED TRANSACTIONG........:cccecsseceteterereteneneeensesseseaesenenes 102
A. Background and Rationale ..........:ccccsescssecesseceseeeseeneenesneneseencenesesesneessnensneensenessenneneenenags 102
B. Transactions That Raise Corporate Tax ISSUES ...........:.ssceseseecereeeeeteeseeeeseseseeessseseeneeenes 109
1. Discussion of relevant corporate tax laws.. .. 109
2. Projects Tanya and Valor .......ssssesesececeesereeesseesstseeeseseeeesseseesesesnenenenenenees 118
3. Project Steele... ccssseesesesesssseeesesenenetsnetenenssesetesssssessssseseseseaesenenenenensens 135
4. Project Cochise.. .. 147
5. Project Teresa..........sssessessssssssssesseseeseeseesesaesneeneeneennecessenesnesanesnssnesesessscseeseesnesseneensenaey 165

C. Transactions That Raise Partnership Tax ISSUCS ............ccsccccseseeeeeeeeeteesetensesesesesseseeeenes

1. Discussion of relevant partnership tax law rules.. vee

2. Project TOmMAS.........csccssssessssseseseseesenessseneenenenenesssesesnsesseseensneesscasssseseseneseneensnnsaseeneentes

3. Project COMdOL..........ssssssssseseseseseesesesesseeeteseneeneneseensneseaesnsnssessscssesesesensassseneneseeseneeneneaees
4. Projects Tammy I and Tammy IL ..........:esssececesseeeeeseesesesnsesesesnssesessensassnenssseseneenenees
D. Other Structured Transactions..............sccscseseseeseesesseseeeeeesscseseeteceeesessecsessessssseeseeseeseeaes 242
1, Project Apache ........c.ccscccseseseessssesesenseseneseeeensnenenerseenssseeeseseasseeenenenesensesesessnesney fesseseseeee 242
2. Project NOLY ........sssssssseseseseseseeseseseseeeenssecesesceeenensassesessssssnsnssssessessseseseenssensenenenegses 260
E. Transactions in Which Enron is an Accommodation Party
1. Project Renegade .........ccccceseseseseeeseseeeseeeeenereneneneeeneneneeees ve
2. Project Valhalla ..........cessssessssescssesseseeseeseseseeeesneenseeeneeeensensseencensssesseessseessenssseeneseneenes
Il. COMPANY-OWNED AND TRUST-OWNED LIFE INSURANCE .......:.secsessssseeeeeeeeeesees 290
A, SUMMATY oo. eeeeseeesestesesessseeseseseneseceeneseseseneencneseeneseassssesesnssssessseceseessnsasseasenenenenneneeneneneenes 290
B. Background, Present Law, Discussion and Recommendations ............:csscceseeteeseeeseeeeee 290
1. Background and present law relating to the tax treatment of company-owned life
MSUITANCE......sescessescssescescecesccccccscescescesssecsceseseesscsessesecsecsesesecseeseseeesaeenseeesaesseiesesaseaseaees 290
2. Enron's COLI and TOLI transactions .........cccsesessesesseseeseseseeeeeeeeceeseesseessessseneeeeees
Il. STRUCTURED FINANCING TRANSACTIONS .......cccccsssssecsseeeseeeseseneneteneneneneseeteeeseneeens 304
A. Background and Rationale ...........cccessesseseeeeseeseeeeeeneeneneensenenneneeneseessesseessenerseneeneenenes 304
B. Discussion of Present Law Relating to Certain Structured Financing Transactions....... 305
1. Debt characterization........cccccccecescecscesesessesssessssescscssescssecseseseneceesensesenseaseeneneneneeaseentes 305
2. Constructive SAleS.......ccsecesessceeesceceeesesessessscssssesesesseseseneeseseseeecseeeseneeseeseeeeneseasaesenees 305
3. Disqualified indebtedness ..........csccssssessecseseeseceenneseseeneenesteaserssessssesnsneseeneeneneeseeneenens 306

iv

=== PAGE 13 ===
4. Straddles .....csesceecssesssssssseseesesseeesesessneeeeseneeeees 307
5. Prepayment transactions..... .. 308
6. Notional principal Contracts ........c.ccseseseceeeeseseeteteneeteeeeneaeeeeneeseetenenenes 310
7. Application of present law to Enron structured financing transactions ..............+ 312
C. Tiered Preferred Securities 0... sccssecscsssesessescsesssseseseeeesseeesesseseesesesseseesenerensesenensees 313
1. Brief OVErViCW........ceeesecsceseeseeseeseesecssesessscseseesecsscsessensesecsscsecnecaeeneeneesesseaesaeienseseeseeans 313
2. Background ........essesssessessesessesesssnesssseseseesessesecsesesneeesseenssesesacsesensneeacaeeusensanesneaseneanenes 313
3. Discussion op
4. Recommendations ..........cecececeesssessesesesesesesesescsesescsesesesesesssecsesssenesesesesenenenessecseseseneaes 331
D. Investment Unit Securities .......... eee eeeesscesessesessesscsecsesececsecsseseeseeseeeeesseescseerssenseneenees 333
1. Brief overview............. ... 333
2. Background .........scsesseeesesessesesssssesesseseseseseensseseseensseseseenenesesesensseeneenssessoncneaeensaeeneneaces 333
3. DisCUSSION ........:.cccsssseeeceeesesesessesesssseseceeseseeseseseeseseseeseseneseseeseseessceseneneesesenseeneneeasaeee® 339
4, Recommendations ..........:cccescscescessessesceseeseesessesseseescseesesseseeseecaesaseseeseeseeecseeeseseesensenses 345
E. Commodity Prepay Transactions ...........:seeeeee 346
1. Brief overvieW.........cceeeee 346
2. Background ..........cceee 347
3. Discussion ..........cscceeeee 358
4, Recommendations .........ccccccescescceseeeesesecsessesesessesssusesseseseeesessesseessesesensseseseseeesessseseess 362
IV. USE OF FOREIGN ENTITIES BY ENRON ........ccceccssseeeseseeeseseeeeeeseseneseseseeseneseseseneneees 363
A. Overview of Selected International Tax Rules .........ccccccccccsseseseeeeseseteneseescseeeseseneeeenes 363
1. In general
2. Foreign tax Credit ........cccccseeseseseseseeesesseeneseeeseneeeneeseeneeeneeesseseensnseaserenenesneasscacseaeaes
3. Anti-deferral regimes ..........cceeccssesesesssesesesesesesesesenenesesesessneesesesesenssessasneneeneneeeenenees 365
4. Transfer pricing.......... ... 367
5. Entity classification .........sssssessssssessssseseesesesceseseseeseseseseeseseseseseseneessneseseeeeseseenecessenenees 368
6. Treaties .......ccsccsesscsescssssecescecesesceceseseeeescssessscsssecsessssssesesseseseseessssessscsesseeesesesseesessneeseees 369
B. Enron’s General International Tax POSture..........ccccesssessesseseeneeseeseesesseneesetesseseseensenenes
1. Foreign tax credit problems arising from interest allocation rules.. .
2. Planning techniques addressing the foreign tax credit problem..........::seeesseeeeees
C. Proliferation of Foreign Entities in Enron’s Ownership Structure..........cccccceseseereeeeeees 373
1, Background... eeseseseseseesesesssseseseseesesesesesesessenesesesneneseseseseeeensnssenscesssaneneenenseeneees
2. General reasons for complex entity structures .
3. The number of foreign entities in Enron’s ownership Structure... 374
4. Sources of complexity in Enron’s ownership Structure ..........:cccsceceeeseeeeseteteteneeeneees 376
D. Transfer Pricing Issues ..............ssssssssssssssssseseesssssesseseeeseseeesecseessesesesesensnenssssesesaenseesesenees 383
E. Recommendation: Information Reporting with Respect to Disregarded Entities........... 387

=== PAGE 14 ===
V. OFF-BALANCE SHEET TRANSACTIONS

A. OVELVICW oo. eesccesesescesessesceeceseseeseseescessucseseeseseesesecassesseseseseseseseseeseseeeeaeseneeneaseasaeseeseaseaees
1. Introduction to off-balance sheet transactions ..
2. Description of Chewco and JEDI I structure and transactions ..........sseseeeeeeees 390
3. Description of LJM1 structure and transactions
4. Description of LJM2 structure and transactions

PART FOUR: ISSUES RELATING TO COMPENSATION .........cccccssssesesssenseteeeeeeetereeeteees 404
I. INTRODUCTION TO COMPENSATION-RELATED ISSUES..........cccccsesesessssseteeesesenenees 404
A. Overview of Issues Relating to Compensation ............csccccsesesesssseseseeeeseteeeteetenererseeeesenaes 404
B. Overview of Enron Internal Functions Relating to Compensation ...........ssscesseeeeees 406
TL. Qualified Plans 0... ccs ssssesssessssseseseseseneseseeessesesesesesesesenenseenensnensnsasssasscasscsesesesessssseeeseseensnsgs 407
A. Overview of Present Law Relating to Qualified Retirement Plams.............:ssceeseereees 407
1. In general... ...eeeeseesssssesesesesesesesesesesesenenenseseseseneneneneseasssasacasacacacssasscesacseeesnerecsseenneneee
2. Types of qualified retirement plans oD
3. General rules relating to investment of qualified retirement plan assets ...............++++ 414
4. Rules relating to investments of qualified retirement plan assets in employer
SOCUTILICS .......scescsscssssssecesceeeeesescecscsecsessesescssesesscseseesesesscsesesesenecessesenseseaeseneessaseneneneeeseneees
5. Other rules.
B. Overview of Enron’s Qualified Retirement Planss...........cccccssssseseseteeeeeeteceeseseneeeneeees 425
1. In general op
2. Recent and pending legal matters involving the Enron qualified plans....................+- 426
3. Administration of the Enron qualified retirement plams..............cccceeeeseeeeeeeeneteeees
4. The Enron Corp. Retirement Plan (“Enron Retirement Plan”) oe
5. The Enron Corp. Employee Stock Ownership Plan (“Enron ESOP”)............:se 442
6. The Enron Corp. Cash Balance Plan (“Enron Cash Balance Plan”).........-s:seseseee 449
7. The Enron Corp. Savings Plan (“Enron Savings Plan”) ........cscsssesesseteeeeereneeeenenenenes 452
C. Discussion of Specific Issues ..........cceceseseseesessseseseessesesesesensseseneseeeenenenenenenensenenereeanses 458
1. Phase out of the ESOP offset under the Enron Corp. Retirement Plan...... 458
2. Conversion of the Enron Retirement Plan to the Enron Cash Balance Plan.. 475
3. Enron ESOP Investment in Enron Stock ......ccccesessceeeeteeeeeeseeteteneesees . 487
4. Change of recordkeepers under the Enron Savings Plan... +493
5. Investments under the Enron Savings Plan................ S15

6. Allegations of misuse of benefit fUNdS............eesseeeeetereeeeeetentenenes ... 540
Ill. OTHER COMPENSATION-RELATED ISSUES .......cececesesesssesseseseseseseeeeeeeseeenenseeeeeenenesees 545
A. General Overview of Compensation .........cccsccccesesesssseseseseenceeceeseseseteneeseeenecacesseneesenseee 545

vi

=== PAGE 15 ===
Overview of Executive Compensation Arrangement ...........:.:cseesesereeeeeetseeneeeeteeeesees 558
1. In gemeral .......eeesesseesessssesesesessssesessesesnesceuesecsssecueseenecneesensaesusncaeenecucensaeencaeneeneensseenags 558
2. BONUSES «0.0... .scseseeseesesseesesseeseeneees . 566

3. Special compensation arrangements “
4. Board of Directors COMPeNSALION..........ccccseceserseeeseeteeeetetsesseeeseteneeasssstenseseeeseesesesees 584

Discussion of Specific Issues
1. Nonqualified deferred compensation plans...

2. Stock-based COMPENSALION .........cccseseseseeeeeeeeeeeeteteteeneteeeeeee im

3. Employee loans .........cccseesesesesssseseseseeeeseesscaseneneseneenenensneneeneeneaes . 665
4. Purchase and reconveyance of Kenneth L. Lay’s annuity contract ..679
5. Split-dollar insurance arrangeMent............-scseseceesesesesesesteesesesesnsseneeseeseseeeeseeeeeseaeees 686

6. Limitation on deduction of certain executive compensation in excess of
$1 million

Vii

=== PAGE 16 ===
I.

Il.

APPENDIX A

LETTER TO JOINT COMMITTEE ON TAXATION STAFF DIRECTING
INVESTIGATION

DISCLOSURE AGREEMENT AMONG ENRON, SENATE COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE AND JOINT COMMITTEE ON TAXATION STAFF.........ccccssessesesees

RESOURCE MATERIALS PREPARED BY JOINT COMMITTEE ON
TAXATION STAFR 0... eeecssesesssescseseseseeescssnesessseseseessesesesesesenesesesesnessseseseaesessneenenes

Individuals Interviewed by Joint Committee on Taxation Staff During
Investigation .........ccsssccssssssssecesesesecseneeseseeseseeseseseesesesesenesesseenenerecaesenersensasseee

Glossary of Terms Relevant to Joint Committee on Taxation Staff
Investigation 00... cescessssssssescseesseeeseeseseeeeseseeseseeseseeeesenenseseneeenenseasaeaeeeeaeeeacaeegs

OTHER MATERIALS... ceccsscscssscsssseseseesesseseseeeeseesseseseeseseneeseseenenseseseeeneeanensenes

Book-to-Tax Reconciliation ..........cccsccsccesecsscesecseeesecesessccsesessssssesesssesesscseseeeseees

Enron: A Select Chronology of Congressional, Corporate, and Government
Activities, Congressional Research Service .......ccccccseseesesesssesseseseneeeneeeseesees

Viii

=== PAGE 17 ===
I.

I.

Il.

APPENDIX B

Page

BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE .........cccsesesesssesesesesenenenenenenenenesenessesessssesssereneaes B-6

Estimated Structured Transaction Project Fees as of June 4, 2001...........:00 B-7

Enron Presentation to Joint Committee on Taxation Staff, June 7, 2002 ........... B-8

Structured Transactions Group, Summaries of Project Earnings & Cash

Flows, November 2001 ...........ssssssssssssssssssesessscsnseseseneneneneneaescasasscscsesessessesssneesees B-95
PROJECT TANYA Q.o.cccccccsscsessssescscescecssessescssssescsseseseseesesenecseseneeenscaeneeaesseasscssseseseeaeaes B-169

Letter from Arthur Andersen, to Robert J. Hermann, Enron Corporation

(October 27, 1995) ......ssssessssesssseeseseseeseseeseseeseeneaeenssesnssesesesessneseeneseessessssensnaeeesees B-170

Memorandum from IRS District Counsel, Houston District, to Chief, Quality

Measurement Staff, IRS Houston District (August 16, 1999) ........seeeeeteee B-171

Project Tanya To Do List (November 9, 1995) .........ssssssssssssseesseesseeseeenesneenneens B-173
PROJECT STEELE.......cccccccsssesesessscsssessssssssesecessseneseseseseseenenenseenesenesesenesesesessesssarenacaes B-176

Show Me the Money! Project Steele Earnings Benefits ............:..ssssseeeseseeees B-177

Letter from Thomas Finley, Managing Director, Bankers Trust Company to

R. Davis Maxey, Enron Corporation (August 11, 1997) oe cececeesseeeeeeeteeenees B-178

Letter from Thomas Finley, Managing Director, Bankers Trust Company to

R. Davis Maxey, Enron Corporation (November 7, 1997) ......sssssssseseesseeseens B-180

Letter from Thomas Finley, Managing Director, Bankers Trust Company to

R. Davis Maxey, Enron Corporation (June 17, 1997).......sssssessssseeseeseeseesneeneens B-200

Letter from Frank Newman, Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive

Officer, Bankers Trust Company to Mr. Kenneth L. Lay, Chairman and Chief

Executive Officer, Enron Corporation (March 2, 1998) ......sessssesesereeeeereereees B-202

Letter from Thomas Finley, Managing Director, Bankers Trust Company to

R. Davis Maxey, Enron Corporation (January 30, 1998)...........sssesseseesesseeeenes B-203

ix

=== PAGE 18 ===
TV. PROJECT COCHISE .........cccecesscsscsssesesesesescsesesesesesceesesesesessesesesenesesesenesesenenenenensasacgegs B-207
Project Cochise Deal Basics...........ccssscsecsseseceesessenerssnesesnesesnesesnesssnesnenseneaseasans B-208

Minutes, Meeting of the Board of Directors, Enron Corporation
(February 8, 1999), The Four Seasons Hotel .........:.ccceecssseeceeseseesssesneseseeeenenees B-209

Letter from Brian J. McGuire, Vice President, Bankers Trust Company, to
Richard A. Causey, Senior Vice President and Chief Accounting and

Information Officer, Enron Corp. (January 28, 1999) ......ccceseseesessseeeeseetenees B-214
Letter from Arthur Andersen to Bankers Trust Company (May 26, 1999)........ B-220
Preliminary Project Diagram--Transfer of Preferred Stock
to Akin, Gump Partners........cccsssssssssessssesessenessenseseneeenesesensseeesssesesnsssssensseenseees B-239
Preliminary Project Diagram--Dividends During Subsequent Years and
Recapitalization .......c.cccecessscessessessessesestecesseeneneeneseensacensncensssensseenseesnesnsnesassssennens B-240
Preliminary Project Executive SUMMALY ..........ccseseseecesteeceeneeneseseeeseseeneseeeens B-242
V.. PROJECT TERESA... ecessssssssssseseseseseseseseeeseseesenseseseasseseneneeeeeeseseasanassesensacssaeesenenees B-243
Discussion Material for Enron Corporation by Bankers Trust Company
(March 27, 1997)......essssscecsssssesessssesessesessssesesessesesssesesesenesnsneneesssueneneasenenenneneaeenss B-244
Project Teresa Deal Basics .........ssscsesesseseenesenerenerenecessesesesesesesessnsseseseseneaseeeses B-254
VI. PROJECT TOMAS ......ccccccessssesesesesesesesssessesesesesesesaseseenesesesssesenenessnenesenseneceeeenenenenensaes B-255

Letter from Robert P. Palmquist, Arthur Andersen, to R. Davis Maxey, Enron
Corporation (December 11, 1997) ......sesseseseesesessssssesssesseseseseesenensneseenesseneneneenes B-256

Letter from Brian J. McGuire, Vice President, Bankers Trust Company to
Richard A. Causey, Senior Vice President and Chief Accounting and

Information Officer, Enron Corporation (September 15, 1998) .......sssesereees B-259

Enron Risk Assessment and Control Deal Approval Sheet ...........:ccscseseseeneee B-264

Exhibit XX-Sales of Leased Assets Reported by Seneca Leasing

Partners, L.P. ........ccccsccsscsssescceeeeccssesscsesessssscssseseseeseeeeseeeseeseeseensesesesseesesseesesaeenes B-268
VIL. PROJECT CONDOR .......cscccsecscsssessssesessesssessesesesseseseseseacenenenssesssneseseneeneneseneensneenensentes B-269

Letter from Arthur Andersen to Chase Securities, Inc. (September 29, 1999)... B-270
Discussion Material for Project Condor (April, 1999)........cssesessesseeeseneneneeteee B-276

Internal Documentation Regarding Project Condor ISSues............ssssssseseseesees B-288

=== PAGE 19 ===
Memorandum from AnnMarie Tiller, Corporate Tax Department, Enron,

Regarding Proposed Restructuring Whitewing Associates,

(February 26, 1999).......cececcssessssessenesesessesessesscenensensnsneencsnssesnsseenssesssnesneseenersnenees

Nighthawk Restructuring SUMMALY...........:ssecessecssestseetsseseeseeeeseeesennesseneennennens
VIII. PROJECT TAMMY Io... .cececccessescesceeeeceseeseescsscsscsscssseessecseescseesesseesessessesessesnensnensenes

Project Tammy I Deal Basics..........cscscsesececeeseeeeeeesetssesesnssseseeeeneseseaeeeeneseeneenees

Electronic Mail from Steve Klig, Deliotte & Touche, to Alicia Goodrow,

Enron Corporation Regarding Tammy Example (October 23, 2001)............4++
TX. PROJECT TAMMY lu... cceeecesesesssssesessessssssseseseseesseseseneseseaeneneseseneneenensnenensensegs
Project Tammy II Deal Basics .......:.::cessesececssresesesesessesesnesesssssessenenesseesneseeneenenes
X. PROJECT APACHE ...0....ccsecsecsessssssssssesesesesesesesesesesesesesensesessseseneneceneasseaeasneneseasacesesees

Initial Transaction Diagram from Presentation by Chase Securities to Enron ...
XI. PROJECT NOLY........eeececsssessessessssessesesseseseeseaseseesseesssesseneeseeesaeeseseeusasensenesseseeessesenees

Memorandum from Stephen H. Douglas, Enron North America, to
Robert J. Hermann, Regarding Synthetic Mark-to-Market Program
(August 29, 2001)... csesceessescssesessesesssseesesesseesnesnsseeesenensescnnsncensnsensatensensaresetaes

XII. PROJECT RENEGADE ....0... i ececseccssssseseseeseseseseeseneneesetensnsenenerseseneesesasenessesssereseseees

Discussion Material for Project Renegade (December 17, 1998)

Tax Indemnity Agreement Between Bankers Trust and Enron
(December 29, 1998) .......ccccccsssssssesesesesesesesesesesesenenenenenensneasssasasscsesesesesesessesesesees

XII. COLI/TOLI TRANSACTIONS .......scccccccscseseseeeseeseseeseseeeeseetenenscseeeesssensssesseenessseeeenes

Enron Corporation 1994 Deferral Plan, Plan Funding Conclusions and
Recommendations ...........scscsssessssesssesssssessseseseseseecseseseseseseseseeeesseasaeaeacaeseerensseaesess

Enron Corporation Executive Summary of Purchased Life Insurance
POLICIES ....eseeccesesessesescecececescscecessseesesnsssssecsesessesesecseseeeseseseseesesensessseneseessasnenesensegs

File Memorandum from J. Anthony Jarrett Regarding Sale of PGE:
Options for Trust Owned Life Insurance (August 6, 2002) .......s.:ssessesseseeseeseees
United States Bankruptcy Court, Southern District of New York, Amended

Statement of Financial Affairs, Exhibit B-19 and Schedule B

xi

=== PAGE 20 ===
Item 11, Attachment A, Enron Corporation, COLI/TOLI Policies...............+0+ B-359
Enron Corporation, COLI Policies Surrendered in 2002 ...........sessessesseesesseeeeeeees B-360
XIV. STRUCTURED FINANCING TRANSACTIONS ........cccssssseseseeeerereesnenerseseseeneeeesees B-361

Minutes, Meeting of the Board of Directors, Enron Corporation

(December 10, 1996); Minutes, Meeting of the Executive Committee of the
Board of Directors, Enron Corporation (December 18, 1996); Minutes,
Meeting of the Executive Committee of the Board of Directors, Enron

Corporation (June 5, 1997).....sssssesecsessececsestesssnessseseesseseseseesensensesnsenseaseaneents B-362
Minutes, Special Meeting of the Board of Directors, Enron Corporation

(September 27, 1993) ......sscsessssssseeecsecseceesseseesessesseenseseeseenssseseenessenssesenseeceenseaes B-404
Minutes, Meeting of the Finance Committee of the Board of Directors,

Enron Corporation (October 12, 1993) .......ssscscsecsssesnsssssesssseeseesseneensseenseneenes B-420
Minutes, Meeting of the Board of Directors, Enron Corporation

(October 13, 1993) .....sscsecssssssesseseeseeseesesseessesseesecssenseeneeneenseneseenesnssssanesnescensseseeses B-425
Letter from Vinson & Elkins to Enron Corporation (November 4, 1993).......... B-434

Letter from Vinson & Elkins to Robert J. Hermann, Vice President-Tax,
Enron Corp. (December 17, 1993) ......cscsssessesseereeeeeeneetesnensseereesesseseseseenneneenes B-448

Letter from Arthur Andersen to Goldman, Sachs and Co. (September 13,
Field Service Advice Memorandum from Deborah A. Butler, IRS Assistant
Chief Counsel, to Janet Balboni, IRS District Counsel, Midstates Region ........ B-463

Counsel Settlement Memorandum Regarding Enron Corporation
MIPS ISsues.........cccccssssssescesseseesceseeseesesesesacseesececsessesenseeesecsesceeenesseseessessseneenenes B-490

Memorandum from Morris R. Clark to Jordan Mintz Regarding Federal
Income Tax Treatment of Prepayments (September 22, 1999) .......:ssseceseeseees B-518

Memorandum from AnnMarie Tiller and Brent Vasconcellos, Enron
Corporate Tax Planning, to Jim Sandt, Regarding Enron Credit Linked
Notes Due 2005 (April 10, 2001)........ccscssssessesseeseseeseeceeeneseeensenenseneneeseeneseeneenes B-535

Memorandum from AnnMarie Tiller, Corporate Tax Planning to Dave

Maxey, Regarding Enron Credit Linked Notes Due August 2005
(January 12, 2001)......csssscsesesseesesseseesesesseeessesneeneensenestsaeenesessesssssnesseeseseneaseenenney B-540

xii

=== PAGE 21 ===
XV.

XVI.

XVIL.

Electronic Mail from AnnMarie Tiller to Ryan Siurek, Yosemite III Prepay

(March 27, 2001)......cssssscsssssssssssssssssscessesesesessesenessssssessseensneneesenensassssessenessessneseaes B-542

RMTC Liquids (Prepay) 1999 and 2000 tax workpapers ...........:sseesseseeteseeeeees B-543

Memorandum from Brent Vasconcellos, Enron Tax Planning to AnnMarie

Tiller, Regarding Yosemite I Withholding (January 14, 2000) ..........-sssseseeees B-546

Yosemite Financing outline of various tax issues (October 28, 1999) ............... B-554
USE OF FOREIGN ENTITIES ........c:cscessssssseeseereeeeseeseeseesesseseeseeeesesseseesseseeseeseeenees B-564

Enron “Non-binding Intent Agreements” Policy Memorandum

(March 2000)........s:scsscsssssecessssesssesssscscsssssesssessesesesesneseseenssenessenensassecncacaseseenennenes B-566
OFF BALANCE SHEET PARTNERSHIPS ........cccsssssscsssssesesseseeseeseeseeeesseeseneeseees B-569

Memorandum from AnnMarie Tiller and Brent Vasconcellos, to R. Davis

Maxey, Regarding Talon Financing Transaction (April 19, 2000)..............:0 B-570

Memorandum from AnnMarie Tiller and Brent Vasconcellos, to Ben Glisan,

Regarding Talon I, LLC (August 19, 2000)........-scseseesesesesstsesssestssssesceneerenes B-575
OTHER COMPANY MATERIALS RELATED TO THE STRUCTURED
TRANSACTIONS GROUP. .......cccssessssessesceseeecsceseeseeeeseeseeassecsecseseesscsecseesseeseeeeneease B-577

Structured Transactions Group OVervieW........cscccssecesessseeereneeeeetetseseneeaeeneeseee B-578

xiii

=== PAGE 22 ===
I.

Il.

APPENDIX C

Page

PROJECT TANYA Qo. .cccccccscscsessececeseseneeeesssessesesnsnsesssesescsescsesesassceeseasseasseneneeeeessnenensas C-3

Letter from Arthur Andersen, L.L.P. to Robert J. Hermann, Vice President

Tax, Enron Corporation (with appendices) (December 21, 1995)... C-4
PROJECT VALOR .....c.cccssescsesceceesesceeeseeeesecsseeesseesevscsesesssenseseseeseeeseseeseseeeeseseesenenenenees C-29

Letter from Arthur Andersen, L.L.P. to Deborah Culver, Assistant General

Counsel, and Jordan Mintz, Vice President, and Tax Counsel, Enron Capital

and Trade Resources Corporation (with appendices) (December 27, 1996)...... C-30
PROJECT STEELE..........c.cccccsseesesesssesseeeseseeeesesssesssssesescscscsesasseeeessssesessseaeseseseseseseaes C-76

Letter from Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld L.L.P. to R. Davis

Maxey, Esquire, Enron Corporation (December 16, 1997) ........::esseseseeseeeeeenes C-77

Unsigned letter from Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld L.L.P. to R. Davis

Maxey, Esquire, Enron Corporation (December 16, 1997) ......:seesseseeeeeeseeeeees C-115
PROJECT COCHISE ..........ccccssessseceseseseseseseesesescsesesesceesssesesssssesssessseesseassesenesesesesseneeees C-127

Letter from William S. McKee and James D. Bridgeman, McKee Nelson,

Ernest & Young L.L.P. to R. Davis Maxey, Vice President Tax Research

and Planning, Enron Corporation (March 21, 2001)........:cscssssssesessseeeesessenenees C-128

Letter from King & Spalding, to Enron Corporation, Maliseet Properties, Inc.

(May 14, 2001) 0... ceseeesssssssesesessssssesssesescseseesesessesescsnenessesassesesnenenssesenenseeeneceseeys C-213
PROJECT TERESA ........ccccsssceseeseceseseesesseseescsessesesvsssesssssesesesessesseeeseneseeseeaeseesesnecsenees C-217

Memorandum from William S. McKee and Susan Jewett, King & Spalding

to R. Davis Maxey, Director, Tax Research, Enron Corporation

(February 20, 1997) oo... ssesssssessssssseseseseesssesesesessseseseesessseeseseseseesseenenesaeseeneaeente C-218

Draft letter from William S. McKee and Abraham N.M. Shashy, Jr., King &

Spalding, to R. Davis Maxey, Esquire, Senior Director, Tax Research

Corporate Tax, Enron Corporation (May 14, 1997).......scsssessseseeeseseretesseestees C-297

Abraham N.M. Shashy, Jr., (for himself and William S. McKee), King &

Spalding to R. Davis Maxey, Esquire, Senior Director, Tax Research,

Corporate Tax, Enron Corporation (July 29, 1997) ....cesssesseseeeseeeeeeeeseneneesene C-326

xiv

=== PAGE 23 ===
Letter from King & Spalding to Enron Corporation (October 2, 2000) with an
attachment letter from R. Davis Maxey, Vice President, Tax Planning, Enron
Corporation to King & Spalding (September 27, 2000) .......-sssesssesesseeserseeentees C-371

Letter from Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. to Enron Leasing Partners, L.L.P.
(Tully 17, 1997) .essesesssssseesseecsesssnecessecsnsencenseenacsseesssesssnecsssssssensnensaeeeseseetsenseecansets C-391

Letter from Kevin A. Duvall, Partner, Ernest & Young L.L.P. to
R. Davis Maxey, Vice President, Tax Planning, Enron Corporation

(November 16, 1999) ........cesssssessesseeseeseeeeeeenesnsesesseestencsssensesenseesseneenennsensntennecanes C-417
VI. PROJECT TOMAS .......cccccceesesssesseecsessssescsecasseesesesenseseneeessesenessesesessessseeasneeseseseseassenens C-424

Letter from Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, L.L.P. to Enron Corporation

(November 23, 1998) ......sscssecsssesssseererssressessssssseesssnsssensaeseensnseneeasncnsencnsensasesncess C-425
VII. PROJECT CONDO ........ccccsssssssesesssssesescsseseseseseseseseseneaeneaeacasasacsesesssesansseseenssenenssnenens C-488

Draft letter from Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. to Enron Corporation

(attention: R. Davis Maxey) (March 17, 2000)........::ss:sssssssesseessesesseensenentesnnenaes C-489
VII. PROJECT TAMMY I....eecccccececeseseseseseeeseseseseceseneeeneneneneserenenenensnsssesssneessasnesesesenesensenes C-499

Letter from Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. to Enron Corporation

(attention: R. Davis Maxey) (February 9, 2001) .........ssessessesesseesessseseseestenteentenne C-500
IX. PROJECT APACHE ......c.ccccccecesssessesssssssesseseseseseseseseseseneneneneneseasacseseaesesssasensssenenessenens C-524

Letter from Shearman & Sterling to Enron Corporation (May 28, 1999)........... C-525

Letter from Shearman & Sterling to Enron Corporation, and Cherokee

Finance V.O.F. c/o Rabobank Management B.V. (May 28, 1999).........:-ee C-569
X. PROJECT NOLY uw... eesessecsessssessesesssseeseeseceeaceesecsnesssneaeencesssessensnsseasensseenenerenneneenneencens C-584

Letter from Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. to Enron Corporation

(February 26, 2001).......ssssssessecsseesseeseesescneessesstssntesssssessseessensceneeseessenneenssanensensens C-585

Draft letter from Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. to Enron Corporation

(December 17, 2001)........ssssessessessesseeseeseescensessesssstssnessesessseneanenscessnenesnsenseeneanes C-591
XL PROJECT VALHALLA .......ceceecesceeesesseseseeeeseseseseesenseseneeeeeeseneesesesssecseseesensssesseenenenes C-601

Letter from Jutta Schneider, Clifford Chance P tinder to Enron Corporation
(May 2, 2000)........ssssssesssesssesssesseseeeecscesessnssnesssesseessesssesasecsssnnecnenacencnnseneeniatanees C-602

Letter from Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. to Enron Corporation
(September 12, 2000) .....sessssecssesseeereessessessteesessssesnseseessenssecssesnesanecacensaneenessaneeans C-617

XV

=== PAGE 24 ===
APPENDIX D

Page
I. MATERIALS RELATING TO THE DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE
COMMITTEE FOR THE ENRON QUALIFIED PLANS.........ccccscssseeseseeeseteeseeenees D-5
Memorandum from Patrick Mackin to Administrative Committees
of Enron Corp. Tax Qualified Pension Plans Regarding Fiduciary Duties of
Members of Committees (December 2, 1996) (Attachment II to the Minutes
of the December 5, 1996, Administrative Committee Meeting)... D-6
Presentation by Patrick Mackin to the Administrative Committee regarding
Administration of the ESOP, Cash Balance and Savings Plans (Attachment I
to the Minutes of the March 9, 2000, Administrative
Committee Meeting) ...........cssccsssseseseseseseseeeesessessseseeneenseeensnsenensnsasasseeneneasaneseaees D-11
Il. MATERIALS RELATING TO CHANGES TO THE ENRON ESOP AND CASH
BALANCE PLANS .......cccssscseseseseseseseseeeeceessssesesseseeesseeessessessssseseneseseseeeseseesesesesesnenenees D-36
Enron Corp. Interoffice Memorandum Regarding Retirement Plan Changes
and ESOP Access Questions and Answers (January 31, 1995) .......ccecseeseeeees D-37
The Enron Retirement Program Guide...........cccccssssssssssesesereenetensseneseeeeeenteneneees D-58
Cash Balance Plan Benefit Examples .............ccccccesesssssseeeeeeeseeeeeseneneeaeeeteneeeee D-85
Enron Corp. Retirement Plan Estimated Cash Contribution 1994-2002
(November 16, 1994)... secsssssssessesesesesessssesenesesesesesesessensnsnessssesesensasaseeseenensees D-94
Il. MATERIALS RELATING TO THE BLACKOUT PERIOD FOR THE ENRON
SAVINGS PLAN ......cccsescscssssssssescesecesescesesscsseecsesesscsesececseseseseceesesesseasseceeseseeseseeereneneees D-95
Timeline Regarding the Change in the Recordkeeper under the Enron Savings
Plan (Presented at the November 20, 2001, Administrative Committee
MEeting) .......secessesecsessseseescsssesssscsescseseseseseeseseseeesesessesesesnssesssnensneneaeensusacareneeneneys D-96
Enron Corp. Savings Plan Changes, “Money in Motion”...........::ssssssseeeseseeeeee D-104
Electronic Mail to Employees with Blackout Reminders
(October 16, 2001, 11:10 pM)... cesseseseseeesesteseseeeseeeeneseseseseessssneneeneeneneees D-110
Electronic Mail to Employees with Blackout Reminders
(October 22, 2001, 10:28 pm) .......scsceseeseseseeseseseeesesnssesnessseseetensneneneeteeeanenserees D-111

xvi

=== PAGE 25 ===
Electronic Mail to Employees with Blackout Reminders
(October 25, 2001, 11:44 pm) ......ccsseesesseceeneeseeeeseenenesneatenestessseessnseesneseeseenenenensees

Electronic Mail to Employees with Final Reminder of Blackout Date
(October 26, 2001, 11:58 aM) .....sceeseseesecseeesseeeseeteneeeneenssnsessesesesnsseseaseneneeenenes

Electronic Mail to Enron Employees Notifying Them that the Blackout
Had Ended on November 13 (November 14, 2001, 9:07 pm) ........ssssssseeereetereees

IV. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION “WHITE PAPERS”

Enron Executive Compensation Program “White Paper”
(Updated January, 1998) ......cssssessesseeseseesessssssssesssssnssesssessessssnesneseescessensensensentenens

Enron Corp. Executive Compensation Program Brochure ..........s.sssssessecssseseseeees

Vv. MATERIALS PROVIDED TO ENRON BY OUTSIDE CONSULTANTS
REGARDING EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION .........cccccssssseseseseeeeneneseseseeenenereaesees

Letter from Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles A. LeMaistre dated
December 3, 2001 (regarding competitiveness of Enron executive
COMPeNsation PLOYTaMS) .......eeresecsersereereeererrenentesestestesnecetsaseneensseseeneeseeseenetsatsets

Letter from Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles A. LeMaistre dated November 14,
2001 (regarding bonus and other compensation decisions during period before
proposed merger with Dynegy) (letter was included as an attachment to

the Towers Perrin letter dated December 3, 2001)..........ecscesscesssesseeeeeereeeeeteeeeeees

Enron Corp. Executive Compensation Stress Test Findings (April 20, 2001)
Prepared by Towers Perrin and Presented to the Compensation Committee on
May 1, 2001.0... seesessessssseeseeseesesseensessseeneeseeaneaeestesnesesssesscsseessessesssneseeseeneenesansnatens

Letter from Towers Perrin to Ms. Pam Butler, Director, Compensation, dated
November 16, 2000 (regarding marketplace compensation analysis for Mr. Lay
and Mr. SKilling) ........ssessessesseseseseseeeeeeseseseseeneeeeneenesesesesnesssnsnessseesensnsnesseneeeenees

Letter from Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles A. LeMaistre dated January 18, 2001
(regarding alternative compensation arrangements for Mr. Lay due to his
changed responsibilities upon the appointment of Mr. Skilling as Chief
Executive OffiCer) ......ccceecescesececesssscsesscsessesesessescsesenessesesesesneesesetessersesensesseeneneseees

VI. COMPENSATION OF THE TOP-200 MOST HIGHLY COMPENSATED
EMPLOYEES (1998, 1999, and 2000 and 2001)

VII. MATERIALS RELATING TO PRE-BANKRUPTCY BONUSES

List of Recipients of Bonuses, Including Name, Job Title, and Amount
ReCeIVE .....eeeeeceescescescesscesesscescesecsceesceseeeseessecseesecascsecsecseesessesseseaeseneenseceeesseenensnenes

=== PAGE 26 ===
Information Regarding Individuals Who Terminated Employment with Enron
Before Completing 90-Day Service Requirement ...........:.sssesessesssesssseeseeneeseenenees D-241

Sample Agreements Relating to Pre-Bankruptcy Bonuses ..........:.ssssesseeeeseseenes D-246

Minutes of Board of Directors and Compensation Committee Meetings
Relating to Pre-Bankruptcy Bonuses (October 24, 2001; November 16, 2001;
November 18, 2001; November 25, 2001; November 28, 2001; and

November 29, 2001)......ccccssssssssessssccesssscsesssscsecssseessssesesecseseneeseneesesenseeneeenacsessaeaees D-248
VII. MATERIALS RELATING TO NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED
COMPENSATION. ......cccccscsssesssesesesesesesesescsesesessescscsesessseseeesseseeessseeesesenenensseesenseerenenses D-299
Pre-Bankruptcy Early Withdrawals from the 1994 Deferral Plan and the Expat
Deferral Plan .........ccccsccsssesssceceecsessesesesscsessesesseseseessseseeseeesessesseseeacsesenasansssessecsssees D-300
MATERIALS RELATING TO SALE OF OPTIONS TAX SHELTER...........::ese+ D-309
Sale of Executive Options Technique--Advantages and Disadvantages ............... D-310
Diagrams of Sale of Executive Options Technique ............s.sssssesesssessessecestessesees D-314
Draft Opinion Letter (undated, to “CHient”) ........ ees eseeeeeeseeeeneeteneseeennenenens D-317
MATERIALS RELATING TO EXECUTIVE LOANS .......cccccscssseseseseseeeseesetereneeeenene D-346
Enron Corp. Account Reconciliation, Officers’ Loans (1997-2001) ..........seseese D-347
Mr. Lay Line of Credit, Recent Transactions (2001).........s:ssessessesseesseseeseeseeseenes D-352
Enron Line of Credit, Mr. Frevert (2001) ........cecscssesseeseeseereesesseeteetecseeteeenreeeseees D-353

XI.

XI.

MATERIALS RELATING TO PURCHASE AND RECONVEYANCE OF
MR. LAY’S ANNUITY CONTRACTS........ccccccsesssseseseeeeseeteeseseneesesenensnenessesensaenenees D-354

Ken Lay Insurance Swap Analysis (presented at September 14, 2001,
Compensation Committee meeting)...........csescesreseseeseeeseseeeseeneeneseeseeseenesneenennes D-355

Letter from Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles A. LeMaistre dated

November 2, 2001 .....c.cccccscsssssesssssseceseeceeescscesssscsessseesesesecsessseesesesesseseseseneneneeseeneeees D-357
SPLIT DOLLAR LIFE INSURANCE ARRANGEMENTS ........:csecssseserseseeeessesesesees D-359

Kenneth L. Lay Split Dollar Life Insurance Agreement Effective

April 22, 1994 ooo. sceesesseesesseesseeseesnennecnecneneeneenesnssnsssesussseeseesssecsssesessnseneesnessnesnens D-360

Kenneth L. Lay Collateral Agreement Effective April 22, 1994... esses D-365

Kenneth L. Lay Split Dollar Agreement Effective December 13, 1996................ D-367

XViii

=== PAGE 27 ===
Jeffrey K. Skilling Split Dollar Agreement Effective May 23, 1997... D-374
Jeffrey K. Skilling Assignment of Life Insurance Policy as Collateral,

Effective May 23, 1997 .........ccscsssssssssesssessssesesneseseeneseeeeeenenseeseseassesssesssnsnssesneneeneens D-381
Jeffrey K. Skilling Split Dollar Premium Payment Schedule .............sessessesseesees D-385

xix

=== PAGE 28 ===

=== PAGE 29 ===
INTRODUCTION

This document,’ prepared by the staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation (“Joint
Committee staff’), is an official report of the Joint Committee staff investigation relating to
Enron Corporation and related entities. This investigation began in February 2002 at the request
(by letter dated February 15, 2002) of Senator Max Baucus and Senator Charles E. Grassley of
the Senate Committee on Finance.

The Joint Committee staff is publishing this Report in three volumes. Volume I contains
the Joint Committee staff report of investigation. Volume I is divided into Four Parts: Part One
is the general observations, findings, and recommendations; Part Two contains general
background information including the methodology and scope of the Joint Committee staff
investigation and a history of the company; Part Three provides a detailed discussion of certain
of Enron’s tax-motivated business transactions and other business tax issues; and Part Four
provides a detailed discussion of Enron’s pension plans and compensation practices.

Volumes II and III contain four Appendices to this Report. Appendix A (general
information relating to investigation) and Appendix B (information relating to Enron’s tax-
motivated transactions) are contained in Volume II. Appendix C (tax opinion letters with respect
to Enron’s tax-motivated transactions) and Appendix D (pension and compensation-related
materials) are contained in Volume III.

1 This document may be cited as follows: Joint Committee on Taxation, Report of
Investigation of Enron Corporation and Related Entities Regarding Federal Tax and
Compensation Issues, and Policy Recommendations (JCS-3-03), February 2003.

=== PAGE 30 ===
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
A. General Overview of the Investigation
1. Scope of Report

In February 2002, at the direction of Senator Max Baucus and Senator Charles E.
Grassley of the Senate Committee on Finance (“Senate Finance Committee”), the staff of the
Joint Committee on Taxation (“Joint Committee staff’) began its review of Enron Corporation
and related entities (“Enron”). The review focused on two principal areas: (1) Enron’s use of
tax shelter arrangements, off-shore entities, and special purpose entities, and (2) the
compensation arrangements of Enron employees, including tax-qualified retirement plans,
nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements, and other arrangements, in order to analyze
the factors that may have contributed to the loss of benefits and the extent to which losses were
experienced by different groups of employees. This Report transmits the findings and
recommendations of the Joint Committee staff with respect to its review of these areas.

On March 6, 2002, a disclosure agreement was executed by representatives of Enron
Corp., the Senate Finance Committee, and the Joint Committee staff. Under the terms of the
disclosure agreement, Enron agreed to the disclosure of its tax returns and tax return information
that would otherwise be confidential under the Federal tax laws. The Senate Finance Committee
and Joint Committee staff agreed that any disclosure of information collected during the
investigation would only be disclosed through official reports, meetings, or hearings of either
Committee.

2. Methodology and scope of Joint Committee staff investigation

Enron agreed to cooperate with the Joint Committee staff investigation. Enron complied
with requests for information from the Joint Committee staff through the voluntary production of
documents.

In conducting its investigation, the Joint Committee staff:

e Requested Enron’s tax returns since 1985;3
e Reviewed more than 100 boxes of documents received from Enron in response to
seven extensive document requests;

Z Except as otherwise indicated, all references to “Enron” in this Report refer to Enron
Corporation and its affiliates, and all references to “Enron Corp.” refer specifically to the parent
company.

3 Each tax return was thousands of pages in length.

=== PAGE 31 ===
e Reviewed more than 40 boxes of documents from the Internal Revenue Service
(“IRS”) relating to Enron;

e Conducted 46 interviews of current and former Enron employees and other
individuals with information relevant to the investigation;

e Made four trips to Houston, Texas, to review documents and conduct interviews;

e Reviewed publicly available information relating to Enron, including information
made available by various Congressional committees, governmental agencies, the
U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, and information
contained in media reports; and

e Reviewed information provided by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, the
Department of Labor, and the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations.

The Joint Committee staff faced several limitations in conducting the investigation. The
Joint Committee staff had to rely on Enron’s cooperation to make available relevant documents
and employees. In many cases, current Enron management could not locate the requested
documentation or were unable to answer questions posed by the Joint Committee staff. The
individuals interviewed by the Joint Committee staff were not under oath, nor were individuals
relevant to the investigation compelled to appear. Many Enron employees who had participated
in the transactions or activities reviewed by the Joint Committee staff have since left Enron and,
in some cases, could not be located for an interview. Other individuals stated that they recalled
little of the specific events or transactions. The Joint Committee staff cannot represent that this
Report identifies all relevant facts or analyzes all transactions in which Enron engaged that might
be of interest to policymakers or government agencies.

Despite these limitations, the Joint Committee staff believes that its investigation
provides valuable analysis of Enron’s structured transactions and compensation structures and
provides important recommendations and findings for improvements to the Federal tax system.
More generally, the Joint Committee staff believes the Report provides significant insights into a
corporation’s tax and compensation activities that typically are unavailable to those outside the
company.

The Report identifies financial accounting benefits that Enron claimed in connection with
certain tax-motivated transactions, but it was beyond the scope of the investigation to evaluate
the validity of these claimed financing accounting benefits. Therefore, the financial accounting
benefits are reported as claimed.

This Report is presented in three volumes. Volume I contains the Joint Committee staff
report of investigation. Volume I is divided into Four Parts: Part One is the general
observations, findings, and recommendations of the Joint Committee staff investigation; Part
Two contains general background information, including the methodology and scope of the Joint
Committee staff investigation and a history of the company; Part Three provides a detailed
discussion of certain of Enron’s tax-motivated business transactions; and Part Four provides a
detailed discussion of Enron’s pension plans and compensation practices.

Volumes II and III contain four Appendices to this Report. Volume II contains
Appendices A and B. Appendix A contains copies of certain general information relating to
investigation, including the letter to the Joint Committee staff from Senators Baucus and

=== PAGE 32 ===
Grassley and the disclosure agreement among Enron, the Senate Finance Committee, and the
Joint Committee staff. Appendix B provides detailed documentation relating to Enron’s tax-
motivated transactions. Volume III contains Appendices C and D. Appendix C reprints copies
of the tax opinion letters provided with respect to Enron’s tax-motivated transactions.
Appendix D contains information relating to Enron’s pension plans and other compensation-
related materials.

=== PAGE 33 ===
B. Enron’s Business Operations and Tax-Motivated Transactions

Enron is a Houston-based energy and commodities trading company currently under
Federal bankruptcy reorganization protection. Prior to its bankruptcy, Enron conducted business
through approximately 3,500 domestic and foreign subsidiaries and affiliates (though some of
these entities were inactive), and operated in diverse markets and industries such as wholesale
merchant and commodity market businesses, the management of retail customer energy services,
the operation of gas transmission systems, and the management of energy-related assets and
broadband services. Enron reported consolidated financial statement revenues of $101 billion
for 2000, and ranked seventh on the Fortune 500 list of the country’s largest companies for 2001.
As of December 31, 2000, the company had approximately 59,000 shareholders of record with
respect to its outstanding shares of common stock. At the time it filed for bankruptcy on
December 2, 2001, Enron employed approximately 25,000 employees worldwide.

1. Summary of selected tax information
Federal taxable income

Enron and its affiliates filed a consolidated Federal income tax return for each year from
1985 through 2001. Based on Enron’s tax returns without regard to audit adjustments, Enron
paid approximately $325 million in Federal income taxes between the years 1990 and 1995.

Enron paid no Federal income tax for taxable years 1996 through 1999, and reported a
net operating loss carryover of $3.1 billion from 1999 to 2000. Enron reported that it fully
utilized its net operating loss carryover in 2000 and paid $63.2 million of Federal income tax for
its 2000 taxable year. Enron filed its 2001 Federal income tax return on September 13, 2002,
and reported a net operating loss of $4.6 billion for its 2001 taxable year.

Table 1, below, lists Enron's Federal tax liability for its taxable years 1996 through 2001.

Table 1.-Enron’s Federal Tax Liability, 1996-2001
[millions of dollars]

Year Regular Alternative Total Tax

Tax Minimum Tax Per Return
1996 0 0 0
1997 0 0 0
1998 0 0 0
1999 0 0 0
2000 21.3 41.9 63.2
2001 0 0 o*
Totals 21.3 41.9 63.2

Source: Enron’s Federal income tax returns
* Enron’s tax liability for taxable year 2001 as shown on its return was $13,331.

The IRS uses a coordinated industry case program to coordinate the examination of large
and highly diversified taxpayers. Enron has been in the coordinated industry case program since


=== PAGE 34 ===
January 1989. The IRS has completed its examination of Enron’s tax returns through 1995 and
is currently examining Enron’s 1996 through 2001 tax returns. The IRS adjustments to Enron’s
taxable years 1988 through 1994 increased Enron’s taxable income by $361 million, which, after
taking into account net operating loss carryovers from earlier years, resulted in additional tax
payments of $4.3 million for 1988 through 1994.4

It is impossible to fully assess Enron’s ultimate tax liability until the IRS examination of
Enron’s tax returns for 1996 through 2001 is completed and the bankruptcy court has reviewed
the IRS proof of claim, which is expected to be filed by March 31, 2003.

Reconciliation of Enron’s financial statement net income and Federal taxable income

Enron reported financial statement net income of $2.3 billion, but tax losses of $3 billion,
for the period 1996 through 1999. For year 2000, Enron reported financial statement net income
of $1.0 billion and taxable income of $3.1 billion (before net operating loss carryovers from
1999).

Table 2, below, summarizes the significant adjustments from Enron’s Form 1120,
Schedule M-1, Reconciliation of Financial Statement Income to Taxable Income, for years 1996
through 2000. These reconciliations use Enron’s financial statement and tax return information
as reported or filed, without regard to restatements or audit adjustments. It should be noted that a
complete analysis of Enron’s book to tax differences cannot be made prior to determination of
Enron’s ultimate tax liability, which is under review by the bankruptcy court, and without a
restatement of Enron’s financial statements for these periods to reflect generally accepted
accounting principles.

4 The IRS examination of Enron’s tax return for 1995 is complete. The impact of any
IRS adjustments to Enron’s 1995 tax return will not be known until the examination of 1996
through 2001 is complete.

=== PAGE 35 ===
“winjar xe} oy} UT poyodas se sjuouNsn(pe xe} 0} YOO S,UOIUG Jo s|re}op Joy)INy surejUOD Y xIpuoddy ‘uoNIppe Uy ‘uoNHeUasoud si) suTeJUCS g xIpuoddy

“ZOOT ‘L ouNy YJeIS DON TUMIOD JUIOF oY} 0} UONeIUESeId UOIUG UI poyode se sjuNOUTY (9) ‘sJUNOUIE esoY} Jo S]IeIOp [BUOTIIPpe SUIEIUOD V xipuoddy ur uoneipiouoser

uiNjar Xv) 0} SuNUNOsoe [elouLUY oY, ‘sJUOWOIEIS [eIOURULY Poyeplfosuod UT Popnjour you (E-TOLL'10E “99S “Boy ‘seorL) sosodind xe} Jesope,j Joy sonnus popresoisiq

(c) ‘stunoure esau) Jo s[lejep [euONIppe sureyuoo VY xIpueddy uy uoNerIouose1 WINJoI XB} OF Sununoooe [elouruy oy], “SuINjo xv) OWOOUT [eIOpo,j aIeIedas oIIJ 0} posnbor
are sdiysiouyseg (7) “((€)(Q)POST *99S) UANJOI Xe} PoJePITOSUOD UI UOISNIOUT JOJ Q][qQISI[o Jou ore suoMeIOdIO9 uSI9I0,{ (¢) ‘s}JUNOUIe asoy) JO S[IeJop [BUOCTIIPpe sule}UuO. YW
xipuoddy ut uonerpiouosal uinjor xe} 0} SuNUNODOR JerouRUY YL, “((Z)()POST *998) 189) NTA pue 9}0A UIOIOd Cg SuNSoW Jou suoNLIodIoD (Z) ‘pewodes A[jeursiio sy (1)

LOT‘E Bsr'I- €SL- vOS- OI€-
LEI- €@Z 10I- 187- €6C-
OIS‘S- 898°C- 889'T- €Z0'T- €8I‘I-
vsI- vl- LS- ¢9- L9-
09S‘T- 78E- (Aon o €II-
0c- ce- Lt- v- 6I-
6v1- ZI- €- ve- (
99S‘¢ 0 0 0 0
LES- 906- eer sil SII-
18¢- SEE- 601- @I- LOI-
€61 8zI- Sv ce- 6S
968°S Ze ZI9T 196 cert
€88‘El GIP 868'T o0€'T tet
Bsz (Za ral 0 0
CZ9EI L66°E y8s'l 00E€‘T TET
996'8- 006‘T- 686" bbb- €Lb-
668°9- 8E9- 61€- T1Z- StI-
TZL‘T- OIT‘I- IZ¢- vr TEC
cpe- zsI- 6v1- 68I- 96
6L6 €68 €0L sol y8¢
0002 6661 8661 L661 9661

TSOION

WIMeY XVI, payepljosuoD uo poylodoy swoouy s]quxe |,

saoudrajjIg XBL, 0} YOOY JOIO [TV
uINjOY XVI Jog [es1oAoy ssurusreyq Ainby

saouslajjiq uonersoidoq,

uononpsg suondg 4901¢

juousnipy souvinsuy oI] pouMO Aueduiop

(Qso19}UI

Aylgourtul Jo Ayinbo “3*9) yoog JO JOU XB, 1OJ IQoq] se poywolL, SoANjoNS
(6SZI UoNdes) aJeg aAONNsUOD

syuounsnipy Joye] O} JRA ION

syuounsnf(py diysioureg 19N

SOXB], SWIODUT [eIOpI]

SluouNIsHIpy XBL 01 yoog juESyT

IS
WINDY XB], pPoyeplfosuo_ uo poyodey sulosuy Yyoog
<XB 10j popnyouy SupuNosoy [eroueULy Joy pey]oNUOD Jou sennUg

XB, JOJ JOU Inq syoog Joy ope] UoHeUIUNTY Auedwiossajuy
TMMOIF SUIS] JON SN

>»Sdiysiouyeg
,Suones0ds0D us1010,4
Suonesodio snseutog
Tnjoy KEL, poeplfosuoy UT popnpouy jOU SONU Wor; SUIOSU] JON SSo’T

usta IeIg SWOOUT [eIOUBUTY PoyeplfosuoD Ut povodoy aulosuy 19N

[sae[jop Jo suo]
0007-9661 ewoouy a[qexe J, 0) aod] JUSWIA;e}S [e|ULUT Jo UOHETIUOIeY -salteIpIsqns pue dio uo1uq—7Z 8192,

=== PAGE 36 ===
2. Enron’s development and use of tax-motivated structured transactions

As Enron’s management came to realize that tax-motivated transactions could generate
financial accounting benefits, Enron looked to its tax department to devise large transactions that
would increase its financial accounting income. Enron came to view the role of its tax
department as more than managing its Federal income tax liabilities. Rather, Enron’s tax
department became a source for financial statement earnings, thereby making it a profit center
for the company. With an emphasis on short-term profitability and cash flow, Enron used
various techniques to generate current financial statement net income and increase cash flows.
Enron also used techniques with respect to its tax planning by engaging in 12 large structured
transactions during the period from 1995 until it filed for bankruptcy. At their core, Enron’s
structured transactions were designed to permit Enron to take the position that its long-term tax
benefits could be converted to current or short-term financial statement net income. In most of
the structured transactions discussed in this Report, the origin of the financial accounting benefits
was the reduction in Federal income tax that the transaction was anticipated to provide either
currently or in the future.

This Report classifies Enron’s business transactions into various categories: (1) structured
transactions that raise corporate tax issues; (2) structured transactions that raise partnership tax
issues; (3) other structured transactions which implicate international or certain financial
products provisions; (4) corporate-owned and trust-owned life insurance arrangements, and (5)
structured financings, including tiered preferred securities, investment unit securities, and
commodity prepay transactions. Irrespective of the structure used, the structured transactions
typically used one of two strategies to achieve their tax and financial statement benefits. Several
of the structured transactions (i.e., Projects Tanya, Valor, Steele, and Cochise) were designed to
duplicate losses (i.e., deduct the same loss twice) with respect to a single economic loss. The
other dominant strategy (i.e., Projects Tomas, Condor, Teresa, Tammy I and Tammy II) was to
shift tax basis from a nondepreciable asset to a depreciable asset with little or no economic
outlay. One exception was Project Apache, which was designed to generate tax deductions for
what was, in essence, the repayment of principal. In two projects (Renegade and Valhalla),
Enron received a fee to serve as an accommodation party to another taxpayer who expected to
derive tax or financial statement benefits from a structured transaction.

Most of the transactions relied on differences between the tax treatment and financial
accounting treatment of various items so that the tax benefits could be used to generate financial
statement income. For example, the transactions designed to duplicate losses, i.e., deduct the
same tax loss twice, would be recorded on the financial statements as producing income (not
loss). Similarly, the transactions designed to shift tax basis from a nondepreciable asset to a
depreciable asset would be recorded on the financial statements as producing income.

=== PAGE 37 ===
Table 3, below, summarizes certain tax and accounting information regarding Enron’s
structured transactions. The table shows that the financial accounting benefits Enron expected to
derive from the structured transactions were front loaded to provide immediate reporting of
earnings for its financial statements, even though the bulk of the tax benefits would not be
derived, if at all, until well into the future. The table lists the promoter of the transaction, the
primary tax opinion provider, and project fees paid by Enron with respect to each transaction.
The table tells a broader story as well -- from 1995 until Enron filed for bankruptcy, Enron
achieved more than $2 billion in tax and financial accounting benefits and paid approximately
$88 million in fees paid to advisors and promoters.

=== PAGE 38 ===
‘juourseI8e Yyors 0} Ayredioyun0d

ayy Aq poatooos u9eq OARY syuowiXed [ye yOu ‘Burpy Aojdnszyueq s,uorug 0) ond “kyredsoyunod oy) pue uolUg useMjoq SJUoUTOOITe JeN}OBIIUOD UO paseq oIv Sadj Jofolg
(g) pue ‘sueoy SumMesJJo oY) UO peolds d}J¥I-JsoJOJU! UL JO WAIOJ OY} UT SEM ETTEYTEA yooforg ul uonedronsed 10j doy s uoIUg ‘opeSousy 100fo1g Ul SuIsesuUd Joy UOT|TU
SLE'1¢ pred sem uolug *Kpoarjoodsos ‘eyjeyje A pue opesouoy syoofoig Ul (ISNIZ, S19YUR 0} JOSsaOONs oY}) YUR_ SyosInoq] pue jsn1p sioxuLg 0} Ayred uoyepourusoso8
ue sem uosug (¢) ‘10Te A, y99fo1g Jdaoxa ‘yodoy sty) 01 g xIpuaddy ul pourEyUOd [Q0Z JOQUIDAON “SMOT- YSBD s8uruseg yoofo1g Jo Krewuung dnoip suonoesuely,
POINJONNS JOqUIOAON OY} SI SBUIALS XE} OUIODUT [eIOPIA] poyoofoid Joy UoTeUTIOJUT 9dINOS (jp) ‘soxe} UI UONONpel ojeIPOUIUUT Ue ULY) JOYyEI SOSsO] Sunesodo

JOU POSBdIOUI UI paj[Nsel sj1joueq oy} sreak oy} Jo Auvul 10j sesso] Sunesodo you pey uoIUY osnedog “oyel xv} juoosod ¢¢ v Butsn poynduios ssuravs xv} [e1Opo,]

(¢) {pozipeor oq JOU [TIM s}Zousq SuNUNOdoR [eTOUBUTY oY) JO Aueur yey Apoyyy sty ‘Burpy Aoidnsyueq s,uorug 0) ong “Joye, 1eforg ideoxe ssodoy sty) 0) g xIpueddy
UI PouTe}UOS [OZ JOqUIdAON ‘SMO]] YseD 2 sSutuseg yooforg Jo Areurung dnoip suonoesues], posing JOqUIOAON OU} ST OWOOUT Surjunosoe [eroueury pojsefoid

JO} oreULIOJUT doINog (Z) ‘Bury Ao\dn.n[URg s vor 0} onp sjunoure eurosur poyodor ay) Jo AUBUT Jo [BSIOAI OU 199[Jor OU SBOP SWOT Sununosoe [eroueut,y (1)

‘SOON

9°L8 VIN V/N (acid LS@ 6L0°T Ts9 STRIOL
= _ — OLE — 69€ — (1007) 1 Aue,
6 SUPITA 29 uosuLA | SY4ONOL 27 e10[9d [ana 90r (0002) 1 Aue,
= SUDITA 2° UOSUTA yueg oyosineq = — v9 91 <(0002) BrreuieA
ol SUDYTA 27 UosuTA | eyono], 7 aMO[Ed TEE = 8ZE 88 (6661) JopuoD
= — snd] sioyueg = 7 I i <(8661) opesousy

34 2 Joney
v1 sssnvng “dutty unyy jst sroyug 601 56 €ll LE CHANGE
SI Burpierg 2p ueuLesys | uRNeYURA eseYyD LOI Is LOL Is (8661) sysedy
SunoX
91 sug ‘UOSTaN 2049/1 js roy II — €vl 101 (8661) estys09,
ai Suipredg 29 Sury ISN], soy £9 (91) LSZ 9% (L661) P8219],
II ee SMU, sIoyUR 8L 6€ €8 ¢9 (L661) 1983S
v0 uasiopuy Inguy | uesiepuy Inyy 78 78 78 = (9661) 20reA
0 uasiepuy inyyy | uesiopuy inyuy 99 99 99 99 (S661) eAueL
puoouy
»Sduraes 1007 Suyunosdy | 1007 Ysnomm}
989A JoplAoig uoruldg XB] [e10pay ysno1) [epueuly au0suy ouleN
poforg [810], xey Areuliig 19}0WI01g pays0fo1g ssulAes paqs0foi1g suyunod0Vy poforg
[eq0L, xe], [e19pa,] 1e0L [epueuly

(saeyjop Jo suoy[r)

(100Z-S661) SHOHIVSURAT, PaNpN.Yg snoLe A S,WoIUG Jo saaq pure Spyoueg-"¢ aQe.L

10

=== PAGE 39 ===
3. Enron’s foreign subsidiaries and other entities

As of December 31, 2001, Enron’s worldwide operations included roughly 250 foreign
entities that were associated with ongoing businesses. Enron had a total of approximately 1,300
different foreign entities, including foreign corporations and partnerships that were controlled by
Enron, as well as other entities in which Enron owned a significant stake. Approximately 80
percent of Enron’s foreign entities were inactive shells that did not hold and were not engaged in
or associated with any ongoing business and that were therefore largely irrelevant for tax
purposes.

Enron created many entities in jurisdictions that do not impose a tax on such entities. In
particular, as of December 31, 2001, the Enron ownership structure included 441 entities formed
in the Cayman Islands, a country that has never imposed a corporate income tax. Most of these
entities were inactive shells not associated with any ongoing business.

11

=== PAGE 40 ===
C. Pension and Compensation Arrangements
1. Overview

Enron’s compensation arrangements received considerable media attention in the
aftermath of the Enron bankruptcy. Some of this attention has focused on the broad-based
retirement plans maintained by Enron that receive special tax benefits (“qualified retirement
plans”). For many Enron employees, the benefits provided under these plans were the primary
source of retirement income. Attention has also focused on the overall compensation
arrangements of Enron, particularly the compensation provided to executives. The Report
addresses both aspects of Enron’s compensation arrangements.

2. Enron’s qualified retirement plans

Overview of Enron qualified plans

Enron maintained three main qualified retirement plans: the Enron Employee Stock
Ownership Plan (“ESOP”); the Enron Retirement Plan, which was modified and renamed the
Enron Cash Balance Plan; and the Enron Savings Plan.

The Enron ESOP was invested primarily in Enron stock.

The Enron Retirement Plan provided a benefit based on a participant’s compensation and
years of service. The Enron ESOP and Enron Retirement Plan were designed as a floor-offset
arrangement, under which benefits earned by a participant under the Enron Retirement Plan were
reduced or “offset” by the benefits received by the participant under the Enron ESOP.

The floor-offset arrangement was frozen after 1994 and was phased out over the period
1996 through 2000. During that period, the value of the account balance in the ESOP was
locked in, and an offset for benefits accrued under the Enron Retirement Plan during 1987
through 1994 was set permanently based on Enron stock prices at specified times. As a result of
the locking in of the offset and the subsequent decline in the value of Enron stock, many plan
participants did not receive the same level of benefits they would have received if the offset

feature had remained unchanged. The locking in of the offset is currently under review by the
IRS.

In 1996, the Enron Retirement Plan was renamed the Enron Cash Balance Plan and the
traditional defined benefit plan formula was replaced with a cash balance formula. The Enron
Cash Balance Plan has been under review by the IRS National Office since 2000, pursuant to a
1999 directive that all cash balance plan conversions be referred to the IRS National Office
pending clarification of applicable rules.

The Enron Savings Plan is a 401(k) plan. Participants could make elective deferrals and
after-tax contributions to the Enron Savings Plan, and had a range of investment choices
available for their contributions, including Enron stock. In addition, Enron made matching
contributions based on employee elective deferrals. The matching contributions were invested in
Enron stock pursuant to the plan terms; participants could elect to invest the matching
contributions in another investment after attaining age 50.

12

=== PAGE 41 ===
Many Enron Savings Plan participants lost considerable amounts of retirement savings
due to the high level of investment in Enron stock. Significant amounts of plan assets were
invested in Enron stock even though the Enron Savings Plan offered approximately 20
investment options other than Enron stock, consisting of a broad range of alternatives offering
various risk and return characteristics.

Employee investment in Enron stock was generally encouraged by Enron. Even as the
price of Enron stock declined during 2001, management told employees of a bright future for
Enron. For example, Kenneth L. Lay was consistently optimistic in his predictions for the future
of Enron stock, even when an employee specifically asked about Enron stock in the context of
the Enron Savings Plan.

The decline of Enron’s stock price and Enron’s subsequent bankruptcy has affected the
benefits that Enron employees are or may be entitled to under the Enron qualified plans. Most of
the media attention regarding the effect of the bankruptcy on employees’ benefits related to the
significant plan holdings in Enron stock, particularly in the Enron ESOP and the Enron Savings
Plan.

Issues reviewed with respect to Enron qualified plans

The Joint Committee staff reviewed in detail certain issues relating to the Enron qualified
plans, including: (1) the locking in of the value of the ESOP offset under the Enron Retirement
Plan; (2) the conversion of the Enron Retirement Plan into the Enron Cash Balance Plan; (3)
investment of the Enron ESOP in Enron stock; (4) a change in recordkeepers under the Enron
Savings Plan that resulted in a “blackout” period in October and November 2001 during which
plan participants could not make investment changes while the price of Enron stock was falling;
(5) the reasons behind the level of investment of Enron Savings Plan assets in Enron stock; and
(6) allegations made in early 2002 by Ms. Robin Hosea, a former Enron contract and full-time
employee, that payments were made from Enron’s employee benefit funds for purposes
unrelated to employee benefits. The Report also discusses the issue of whether plan fiduciaries
of the Enron ESOP should have acted to remove Enron stock as an investment under the ESOP,
despite plan provisions directing such investment.

3. Other compensation arrangements

In general

In addition to the attention given to the Enron qualified retirement plan issues, attention
has been focused on the various compensation arrangements of Enron, particularly those of
officers and other executives. This focus has been both on the magnitude of compensation paid
to certain executives and on the various forms of compensation used by Enron.

Enron had a pay-for-performance compensation philosophy. Employees who performed
well were compensated well. Enron’s compensation costs for all employees, and especially for
executives, increased significantly over the years immediately preceding the bankruptcy.

Enron’s executives were paid substantial amounts. In 2000, total compensation for the

200 highest paid employees of Enron was $1.4 billion. This consisted of $56.6 million of

13

=== PAGE 42 ===
bonuses, $1.06 billion attributable to stock options, $131.7 million attributable to restricted
stock, and $172.6 million of other income, including base salary.

Overview of Enron’s executive compensation arrangements

Executive compensation at Enron was generally comprised of base salary, annual
incentives, and long-term incentives. Enron’s long-term incentive program was designed to tie
executive performance directly to the creation of shareholder wealth. The long-term incentive
program provided for awards of nonqualified stock options and restricted stock. Certain
executives were eligible to participate in nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements.

Nonqualified deferred compensation plans

Certain executives were given the opportunity to participate in nonqualified deferred
compensation arrangements. Participants were eligible to defer all or a portion of salary, bonus,
and long-term compensation into Enron-sponsored deferral plans. The plans provided an
opportunity to delay payment of Federal and State income taxes and earn a tax-deferred return on
deferrals. Many executives took advantage of the opportunity to defer amounts that would
otherwise have been included in income currently.

Nonqualified deferred compensation was a major component of executive compensation
for Enron. In 1998, the 200 highest paid employees at Enron employees deferred $13.3 million.
By 2000, that amount had risen to $70 million. For the years 1998 through 2001, a total of $154
million in compensation was deferred. According to documents provided by Enron, Mr. Lay
deferred $32 million under one of Enron’s nonqualified deferred compensation plans.

In late 2001, prior to Enron’s bankruptcy filing, early distributions were made to certain
participants from two of Enron’s nonqualified deferred compensation plans. These distributions
totaled more than $53 million.

Stock-based compensation

Enron used stock-based compensation as a principal form of compensation for
executives. Enron’s stock-based compensation programs included nonqualified stock options,
restricted stock, and phantom stock. Enron’s deduction for compensation attributable to the
exercise of nonqualified stock options increased by more than 1,000 percent from 1998 to 2000.
Enron’s directors were also compensated partially in Enron stock.

Pre-bankruptcy bonuses

In the weeks immediately preceding the bankruptcy, Enron implemented bonus
programs; one for approximately 60 key traders and one for approximately 500 employees that
Enron claimed were critical for maintaining and operating Enron going forward. In order to
receive a bonus under one of these programs, the employee had to agree to repay the bonus, plus
an additional 25 percent, if the employee did not remain with Enron for 90 days. The combined
cost of the programs was approximately $105 million.

14

=== PAGE 43 ===
Special compensation arrangements

Enron had certain compensation arrangements for limited groups of people or for specific
individuals. For example, Enron had a Project Participation Plan for employees in its
international business unit.

Enron also had arrangements for a small number of employees or in some cases just one
employee. One executive, Mr. Lou Pai, received the use of a 1/8 fractional interest in a jet
aircraft Hawker 800 as part of his compensation. A few employees received loans (or lines of
credit) from Enron or split-dollar life insurance arrangements. Enron purchased two annuities
from Mr. Lay and his wife as part of a compensation package for 2001. Certain executives were
allowed to exchange interests in plans for large cash payments or stock options and restricted
stock grants.

Employee loans

From time to time, Enron extended loans to a few executives. Information provided to
the Joint Committee staff indicates that loans were made to at least eight Enron employees,
including Mr. Lay and Mr. Jeffrey Skilling. Mr. Lay was provided with a $7.5 million line of
credit with the company. The aggregate amount withdrawn pursuant to his line of credit from
1997 through 2001 was over $106 million. In 2001 alone, Mr. Lay engaged in a series of 25
transactions involving withdrawals under the line of credit totaling $77.5 million, of which all
but $7.5 million was repaid. Mr. Skilling was loaned $4 million by Enron in 1997. Half of the
loan was repaid in 1999 and the other half in 2001.

Purchase and reconveyance of Mr. Lay’s annuity contracts

In September of 2001, the Compensation Committee of the Enron Board of Directors
agreed to an “insurance swap transaction” under which Enron agreed to purchase two annuity
contracts from Mr. and Mrs. Lay for $10 million and also agreed to reconvey the annuity
contracts back to Mr. Lay if he remained employed with Enron through December 31, 2005. If
Mr. Lay left Enron prior to that date, the reconveyance would still take place in four events: (1)
retirement with the consent of the Board; (2) disability; (3) involuntary termination (other than
termination for cause); or (4) termination for “good reason.” Mr. Lay’s counsel indicated in a
letter to the Joint Committee staff that they could not give a legal opinion about the current status
of the annuity contracts and indicated their understanding that the characterization of Mr. Lay’s
termination with Enron for purposes of severance benefits was still under review.

Split dollar insurance arrangements

Enron entered into split-dollar life insurance arrangements with Mr. Lay ($30 million and
$11.9 million), Mr. Skilling ($8 million), and Mr. Clifford Baxter ($5 million).

15

=== PAGE 44 ===
D. Summary of General Observations

This Report’s detailed analysis of Enron’s structured transactions reveals a pattern of
behavior showing that Enron deliberately and aggressively engaged in transactions that had little
or no business purpose in order to obtain favorable tax and accounting treatment.

A critical component of many of Enron’s structured transactions was the involvement of
an accommodation party such as an Enron employee or the party promoting the transaction.
Enron’s activities show that, in general, when transactions can be structured by parties that have
the shared goal of obtaining favorable tax treatment, the tax rules do not function as intended and
may produce undesirable results.

In transaction after transaction, Enron obtained sophisticated advice, and in most
instances received assurances that the proposed transaction “should” comply with technical tax
law requirements. Often, these assurances were based on highly technical interpretations of the
law even though the transaction produced surprising and questionable outcomes. Many of the
opinions hinged on a determination that the transaction had sufficient business purpose. Enron
represented the business purpose of the transaction, and Enron’s counsel did not bother to look
beyond the representation.

For many transactions, Enron picked from the same small pool of outside advisors. In
some cases, if one advisor from the pool was not advising Enron in a particular deal, that advisor
advised the other party (the promoter) to the transaction. Thus did incestuous relationships
evolve among the participants in many of the transactions, with the result that Enron even acted
as an accommodation party to deals designed primarily by Enron’s advisors to benefit others.

Enron also excelled at making complexity an ally. Many transactions used exceedingly
complicated structures and were designed to provide tax benefits significantly into the future. A
reviewer of the transaction would be required to parse details from a series of deal documents,
make assumptions about the parties’ intent in future years, and only then apply technical rules to
the transaction to test for legitimacy. Enron had the incentive and the ability to engage in
unusually complicated transactions in order to preclude meaningful review.

Corporations like Enron have an inherent advantage over the IRS. Enron relied on advice
from sophisticated and experienced lawyers, investment bankers, and accountants. Assertions of
attorney-client privilege hinders the ability of the IRS to obtain many of the most instructive
documents, which impedes the IRS’s ability to audit the transaction. Enron’s activities shows
that the IRS cannot minimize the importance of loss companies on examination because to do so
would ignore a breeding ground for tax-motivated transactions that also could be used by
taxpaying companies.

Enron’s aggressive interpretation of business purpose, the cooperation of accommodation
parties, the protections provided by tax opinions, the complex design of transactions, advantages
over the IRS -- all were factors that contributed to Enron’s ability to engage in tax-motivated
transactions. Until the costs of participating in tax-motivated transactions are substantially
increased, corporations such as Enron will continue to engage in transactions that violate the
letter or the spirit of the law.

16

=== PAGE 45 ===
E. Summary of Findings and Recommendations
1. General findings relating to business tax matters

The Joint Committee staff believes that the transactions that are the subject of this Report
demonstrate the need for strong anti-avoidance rules to combat tax-motivated transactions that
might satisfy the technical requirements of the tax statutes and administrative rules, but that
serve little or no purpose other than to generate income tax or financial statements benefits.
Accordingly, the Joint Committee staff makes the following general findings with respect to tax-
motivated transactions:

¢ Stronger measures (e.g., the imposition of substantial, punitive penalties) are
necessary to increase the costs to taxpayers of engaging in transactions that lack a
non-tax business purpose or economic substance;

e Attainment of financial statement benefits based solely on Federal income tax savings
is not a valid business purpose for Federal income tax purposes;

e The tax laws should impose severe penalties on the use of accommodation parties
such as employees, consultants, or advisors, as parties in a transaction or arrangement
to permit a taxpayer to achieve Federal income tax benefits;

e The Treasury Department and IRS should have a broad array of sanctions to impose
on advisors who render opinions that rely on representations that the advisor knows,
or has reason to believe, are incorrect, incomplete, or inconsistent with the facts; State
licensing authorities should be notified when these sanctions are imposed, and the
licensing authorities should discipline the advisor as appropriate,

¢ Many taxpayers are engaging in transactions primarily to obtain financial accounting
benefits and those responsible for promulgating the accounting standards should
evaluate whether changes to the rules governing accounting for income taxes should
be made; and

e The use of multiple entities in connection with tax-motivated transactions, coupled
with the inherent complexity of these transactions and the delayed realization of the
tax benefits, makes it exceedingly difficult for the IRS to timely identify and properly
evaluate these transactions; thus, taxpayers should be required to make a detailed
disclosure of any tax-motivated transaction on a timely basis, irrespective of whether
the transaction has immediate tax return effect.

17

=== PAGE 46 ===
2. Specific recommendations relating to business tax issues

In addition to the general recommendations and findings relating to tax-motivated
transactions, the Joint Committee staff makes the following specific recommendations:

¢ The duplication of losses should be curtailed so that a single economic loss is not
deducted more than once;

e The rules that prevent corporate acquisitions made to evade or avoid Federal income
tax should be strengthened;

e The extraordinary dividend rules should be strengthened;

e Guidance should be provided on the replication of earnings and profits in a
consolidated group;

e There should be greater disclosure of partnership disguised sales;
e The partnership allocation anti-abuse rules should be strengthened;
e Guidance should be provided regarding the transfer of partial partnership interests;

e Rules are needed to address the appropriate interaction between the partnership basis
rules and the corporate stock nonrecognition rules;

e The rules for allocating subpart F income should include an anti-abuse provision;

¢ The exception to the passive foreign investment company rules for U.S. shareholders
of controlled foreign corporations should relate more closely to the U.S. shareholder’s
potential taxability under subpart F;

e The earnings stripping rules should be strengthened;

e Annual information reporting should be required with respect to entities that are
disregarded pursuant to a check-the-box election;

e The financial asset securitization investment trust provisions should be repealed;

e The pre-June 20, 1986, grandfather rule for certain corporate-owned life insurance
contracts should be repealed;

18

=== PAGE 47 ===
e The rules relating to the characterization and treatment of debt and equity should be
modified; and

e The 50-percent related party threshold under the interest expense disallowance rules
for disqualified indebtedness should be eliminated.

3. General findings relating to pensions and compensation

This Report’s detailed review of Enron’s compensation programs reveals a process which
rested approval of executive compensation packages almost entirely with internal management.
Although the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors formally approved both the
total amount of compensation paid to executives and the form of such compensation, the
Committee’s approval generally was a rubber stamp of recommendations made by Enron’s
management.

Underlying Enron’s compensation programs was an apparent lack of consistent or
centralized recordkeeping with respect to compensation arrangements in general and executive
compensation in particular. Enron could not provide documentation relating to many of Enron’s
special compensation arrangements for its top executives. Although Enron represented that it
properly reported income with respect to employee compensation arrangements, the lack of
recordkeeping made it impossible to verify whether this was true.

Enron’s heavy reliance on stock-based compensation, both with respect to executives and
with respect to rank and file employees, caused significant financial loss when Enron’s stock
price collapsed. Although some executives suffered losses that appear stunning in amount, many
executives also reaped substantial gains from their compensation arrangements. Enron’s rank
and file employees in many cases lost virtually all of their retirement savings because they
believed statements made by Enron’s top executives up to the very end that Enron was viable
and that Enron’s stock price would turn around.

4. Findings and recommendations relating to pensions and compensation

Some of the issues examined by the Joint Committee staff with respect to Enron’s
retirement plans and compensation arrangements raise nontax issues, such as issues of corporate
governance and fiduciary responsibility. The Joint Committee staff finds it appropriate to make
the following recommendations with respect to these plans and arrangements:

e Clear rules should be adopted with respect to the operations of cash balance plans and
the conversion of traditional defined benefit plans into cash balance plans;

e To better protect retirement benefits, legislative changes should be made to reduce the
likelihood that defined contribution plan participants will have high concentrations of
assets in a single investment, such as employer securities. Such changes include
allowing participants greater opportunities to move plan assets out of employer
securities and into more diversified investments, and requiring plans to provide
notices regarding investment principles. In addition, plan participants should receive
investment education consistent with fiduciary rules;

19

=== PAGE 48 ===
To help prevent plan participants from being misled with respect to investments in
employer securities, fiduciary rules should apply to statements made by company
executives regarding investments under participant-directed defined contributions
plans, regardless of whether such officials are otherwise plan fiduciaries. The
Department of Labor should also make additional efforts to educate plan fiduciaries
and company executives regarding fiduciary obligations;

Changes should be made to the rules relating to nonqualified deferred compensation
arrangements to curb current practices that allow for the deferral of tax on
compensation income while providing executives with inappropriate levels of
security, control, and flexibility with respect to deferred compensation. These
changes include repealing the prohibition on the issuance of related Treasury
guidance, and providing that certain plan features result in current taxation, including
the ability to obtain accelerated distributions, participant directed investments, and
subsequent elections.

Guidance relating to split-dollar life insurance should be finalized; and

The limitation on the deduction for compensation in excess of $1 million should be
repealed.

20

=== PAGE 49 ===
PART ONE: GENERAL OBSERVATIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND FINDINGS
I. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

Enron entered the 1990s as a rapidly growing company with an ambition to grow faster
and larger and to change the nature of its business from an “old” economy energy company to a
“new” economy firm with diverse interests and global reach. Enron’s desire to grow pushed
Enron’s leaders to find ways to increase reported earnings and thereby drive up Enron’s stock
price, which would fuel further growth. Ultimately, the reported picture of the company failed to
comport with the underlying economic reality and Enron notoriously collapsed.

This Report’s detailed analysis of Enron’s structured transactions reveals a pattern of
behavior showing that Enron deliberately and aggressively engaged in transactions that had little
or no business purpose in order to obtain favorable tax and accounting treatment. For Enron’s
leaders, financial statement income became paramount, and Enron announced to the world its
target of $1 billion in net income for year 2000.°> As Enron’s management realized that tax-
motivated transactions could generate financial accounting benefits, Enron looked to its tax
department to devise transactions that increased financial accounting income. In effect, the tax
department was converted into an Enron business unit, complete with annual revenue targets.
The tax department, in consultation with outside experts, then designed transactions to meet or
approximate the technical requirements of tax provisions with the primary purpose of
manufacturing financial statement income. The slogan “Show Me the Money!” exemplified this
effort.© However, a bona fide business purpose, that is, a purpose other than to secure favorable
tax and accounting treatment, was either lacking or tenuous in many of the transactions and
clearly was not the impetus for the transactions.’

5 According to Kenneth L. Lay: “Enron achieved its earnings and operational goals in
1996, the first year of our ENRON 2000 initiative to reach net income in excess of $1 billion and
achieve a minimum double digit growth in annual earnings per share.” Press Release, Enron
Corp., Enron Reports 12 Percent Increase in 1996 Earnings Per Share, to $2.31 Per Share
(January 21, 1997), at http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/1997/12per.html (last
visited February 11, 2003). Enron’s reported net income in 2000 (before restatements) was $979
million.

© This is documented by Enron presentation materials titled “Show Me the Money!
Project Steele Earning Benefits.” The expected pre-tax operating earnings from this transaction
was approximately $133 million. The Project Steele materials in Appendix B contain the
document. EC2 000038546.

7 Nearly all of the reviewed transactions are vulnerable to attack under judicial or
administrative anti-abuse and anti-avoidance doctrines. Many of the reviewed transactions
shared common characteristics, such as claiming the same tax loss twice in order to generate a
financial statement benefit, and the shifting of tax basis from a nondepreciable asset to a
depreciable asset.

21

=== PAGE 50 ===
Viewed in their entirety, Enron’s structured transactions not only pushed the concept of
business purpose to the limit (and perhaps beyond) but also highlight several general issues about
the nature of the tax system and a corporation’s attitude towards it. Enron’s behavior illustrates
that a motivated corporation can manipulate highly technical provisions of the law to achieve
significant unintended benefits. Remarkable in many respects was Enron’s ability to parse the
law to produce a result that was contrary to its spirit and not intended by Congress or the
Treasury Department.

In transaction after transaction, Enron obtained sophisticated advice and in most instances
received assurances that the proposed transaction “should” comply with technical tax law
requirements. Often, these assurances were based on highly technical interpretations of the law
even though the transaction produced surprising and questionable results. Many of the opinions
hinged on a determination that the transaction had sufficient business purpose. Enron
represented the business purpose of the transaction, and Enron’s counsel did not bother to look
beyond the representation. Troubling is the lack of responsibility or independent assessment that
some advisors showed in evaluating Enron’s stated business purpose. In one case, the advisors
were involved in the promotion of the transaction and the creation of its ostensible “business
purpose.” It would not be surprising if this collusion also existed in other transactions.

For many transactions, Enron picked from the same small pool of outside advisors. In
some cases, if one advisor from the pool was not advising Enron in a particular deal, that advisor
advised the other party (the promoter) to the transaction. Thus did incestuous relationships
evolve among the participants in many of the reviewed transactions, with the result that Enron
even acted as an accommodation party to deals designed primarily by Enron’s advisors to benefit
others.

A critical component of many of Enron’s structured transactions was the involvement of
an accommodation party such as an Enron employee or the party promoting the transaction.
Such parties were not related to Enron from an ownership standpoint, but their interests were
aligned with Enron and they shared the same objectives as Enron for purposes of the
transactions. The tax law generally assumes that unrelated parties to a transaction are

8 The following statement by the managing partner of Enron’s primary legal counsel,
Vinson & Elkins, suggests that this minimal level of review perhaps was not unintentional.

With regard to the related party transactions, it is important to consider the role of
legal counsel. If a transaction is not illegal and it has been approved by the
appropriate levels of a corporation’s management, lawyers, whether corporate
counsel or with an outside firm, may appropriately provide the requisite legal
advice and opinions about legal issues relevant to the transactions. In doing so,
lawyers are not approving the business judgment of their clients. Likewise,
lawyers are not responsible for the accounting treatment of the transactions.

Statement of Joseph C. Dilg, managing partner at Vinson & Elkins, in testimony before

the House Committee on Energy and Commerce (March 14, 2002), available at
http://energycommerce.house.gov/107/hearings/03142002HearingS 1 1 /hearing.htm.

22

=== PAGE 51 ===
independent and therefore will negotiate the terms of a deal consistent with their best (and
selfish) interests. Typically, the tax law views parties as related by reference to entity ownership
or family relationship. However, if nominally unrelated parties have the same interests and
objectives, the paradigm breaks down. Enron’s activities show that, in general, when
transactions can be structured by parties that have the shared goal of obtaining favorable tax
treatment, the tax rules do not function as intended and may produce undesirable results.

In addition, rules that ordinarily produce sensible results generated a tax benefit for Enron
because of the way Enron utilized its own stock in many transactions. Just as the tax law
generally assumes that the interests of unrelated parties to a transaction will be adverse, the tax
law also generally assumes that a corporation uses its stock as a source of capital. Enron,
however, repeatedly used its stock in a way that yielded a financial statement benefit from a
permanent tax savings.

Paradoxically, the legislative and regulatory systems permitted Enron to enter into
transactions that policymakers either had prohibited by law or questioned by regulation.
Congress abolished the tax advantages of certain types of transactions, but nevertheless
permitted corporations such as Enron to take advantage of transitional rules to engage in the
transactions despite the imminent change to the law. Enron also was free to ignore proposed
Treasury Regulations (some of which were longstanding) that, if finalized by the Treasury,
would have stripped Enron of some of its tax positions.

Enron also excelled at making complexity an ally. Many transactions used exceedingly
complicated structures and were designed to provide tax benefits significantly into the future.
For any person attempting to review the transaction, there would be no easy way to understand
its terms or purpose. Rather, a reviewer would be required to parse details from a series of deal
documents, make assumptions about the parties’ intent in future years, and only then apply
technical rules to the transaction to test for legitimacy. In short, Enron had the incentive and the
ability to engage in unusually complicated transactions in order to preclude meaningful review.

Corporations like Enron have an inherent advantage over the IRS. Enron structured its
deals with the advice of sophisticated and experienced lawyers, investment bankers, and
accountants. Assertions of attorney-client privilege hinders the ability of the IRS to obtain many
of the most instructive documents, which impedes the IRS’s ability to audit the transaction.
Some of the transactions resulted in the payment of some income tax in the early years, with
significantly larger deductions to follow in later years. This pattern makes it less likely that the
IRS will identify and challenge the transaction. Further, Enron’s recent position as a company
with significant net operating losses worked to its advantage in IRS examination. A company
with significant losses generally is of less immediate concern to the IRS because the losses will
offset any increased taxable income arising from the audit. Thus, the IRS has less incentive to
investigate and devote resources to such examinations. Enron’s activities show that the IRS
cannot minimize the importance of loss companies on examination because to do so would
ignore a breeding ground for tax-motivated transactions that also could be used by taxpaying
companies.

Enron’s aggressive interpretation of business purpose, the cooperation of accommodation
parties, the protections provided by tax opinions, the complex design of transactions -- all were

23

=== PAGE 52 ===
factors that encouraged Enron to engage in tax-motivated transactions. Thus, Enron places the
spotlight once again on the general ineffectiveness of present law in regulating tax shelters. Tax
shelters are in many ways a product of the ambiguity of complex provisions of law, lack of
administrative guidance, or inconsistent interpretations of the law by courts. Tax shelters often
involve the juxtaposition of unrelated, incongruous Code provisions in a single transaction or a
series of connected transactions. Taxpayers use the complexities of the system to their
advantage and perform a clinical assessment of the risks and benefits of an action, often
concluding that the low risk of effective enforcement (including the low risk of penalties) easily
is outweighed by the promised benefits.” Until the costs of participating in tax-motivated
transactions are substantially increased, corporations such as Enron will continue to engage in
transactions that violate the letter or the spirit of the law.

> For detailed information of the present law rules and judicial doctrines applicable to
tax-motivated transactions and related recommendations and developments, see e.g., Joint
Committee on Taxation, Background and Present Law Relating to Tax Shelters (JCX-19-02),
March 19, 2002; Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest
Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998 (including provisions relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (JCS-3-99), July
22, 1999; Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9017) to section 6011 (October 22, 2002);
Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9018) to section 6012 (October 22, 2002); Joint
Committee on Taxation, Description of the "CARE Act of 2003," (JCX-04-03), February 3, 2003;
Symposium: Business Purpose, Economic Substance and Corporate Tax Shelters, 54 SMU L.
Rev. 1 (2001).

24

=== PAGE 53 ===
II. GENERAL FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
RELATING TO BUSINESS TAX MATTERS

A. General Findings Relating to Business Tax Matters

The Joint Committee staff believes that the transactions that are the subject of this Report
demonstrate the need for strong anti-avoidance rules to combat transactions that might satisfy the
technical requirements of the tax statutes and administrative rules, but that are conducted for
little or no purpose other than to generate income tax or financial statement benefits.
Accordingly, the Joint Committee staff makes the following findings and recommendations.

1. Cost-benefit analysis with respect to tax motivated transactions

The Joint Committee staff believes that stronger measures are necessary to discourage
transactions that lack a non-tax business purpose or economic substance. Such measures,
however designed, must significantly increase the economic risk to taxpayers of entering into
tax-motivated transactions. Under the present system, the expected tax benefits from these
transactions typically far outweigh the associated costs. Taxpayers will continue to engage in
tax-motivated transactions unless and until there is a meaningful change in this cost-benefit
analysis. At a minimum, taxpayers that engage in tax-motivated transactions should be subject
to substantial penalties.

2. Business purpose

The Joint Committee staff believes that attainment of financial statement benefits based
solely on Federal income tax savings is not a valid business purpose for purposes of evaluating a
transaction or arrangement under Federal income tax laws.

3. Accommodation parties

The tax laws should not permit the use of accommodation parties such as employees,
consultants, or advisors, to serve as a party in a transaction or arrangement to permit a taxpayer
to achieve Federal income tax benefits. The Joint Committee staff recommends that severe
penalties be imposed on the accommodation party and on the taxpayer who engages the
accommodation party.

4. Tax advisors

The Joint Committee staff is concerned about the willingness of tax advisors to render
opinions that rely on factual representations that the advisor knows, or has reason to believe, are
incorrect, incomplete, or inconsistent with the facts. Many tax-motivated transactions cannot
occur without the complicity of a tax advisor who is aware of all the relevant facts, yet chooses
to ignore them and instead relies on the taxpayer’s purported factual representations. The
Treasury Department and IRS should have a broad array of sanctions to impose on advisors who
render such opinions, and they should impose stiff sanctions on these advisors (and when
appropriate, on the advisor’s employer or partners). In addition, the relevant State licensing

25

=== PAGE 54 ===
authority should be notified when these sanctions are imposed, and the licensing authority also
should discipline the advisor as appropriate.

5. Generally accepted accounting principles relating to accounting for Federal income taxes

The Joint Committee staff is concerned that businesses are engaging in tax-motivated
transactions primarily to obtain financial accounting benefits. The accounting benefits result
solely from the manipulation of the Federal income tax laws to create permanent book-tax
differences. The Joint Committee staff further believes that this activity may be occurring
because of certain aspects of the financial accounting rules governing accounting for income tax
expense. Thus, the Joint Committee staff recommends that those responsible for promulgating
the accounting standards evaluate whether changes are warranted to the rules governing
accounting for income taxes.

6. Disclosure of tax-motivated transactions

The Joint Committee staff is concerned that the use of multiple entities in connection
with tax-motivated transactions, coupled with the inherent complexity of these transactions and
the delayed timing of the tax benefits, makes it exceedingly difficult for the Treasury Department
and the IRS to timely identify and properly evaluate these transactions. The Joint Committee
staff believes that taxpayers should be required to make a detailed disclosure of any tax-
motivated transaction on a timely basis, irrespective of whether the transaction has immediate tax
return effect.

7. Continued use of certain structured transactions
The Joint Committee staff is concerned that the publication of this Report may encourage
taxpayers and promoters to engage in transactions similar to those described in the Report. The

Joint Committee staff recommends that the Congress and Treasury Department take appropriate
action as soon as practicable.

26

=== PAGE 55 ===
B. Recommendations Relating to Corporate Tax Issues

1. Curtail duplication of losses

General rule preventing duplication of losses’”

A single economic loss should not be deducted more than once. The Joint Committee
staff recommends limiting a corporation’s basis in property acquired in a tax-free transfer (or
reorganization) to its fair market value. Alternatively, the Joint Committee staff recommends
expanding the sec. 358(h) basis reduction rule.

Specific rule preventing duplication of losses relating to real estate mortgage investment
conduit residual interests”

Under the statutory rules regarding the taxation of a real estate mortgage investment
conduit (“REMIC”), generally phantom income is allocated to REMIC residual interest holders.
The phantom income allocation inevitably creates built-in losses to the holders of the REMIC
residual interests, thus making such interests a natural component for transactions designed to
duplicate a single economic loss. As such, the Joint Committee staff recommends that either a
corporation’s basis in REMIC residual interests acquired in a tax-free transfer (or reorganization)
be limited to its fair market value or that a transferor’s basis in the stock received in exchange for
REMIC residual interests be limited to the fair market value of the REMIC residual interests.

2. Strengthen rules preventing acquisitions made to evade or avoid Federal income tax!”

Section 269 disallows certain tax benefits if a taxpayer acquires direct or indirect control
of a corporation for the principal purpose of Federal income tax evasion or avoidance. The Joint
Committee staff recommends expanding section 269 to apply to acquisitions of equity interests
in a corporation, without regard to whether such interests provide to the acquirer control of the
corporation, if the principal purpose of the acquisition is the evasion or avoidance of Federal
income tax.

The Joint Committee staff also recommends expanding section 269 to disallow tax
benefits that can be obtained through either controlling or non-controlling interests in a
corporation, if the principal purpose of the transaction in which the benefits are acquired is the
evasion or avoidance of Federal income tax.

'0 Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the descriptions of the
transactions known as Project Tanya and Project Valor in Part Three of this Report.

'l Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the descriptions of the
transactions known as Project Steele and Project Cochise in Part Three of this Report.

12 Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of the
transaction known as Project Cochise in Part Three of this Report.

27

=== PAGE 56 ===
3. Strengthen the extraordinary dividend rules”?

The extraordinary dividend rules were amended in 1997 to prevent a corporate
shareholder from structuring a redemption transaction with a related party to take advantage of
the dividends received deduction. The Joint Committee staff recommends that the extraordinary
dividend rules should be further strengthened.

4. Provide guidance on the replication of earnings and profits in a consolidated group”

A distribution is treated as a dividend to the extent of a corporation’s earnings and profits.
The Joint Committee staff believes that guidance is needed to address situations in which a
consolidated group attempts to create or replicate earnings and profits in a manner inconsistent
with the purpose of the consolidated return rules.

13 Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of the
transaction known as Project Teresa in Part Three of this Report.

4 Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of the
transaction known as Project Teresa in Part Three of this Report.

28

=== PAGE 57 ===
C. Recommendations Relating to Partnership Tax Issues
1. Strengthen disclosure of disguised sales'®

The Joint Committee staff recommends that the period for which disclosure is required
under the disguised sale regulations should be extended beyond two years, and a more detailed
disclosure of the source of permanent book-tax differences should be required. For example,
extending the disclosure requirement to seven years, the period applicable to contributions and
distributions under the pre-contribution gain rules, could make a facts and circumstances
determination by the IRS both more likely to occur and easier for the IRS to administer.

2. Strengthen partnership allocation rules!®

Partnership allocations between members of the same affiliated group (and, in general,
related parties) may not have the same economic consequences as allocations between unrelated
partners. As a result, related partners can use the partnership allocation rules inappropriately to
shift basis among assets. The Joint Committee staff recommends strengthening of the anti-abuse
rules relating to partnership allocations for property contributed to a partnership, especially in the
case of partners that are members of the same consolidated group, to ensure that the allocation
rules are not used to generate unwarranted tax benefits.

3. Provide guidance regarding transfers of partial partnership interests!”

The transfer of partial partnership interests among related partners can result in
inappropriate basis shifts among the partners. The Joint Committee staff believes that guidance
is needed regarding the apportionment of tax basis upon the transfer of a partial partnership
interest (particularly when the transfer involves related parties).

4. Provide rules for the appropriate interaction between partnership rules and corporate
stock nonrecognition rules®

The interaction of the partnership basis adjustment rules and the rules protecting a
corporation from recognizing gain on its stock can give rise to unintended tax results.
Transactions based on this interaction generally purport to increase the tax basis of depreciable
assets and to decrease, by a corresponding amount, the tax basis of the stock of a partner.

'5 Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of the
transaction known as Project Tomas in Part Three of this Report.

‘© Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of the
transaction known as Project Condor in Part Three of this Report.

'7 Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of the
transaction known as Projects Tammy I and Tammy II in Part Three of this Report.

18 Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of the
transaction known as Project Condor in Part Three of this Report.

29

=== PAGE 58 ===
Because the tax rules protect a corporation from gain on the sale of its stock (including through a
partnership), the transactions enable taxpayers to duplicate tax deductions at no economic cost.
The Joint Committee staff recommends that either (1) the rules protecting a corporation from
recognizing gain on its stock should be modified to limit the nonrecognition of any gain if the
gain is attributable to a decrease in the tax basis of the stock resulting from the partnership basis
adjustment rules, or (2) that the partnership basis adjustment rules should be altered to preclude
an increase in the basis of an asset to the extent the offsetting basis reduction would be to stock
of a partner (or related party).

In addition, the Joint Committee staff believes that the proposed regulations under section
337, relating to partnership acquisitions of stock of a corporate partner, would preclude taxpayers
from engaging in these types of transactions. The Joint Committee staff recommends that final
regulations on this subject should be issued expeditiously.

30

=== PAGE 59 ===
D. Recommendations Relating to International Tax Issues
1. Modify the rules for allocating subpart F income”

Treasury regulations contain highly mechanical rules for allocating the earnings and
profits of a controlled foreign corporation for subpart F purposes. Special allocation abuses
similar to those that have been encountered in the partnership taxation area also are possible in
the context of controlled foreign corporations under these rules. In particular, a company may
attempt to specially allocate subpart F income to tax-indifferent parties. The Joint Committee
staff believes that this tactic is inconsistent with the purposes of subpart F and that the results
that it purports to produce are inappropriate. The Joint Committee staff recommends adding an
exception to the mechanical allocation method set forth in the regulations for cases involving
allocations of earnings and profits to tax-indifferent shareholders made for tax-avoidance
purposes.

2. Modify the interaction between the subpart F rules and the passive foreign investment
company rules””

In 1997, Congress enacted rules to mitigate the complexity and uncertainty that arose
when a foreign corporation met the definitions of both the controlled foreign corporation rules of
subpart F and the passive foreign investment company rules, thus requiring shareholders to
negotiate two sets of anti-deferral rules in connection with the same investment. The 1997
legislation largely eliminated this overlap by providing that a controlled foreign corporation
generally is not treated as a passive foreign investment company with respect to a “U.S.
shareholder” of such controlled foreign corporation within the meaning of subpart F. Because
this exception from the passive foreign investment company rules is based on a person’s status as
a U.S. shareholder, as opposed to the person’s likely taxability under subpart F, situations may
arise in which a U.S. shareholder of a controlled foreign corporation with mainly passive assets
and passive income can take the position that no tax liability arises under either subpart F or the
passive foreign investment company rules.

The Joint Committee staff believes that the exception to the passive foreign investment
company rules for U.S. shareholders of controlled foreign corporations should be geared more
closely to the U.S. shareholder’s potential taxability under subpart F, as opposed to mere status
as a U.S. shareholder within the meaning of subpart F. Accordingly, the Joint Committee staff
recommends adding an exception to the 1997 overlap-elimination rule for cases in which the
likelihood that a U.S. shareholder would have to include income under subpart F is remote.

19 Burther discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of the
transaction known as Project Apache in Part Three of this Report.

20 Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of the
transaction known as Project Apache in Part Three of this Report.

31

=== PAGE 60 ===
3. Strengthen the earnings stripping rules”

The lack of final regulations under the earnings stripping tax rules has created a void in
an area in which more definitive guidance is needed. Proposed regulations provide that entities
or arrangements established with a principal purpose of avoiding the earnings stripping rules
should be recharacterized or disregarded. The Joint Committee staff believes that this proposed
anti-abuse rule would change a company’s cost-benefit assessment of certain tax-motivated
transactions, and thus recommends that the rule be finalized expeditiously.

4. Require annual information reporting with respect to disregarded entities”

Present law requires no ongoing information reporting with respect to entities that are
disregarded pursuant to a “check the box” entity classification election. Although the IRS is
alerted of the existence and classification of each entity at the time the election is made, there is
no regime of ongoing information reporting with respect to these entities. On the one hand, this
lack of separate information reporting may be appropriate, given that the entities are supposed to
be “disregarded” for Federal tax purposes pursuant to the election. Nevertheless, it is widely
recognized that the application of the “check the box” regulations in the international setting
raises a number of issues that the IRS is addressing through guidance and on audit.

The Joint Committee staff believes that a regime of annual information reporting with
respect to entities disregarded pursuant to a “check the box” election would significantly enhance
the IRS’s ability to administer the international tax rules and to identify and address specific
issues that arise in applying the “check the box” regulations in the international area.

21 Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of the
transaction known as Project Apache in Part Three of this Report.

22 Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of Enron’s
use of foreign entities in Part Three of this Report.

32

=== PAGE 61 ===
E. Recommendation Relating to Financial Asset Securitization Investment Trusts”
1. Repeal financial asset securitization investment trust rules

Recent commentary suggests that the financial asset securitization investment trust
(“FASIT”) rules, which were first enacted in 1996, are not widely used in the manner envisioned
by the Congress and thus have failed to further their intended purposes. The Joint Committee
staff believes that the abuse potential inherent in the FASIT vehicle far outweighs any beneficial
purpose that the FASIT rules may serve, and thus recommends that these rules be repealed.

23 Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of the
transaction known as Project Apache in Part Three of this Report.

33

=== PAGE 62 ===
F. Recommendation Relating to Corporate-Owned
and Trust-Owned Life Insurance”*

1. Repeal grandfather rules for pre-June 20, 1986 contracts

In light of the growth in interest incurred on debt under life insurance contracts that
remains deductible due to a grandfather rule applicable to pre-June 20, 1986 corporate-owned
and trust-owned life insurance contracts, the Joint Committee staff recommends termination of
the grandfather rule for such contracts.

4 Further discussion of this recommendation is provided in the description of Enron’s
corporate-owned and trust-owned life insurance contracts in Part Three of this Report.

34

=== PAGE 63 ===
G. Recommendations Relating to Structured Financing Transactions”
1. Modify the rules relating to the characterization and treatment of debt and equity

The proper characterization of financial instruments for Federal income tax purposes as
either debt or equity has been a longstanding problem. This problem has been exacerbated in
recent years by the escalation in the amount and variety of hybrid financial instruments that have
characteristics of both debt and equity. Therefore, the Joint Committee staff recommends that
the rules concerning the Federal income tax characterization of financial instruments as either
debt or equity should be reviewed in a comprehensive way. There are several possible
alternative approaches that are available in considering such changes to present law, including:

(1) Conform the tax characterization of hybrid financial instruments to the
characterization that is used for other reporting purposes, such as financial
accounting, so that the non-tax characterization determines the tax
characterization.

(2) Strengthen the requirements for debt characterization, similar to the approaches
proposed by the Treasury Department in 1996 and 1997, which may include
altering or more precisely articulating the debt-equity factors listed in section 385.
This approach also could involve changing the manner in which such factors are
applied so that certain financial instruments that exhibit (or lack) certain features
are presumptively characterized as equity rather than indebtedness. In any event,
section 385 should be amended to apply more broadly to interests in non-
corporate entities, as well as corporations.

(3) Provide restrictions on the proportionate amount of yield payments on hybrid
financial instruments that may be deducted as interest. The proportionate amount
of deductible yield payments could be determined under such an approach by
reference to one or more factors (or some combination thereof), such as the length
of the term to maturity of the instrument or the number of months that the issuer
could defer yield payments under the terms of the financial instrument.

(4) Reduce or eliminate the disparate taxation of interest and dividends (for both
issuers and holders of financial instruments) that creates the market for hybrid
financial instruments.

2. Modify the rules relating to disqualified indebtedness

The interest expense disallowance rules for disqualified indebtedness apply to
transactions involving stock in another corporation only if the taxpayer controls the other
corporation by virtue of owning more than 50 percent (by vote or value) of the outstanding stock
of such corporation. The Joint Committee staff recommends that the 50-percent related party
threshold under these rules should be eliminated.

25 Further discussion of these recommendations is provided in the description of Enron’s
structured financing transactions in Part Three of this Report.

35

=== PAGE 64 ===
III. PENSION AND COMPENSATION OBSERVATIONS,
FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A. General Observations with Respect to Pensions and Compensation

Enron’s stated philosophy was a pay for performance approach to compensation; those
who performed well were paid well. Enron implemented this approach with a broad array of
compensation arrangements for its executives that included base pay, bonuses, and long-term
incentive payments. In 2000, total compensation for the 200 highest paid employees of Enron
was $1.4 billion dollars ($1.2 billion of which was attributable to stock options and restricted
stock). In the same year, Enron reported $975 million of financial statement net earnings.

Enron’s approval of compensation packages for its executives rested almost entirely with
internal management. Although the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors
formally approved both the total amount of compensation paid to executives and the form of
such compensation, the Committee’s approval generally was a rubber stamp of recommendations
made by Enron’s management. Missing was an objective assessment of the value added by top
executives; compensation was typically deemed to be justified if it appeared to be consistent with
what other companies paid executives. Targets for compensation were sometimes set, but in
practice the total amount paid frequently exceeded the targets. The Compensation Committee
went through the motions of satisfying its role as objective evaluator of reasonable pay by
commissioning “independent” studies with respect to Enron’s compensation arrangements; in
some cases, the studies appeared to be designed to justify whatever compensation arrangement
management wanted to adopt.

The lack of scrutiny of compensation was particularly prevalent with respect to Enron’s
top executives, who essentially wrote their own compensation packages. In some cases,
although going through the formalities of reviewing arrangements, the Compensation Committee
merely rubber stamped what was presented. In other cases, the Compensation Committee either
never reviewed certain arrangements for executives, or performed such a cursory review that
they were not fully aware of what they were approving. For example, a former chairman of the
Compensation Committee could not remember an arrangement under which an Enron executive
was awarded a fractional interest in an airplane as a form of compensation.

There was no indication that Enron’s Compensation Committee ever rejected a special
executive compensation arrangement brought to them. Indeed, the Compensation Committee
used studies, sometimes commissioned after the fact, to justify the compensation arrangements
for top executives. As a result, Enron’s top executives earned enormous amounts of money and
even used the company as an unsecured lender. For example, from 1997 through 2001, Mr. Lay
borrowed over $106 million from Enron through a special unsecured line of credit with the
company.

Enron did not appear to maintain consistent or centralized recordkeeping with respect to
compensation arrangements in general and executive compensation in particular. Enron could
not provide documentation relating to many of Enron’s special compensation arrangements for
its top executives. When asked about compensation arrangements in interviews, current and

36

=== PAGE 65 ===
former Enron employees with responsibility for such matters had no knowledge of certain
aspects of executives’ compensation, particularly in the case of special arrangements. Although
Enron represented that it properly reported income with respect to employee compensation
arrangements, the lack of recordkeeping made it impossible to verify whether this was true.

Enron’s heavy reliance on stock-based compensation, both with respect to executives and
with respect to rank and file employees, caused significant financial loss when Enron’s stock
price collapsed. As part of a philosophy that a large portion of executive compensation should
depend on shareholder return, Enron rewarded executives with huge amounts of stock options,
restricted stock, and bonuses tied to financial earnings. In addition, a strong company culture
encouraging stock ownership by all employees led to high investments in Enron stock made by
employees through the Enron Corp. Savings Plan (the “401(k)” plan). In the end, when Enron’s
stock price plummeted, Enron’s employees and executives lost millions of dollars in retirement
benefits under Enron’s qualified plans and nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements and
through the loss of value of stock that had been received as compensation for services. Although
some executives suffered losses that appear stunning in amount, many executives also reaped
substantial gains from their compensation arrangements. Enron’s rank and file employees in
many cases lost virtually all of their retirement savings because they believed statements made
by Enron’s top executives up to the very end that Enron was viable and that Enron’s stock price
would turn around.

37

=== PAGE 66 ===
B. Findings and Recommendations Relating to
Pension and Compensation Arrangements

1. Cash balance plan

In converting the Enron Retirement Plan into a cash balance plan, Enron did not adopt
many of the plan features that gained media attention in the 1990s when several large plans were
converted to cash balance plans. Enron did not adopt a “wearaway” and took steps to protect the
expectation interests of plan participants close to retirement under the old plan formula. The
review of the plan has been pending in the IRS National Office for almost three years pursuant to
a 1999 IRS moratorium on the issuance of determination letters for cash balance conversions
pending clarification of applicable legal requirements. The Treasury Department has recently
issued proposed regulations which, when finalized, would address many, but not all issues
relating to cash balance plans.

The Joint Committee staff believes that the lack of clear guidance with respect to cash
balance plan conversions and cash balance plans in general creates uncertainty for employers and
employees. Thus, the Joint Committee staff recommends that clear rules with respect to such
plans should be adopted in the near future.

2. Blackout periods under qualified plans

Enron implemented a change of recordkeepers under the Enron Savings Plan in October
and November of 2001. As part of this change, plan participants experienced a “blackout”
period of approximately two and one-half weeks during which investment changes could not be
made. During this time, the price of Enron stock fell from $15.40 to $9.98.

Changes in plan recordkeepers or other third-party service providers is a normal part of
qualified retirement plan operations. The Joint Committee staff review of the change in
recordkeepers with respect to the Enron Savings Plan indicates that Enron had legitimate reasons
for changing recordkeeepers, and undertook an extensive search in order to find a new
recordkeeper that would meet its needs.

The main issue raised with respect to the change in recordkeepers under the Enron
Savings Plan is whether plan fiduciaries, including the Enron Savings Plan Administrative
Committee, acted in accordance with their fiduciary obligations in implementing the blackout
period or whether they should have stopped the blackout from occurring given the falling price
of Enron stock and its financial circumstances. Members of the Administrative Committee
interviewed by the Joint Committee staff indicated that they viewed their responsibilities as
relatively narrow, and did not focus on the possible effects of the proposed blackout on plan
participants until after the blackout had begun. Whether there was a breach of fiduciary
responsibilities in this case will be resolved through litigation.

The blackout also raises questions regarding whether plan participants received notice of
the blackout sufficient to allow them to make appropriate decisions in anticipation of the
blackout. The information reviewed by the Joint Committee staff indicates that Enron provided
a variety of advance notices to plan participants explaining the proposed blackout. The J oint
Committee staff did not undertake to review whether all participants in fact received notice of

38

=== PAGE 67 ===
the blackout; however, the Joint Committee staff determined that not all participants received the
same notices. In particular, certain active employees received additional reminders of the
blackout that were not sent to other participants.

The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, enacted after the Enron bankruptcy, includes a notice
requirement with respect to blackout periods under qualified plans. Thus, the Joint Committee
staff does not recommend further legislative changes in this area at this time.

3. Investments under the Enron Savings Plan

Many Enron Savings Plan participants lost considerable amounts of retirement savings
due to a high level of investment in Enron stock. Plan design features which required Enron’s
matching contributions to be invested in Enron stock contributed to the significant investment in
Enron stock. Other factors may also have played a role, including a lack of understanding of the
importance of diversification and the actions (or inactions) of plan fiduciaries. The Joint
Committee staff believes that an overwhelming factor was a corporate culture that actively
promoted investment in Enron stock.

The Joint Committee staff believes that the importance of diversification of retirement
savings cannot be overemphasized. The Joint Committee staff recommends that that a variety of
changes should be made to reduce the likelihood that participants in plans that allow participant
directed investments will have high concentrations of assets in a single investment.

The Joint Committee staff recommends that plans should provide participants with
investment education in a manner consistent with fiduciary standards. This should include
periodic notices describing sound investment practices and individualized notices to plan
participants whose plan investments are over concentrated in a single asset.

The Joint Committee staff recommends that plans should not be permitted to require that
employee elective deferrals or after-tax contributions be invested in employer securities. In
addition, plan participants should be given greater opportunity to diversify the investment of
employer matching and certain other employer contributions made in the form of employer
securities.

The Joint Committee staff recommends certain changes with respect to ERISA fiduciary
rules. The experience at Enron points out the difficulties that may arise when individuals play
more than one role, particularly roles as a fiduciary and as an executive of the employer. These
two roles may conflict and cause confusion among plan participants. The experience at Enron
demonstrates that plan fiduciaries may have difficulty determining what actions are consistent
with their dual roles. The Joint Committee staff believes that fiduciary rules should apply to the
statements of senior executives, whether or not they are otherwise plan fiduciaries, regarding
qualified plans or plan investments. The Department of Labor should also take steps to educate
plan fiduciaries regarding their fiduciary duties.

Because of the strong corporate culture that encouraged Enron stock ownership by Enron
employees, it is not clear that the outcome would have been any different if these measures had
been in place prior to the bankruptcy. Further, Enron is not alone it its high concentration of
investment in employer stock. A recent study of 219 large 401(k) plans found 25 plans that had

39

=== PAGE 68 ===
over 60 percent of their assets invested in employer securities.° Given these factors, the Joint
Committee staff is concerned that, absent legal restrictions on the amount of employer securities
that can be held in defined contribution plans, situations such as Enron’s may occur again. Such
restrictions would involve a major policy change from present law.

4. Nonqualified deferred compensation

Through Enron’s nonqualified deferred compensation programs, executives were able to
defer more than $150 million in compensation from 1998 through 2001. The key motivating
factor in deferring compensation was the desire of Enron’s employees to avoid current income
inclusion with respect to their compensation. In the weeks preceding the bankruptcy, apparently
in accordance with the terms of the deferred compensation arrangement, Enron paid executives
$53 million in accelerated distributions of nonqualified deferred compensation. In addition to
the accelerated distributions, participants were able to direct investment of their accounts and to
make subsequent elections to change the timing of distributions.

The nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements of Enron illustrate the common
practice of allowing executives to defer tax on income, but also to maintain security and control
over the amounts. Given the significant amounts of compensation deferred by Enron executives,
it appears that the risks and restrictions associated with deferring compensation were not viewed
as impediments to deferral.

Enron’s deferred compensation plans allowed executives to receive benefits similar to
those of qualified plans. To the extent that it is possible for executives to defer taxes and have
security and flexibility through nonqualified arrangements, this undermines the qualified
retirement plan system. If executives can obtain the result they desire through the use of
nonqualified plans and arrangements, there will be less incentive for companies to maintain
qualified plans, which will result in rank and file employees losing pension coverage.

Enron allowed its executives to defer significant amounts of compensation even though
Enron had to forego a current deduction with respect to such amounts. The fact that Enron was
apparently indifferent to the deferral of its deduction provides further support for the need for
changes to the tax treatment of nonqualified deferred compensation. Changes to the present-law

rules regarding the taxation of deferred compensation would reduce the amount of income
deferred.

Rules should be developed to require current income inclusion in the case of plan features
that give taxpayers effective control over amounts deferred. The Joint Committee staff believes
that the existence of plan provisions that allow accelerated distributions, participant-directed
investment, or subsequent elections should result in current income inclusion. In addition, the
Joint Committee staff believes that consideration should given to whether rabbi trusts are
appropriate for deferred compensation and whether the rules relating to such arrangements

26 See, Enron Debacle Will Force Clean Up of Company Stock Use in DC Plans, DC
Plan Investing (Institute of Management & Administration), at 1-2 (Dec. 11, 2001).

40

=== PAGE 69 ===
should be tightened. The use of programs such as Enron’s deferral of stock options gains and
restricted stock programs should not be allowed.

In addition, the Joint Committee staff believes that section 132 of the Revenue Act of
1978 should be repealed. This would allow the Treasury Department to issue much needed
guidance in the nonqualified deferred compensation area. The lack of guidance over the last 25
years has given taxpayers latitude to use creative nonqualified deferred compensation
arrangements that push the limit of what is allowed under the law.

The Joint Committee staff also believes that reporting of deferred amounts should be
required to provide the IRS greater information regarding such arrangements.

5. Stock-based compensation

Enron utilized considerable amounts of stock-based compensation, including stock
options, restricted stock, and phantom stock arrangements. The use of stock-based compensation
was not limited to executives. Enron had all-employee stock option arrangements and, as
described above, also facilitated the ownership of Enron stock through Enron’s qualified plans.
The use of stock-based compensation was part of Enron’s overall compensation philosophy, and
also reflected the views of the Compensation Committee that a significant amount of executive
compensation should be dependent on shareholder return.

The amount of compensation generated from stock-based compensation arrangements
was significant, and increased dramatically over the period 1998 through 2000. Over this period,
Enron’s deduction attributable to stock options increased by more than 1,000 percent; from $125
million in 1998 to over $1.5 billion in 2000. Income attributable to restricted stock for the top-
200 most highly compensated employees rose from $24 million in 1998 to $132 million in 2000.

Although the intent of many of Enron’s stock-based compensation programs was to align
the interests of shareholders and executives, the Enron experience raises a potential conflict
between short-term earnings from which executives can reap immediate rewards and longer-term
interests of shareholders.

In addition, the use of stock options highlights the differences between the treatment of
stock options for Federal income tax purposes and accounting purposes. The accounting rules
and the income tax rules have different purposes, and therefore the two sets of rules may be
necessary in order to accomplish their intended purposes.

In implementing its stock-based compensation programs, Enron appeared generally to
follow IRS published guidance. Thus, no recommendations are made with respect to such
programs.

6. Employee loans
While Enron did not have a formal policy regarding employee loans, it nevertheless made

a variety of loans to certain executives, including top management. The loans raise Federal tax
issues as well as corporate governance issues.

41

=== PAGE 70 ===
In some cases, loan agreements provided that the loan would be forgiven if the executive
stayed with Enron for a certain period of time. For example, such an arrangement was provided
for Mr. Skilling.”” While these arrangements were treated by Enron and the executives
involved as loans, it is difficult to distinguish such arrangements factually from the pre-
bankruptcy bonuses paid by Enron, which had to be repaid if the employee did not remain with
Enron for a certain period of time and which were treated by Enron as taxable compensation.
Loans of this type raise the question of whether the arrangement at the outset should have been
treated as taxable compensation.

Other loans did not have a provision regarding forgiveness, but were forgiven by Enron.
In such cases, the amount forgiven was treated as compensation to the executives.

The loan transactions raise corporate governance issues of whether corporate funds are in
essence being used for personal purposes. A line of credit for Mr. Lay provides an example of
the issues raised. Pursuant to his $7.5 million line of credit, in a series of 25 transactions in 2001
alone, Mr. Lay withdrew a total of over $77 million (all but $7.5 million of which was repaid).
The total amount withdrawn under the line of credit was over $106 million; over $94 million of
this amount was repaid with Enron stock. Mr. Lay’s attorneys have stated that the loan
transactions related to Mr. Lay’s personal investment.

The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 contains a prohibition on executive loans. Thus, the
Joint Committee staff is not making any recommendation regarding loans at this time.

7. Split-dollar life insurance contracts

Enron had split-dollar life insurance contracts for three top executives, ranging from $5
million to $30 million of coverage. The Treasury Department has issued notices and proposed
regulations offering more detailed guidance than was previously available with respect to split
dollar life insurance. This guidance generally requires the inclusion of income of the value of
the economic benefit received by the employee under the arrangement. This guidance provides
clear rules and should be finalized expeditiously.

§. Limitation on deduction of compensation in excess of $1 million

The $1 million deduction limitation on the compensation of top executives did not appear
to have a major affect the overall structure of Enron’s compensation arrangements or the total
amount of compensation paid to Enron employees. For 1998 through 2000, total compensation
for Enron’s top executives was $433.6 million. Although most of this compensation was treated
by Enron as qualifying for the exception for performance-based compensation (86 percent),
Enron paid a significant amount of nondeductible compensation during this period ($48.5 million
which was11 percent of total compensation).”* Given Enron’s net operating loss carryovers, the

27 Mr. Skilling did not remain with Enron for the period specified in his loan agreement,
and he repaid the loan. According to Enron, some interest on the loan is still outstanding.

8 As explained in this Report, the compensation numbers presented here are

approximate, due to inconsistencies in information obtained from Enron. These numbers are
from information provided by Enron to the IRS.

42

=== PAGE 71 ===
nondeductiblity of this compensation may not have had a significant impact on Enron’s overall
tax liability.

The $1 million deduction limitation was designed to address corporate governance
concerns that top executives were receiving excessive compensation. The experience with Enron
indicates that the limitation is not effective in achieving its purposes. Taxpayers may choose to
pay nondeductible compensation, and accept the potential adverse tax consequences. In the case
of Enron, there may in fact be little adverse tax impact.

The Joint Committee staff recommends that the limitation be repealed, and that any

concerns regarding the amount and types of compensation be addressed through laws other than
the Federal income tax laws.

43

=== PAGE 72 ===
PART TWO: GENERAL BACKGROUND INFORMATION
I. BACKGROUND AND METHODOLOGY

A. Background Information Relating to
Joint Committee on Taxation Staff Investigation of Enron

Letter to Joint Committee on Taxation staff directing investigation of Enron

On February 15, 2002, Senators Max Baucus and Charles E. Grassley, then Chairman
and Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Finance (“Senate Finance Committee”),
directed the staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation (“Joint Committee staff”) to undertake a
review of Enron’s Federal tax returns, tax information, and any other information deemed
relevant by the Joint Committee staff to assist the Senate Finance Committee in evaluating
whether the Federal tax laws facilitated any of the events or transactions that preceded Enron’s
bankruptcy. The letter indicated that press reports had raised troubling questions about Enron,
including the use of entities in tax haven countries, other special purpose entities, and
questionable tax shelter arrangements. The letter stated that the Joint Committee staff should, as
part of the review, examine the adequacy of present tax law, particularly in the areas of tax
shelters and offshore entities.

The letter also directed the Joint Committee staff to include a review of the compensation
arrangements of Enron employees, including tax-qualified retirement plans, nonqualified
deferred compensation arrangements, and other arrangements, and to analyze the factors that
may have contributed to any loss of benefits and the extent to which losses were experienced by
different categories of employees. A copy of the letter from Senators Baucus and Grassley to
Ms. Lindy L. Paull, Chief of Staff of the Joint Committee, is included in Appendix A to this
Report.

Senators Baucus and Grassley directed that the Joint Committee staff conduct the Enron
investigation pursuant to the authority provided to the Joint Committee under section 8022 of the
Internal Revenue Code.” They asked that the Joint Committee staff transmit its findings and
recommendations as soon as practicable.

9 Section 8022(1)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (the ““Code”) provides that
the Joint Committee will conduct such investigations with respect to the Federal tax system as
the Joint Committee may deem necessary. Code section 8021 authorizes the Joint Committee to
obtain and inspect tax returns and return information (as specified in sec. 6103(f)). In addition,
section 8023 authorizes the Joint Committee (or the Chief of Staff of the Joint Committee), upon
approval of the Chairman or Vice-Chairman, to secure tax returns, tax return information, or data
directly from the Internal Revenue Service or any other executive agency for the purpose of
making investigations, reports, and studies relating to internal revenue tax matters, including
investigations of the Internal Revenue Service’s administration of the tax laws.

44

=== PAGE 73 ===
Disclosure agreement

On January 30, 2002, staff of the Senate Finance Committee, Joint Committee staff, and
lawyers from Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP (“Skadden Arps”)? met to discuss
whether Enron would consent to the public disclosure of its tax returns and return information in
connection with a Congressional review of the role that Federal taxes may have played in the
Enron bankruptcy. This meeting set in motion a series of interactions, during February of 2002,
among the staff of the Senate Finance Committee, the Chief of Staff of the Joint Committee, and
Skadden Arps to negotiate a disclosure agreement relating to the Joint Committee staff
investigation. A representative from the Office of the Senate Legal Counsel also participated in
the negotiations. The disclosure agreement was executed on March 6, 2002, by Mr. Raymond
M. Bowen, Jr., Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of Enron Corp., Senator
Baucus, Senator Grassley, and Ms. Paull.”!

Under the terms of the disclosure agreement, Enron agreed to provide upon request to the
Senate Finance Committee and the Joint Committee copies of all Federal tax returns and related
information of Enron and of affiliated and related entities not included in Enron’s consolidated
returns. Enron retained the right under the disclosure agreement to elect to assert any applicable
privilege or legal objection provided that such assertion would be accompanied by a document-
by-document index sufficiently detailed to enable the Senate Finance Committee and the Joint
Committee to evaluate the assertion.”

3° Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP (“Skadden Arps”) represents Enron in
connection with Congressional investigations and other matters.

31 A copy of the disclosure agreement is included in Appendix A to this Report.

32 During the course of the Joint Committee staff investigation, Enron (through its
counsel Skadden Arps) did not generally raise an issue of privilege or legal objection with
respect to any document requested by the Joint Committee staff. Enron made the following
statement in each of the letters addressed to the Joint Committee staff: “The enclosed documents
are being provided to you in accordance with the terms of the Disclosure Agreement entered into
by and among the Senate Committee on Finance, the Joint Committee on Taxation and the
Company as of March 7, 2002. With this production, the Company does not intend to provide a
general waiver of the attorney-client, attorney work product or other applicable privileges, and
does not waive those privileges as to other documents not produced here.” Enron did assert
privilege in a letter to Senate Finance Committee staff dated May 8, 2002, with respect to certain
matters contained in minutes of the Board of Directors from August 2001 through January 2002.
Enron asserted its privilege by redacting certain portions of the minutes that Enron asserted
related to (1) communications with counsel or among counsel, or involving work product of
counsel, relating to discussions or handling of government and congressional investigations; and
(2) communications with counsel or among counsel, or involving work product of counsel,
relating to discussions or handling of litigation. In the letter, Enron stated “Other privileged
material, outside these two narrow exceptions, has not been redacted in keeping with the
Company’s past practice in this matter.”

45

=== PAGE 74 ===
The disclosure agreement required the Senate Finance Committee and the Joint
Committee to seek tax returns and return information for years after 1995 from the Internal
Revenue Service (“IRS”) and to request such information from Enron only to the extent either
Committee was unable to obtain the information expeditiously from the IRS.

The disclosure agreement set forth the terms and conditions under which Enron agreed to
the public disclosure of information collected by the Senate Finance Committee and the Joint
Committee. The first part of the disclosure agreement related to Enron’s tax returns and return
information.’ In the case of Enron’s tax returns and return information, obtained by the Finance
Committee or Joint Committee pursuant to section 6103,*4 Enron consented to disclosure only
through official reports, meetings, or hearings of either the Senate Finance Committee or the
Joint Committee. Any other disclosure of such information is prohibited and would violate
section 6103 because it would constitute a disclosure outside the agreement. In the case of tax
returns and return information of Enron for years after 1995, the Senate Finance Committee and
Joint Committee further agreed to make no public disclosure before June 10, 2002.

The second part of the disclosure agreement related to all other documents and
information (other than tax returns and return information obtained from the IRS). Under the
disclosure agreement, the Senate Finance Committee and Joint Committee agreed that they
would not disclose other nonpublic documents or information obtained from Enron, except
through official reports, meetings, or hearings. In addition, the Senate Finance Committee and
Joint Committee agreed that neither Committee would disclose before June 10, 2002, any such
nonpublic information for years after 1995, which would be return information if it were in the
possession of the IRS.

33 Under sec. 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (the “Code”), the returns and
return information of a taxpayer are confidential. However, a taxpayer can consent to the
disclosure of information that otherwise would be subject to sec. 6103.

34 Sec. 6103 only applies to returns and return information obtained from the IRS.
Information provided directly by Enron, including tax returns, is not subject to sec. 6103. As
noted above, the Senate Finance Committee and the Joint Committee agreed that they would first
attempt to obtain tax returns and return information for years after 1995 from the IRS.

46

=== PAGE 75 ===
B. Methodology and Scope of Joint Committee Staff Investigation

In general

This section outlines the methodology and scope of the Joint Committee staff
investigation of Enron. This Report attempts to describe the events that occurred over time at
Enron both with respect to its Federal tax situation and with respect to its compensation
arrangements. To understand the information and analysis that is provided in this Report, it is
useful to understand the way in which the investigation was conducted.

The Joint Committee staff did not follow the Federal rules of evidence that would apply
in a court proceeding in conducting its investigation. Thus, documents provided to, and
reviewed by, the Joint Committee staff would not necessarily be admissible in a court of law.
Similarly, with respect to interviews conducted by the Joint Committee staff, the individuals
interviewed were not under oath at the time of their interviews. In some instances, the
individuals made statements that would constitute hearsay in a court of law.

Enron agreed to cooperate with the Joint Committee staff investigation. Enron complied
with requests for information from the Joint Committee staff through the voluntary production of
documents.*> The Joint Committee staff cannot represent that it was able to review all
documents relating to a transaction in which Enron engaged or all information relating to other
aspects of the Joint Committee investigation. During the course of the Joint Committee staff
investigation, Enron was complying with document requests relating to its bankruptcy filing and
other Federal investigations; thus, the company was responding to numerous document requests
at the same time. In some instances, particularly with respect to executive compensation matters,
Enron’s recordkeeping was either abysmal or company representatives who compiled the
information failed to provide relevant documentation.

Throughout this Report, specific information i is provided as it was contained in
documents provided by Enron or the IRS.*° In many instances, the documents provided to the
Joint Committee staff contained data and other information as of the time at which a transaction
occurred. The Joint Committee staff could not independently verify the accuracy of this
information in all cases; for purposes of this Report, the Joint Committee staff has used the
information as it was provided. Furthermore, in many cases, information that may have been

35 Throughout this Report, information contained in documents provided by Enron is
referred to with a Bates-stamp numbering system (e.g., EC 00001234) used by Enron to identify
the documents. Certain of these documents have also been included in the Appendices to this
Report, as noted throughout the Report. It should be noted that Enron’s counsel Skadden Arps
responded to requests for information on behalf of Enron.

36 Certain documents received by the Joint Committee staff in connection with the
investigation are included in Appendices to this Report. Handwritten notes on these documents
are not those of Joint Committee staff; in most cases, the author of the handwritten notes is not
identified.

47

=== PAGE 76 ===
accurate when included in a document may subsequently have become inaccurate due to
subsequent events such as Enron’s restatement of its earnings.

Despite these limitations, the Joint Committee staff believes that its investigation
provides a useful in-depth examination of some of the transactions into which Enron entered, as
well as an in-depth examination of Enron’s compensation structures. The information gathered
enabled the Joint Committee staff to prepare a detailed discussion of specific transactions and
issues to provide an insight into how large corporations might manage their tax liabilities (see
Part Three of this Report, below). The discussion outlines the methods and some of the complex
transactions that Enron used to manage its Federal income tax liabilities. The transactions that
were reviewed by the Joint Committee staff were identified from a variety of sources, including
interviews with current and former Enron employees, meetings with the IRS, and published
reports relating to Enron. However, the Joint Committee staff cannot represent that this Report
identifies and analyzes all transactions in which Enron engaged that might be of interest to
policymakers or the IRS. The sheer volume of information relating to Enron made available to
the Joint Committee staff, the fact that the issues associated with a company the size of Enron are
so broad, and the difficulty faced in attempting to identify specific transactions from the face of a
tax return as complex as Enron’s necessarily limits the ability to identify all of the transactions in
which Enron engaged.””

It should be noted that this Report identifies financial accounting benefits that Enron
claimed in connection with certain of its tax-motivated transactions. It was beyond the scope of
the Joint Committee staff investigation to evaluate the validity of any of the claimed financial
accounting benefits. Therefore, the financial benefits are presented as claimed.

The review also led the Joint Committee staff to make certain general observations about
Enron that are contained in Part One of this Report, above; while these observations relate
specifically to Enron, they highlight some of the systemic issues and problems facing
policymakers and the IRS, especially with respect to large corporations.

The following discussion details the work done by the Joint Committee staff in
connection with this investigation.

Overview of chronology of Joint Committee staff investigation

The Joint Committee staff began its investigation of Enron in February 2002, prior to
execution of the disclosure agreement with Enron. On February 25, 2002, the Joint Committee
staff made an initial document request to the IRS. In the letter to the IRS, the Joint Committee
staff requested copies of all Federal tax returns (including amended returns) for Enron and other
entities in which Enron had an equity interest for tax years from 1985 to the present, including
supporting workpapers, and other information in the IRS’ possession including, but not limited
to, IRS master file information from 1985 to the present, information concerning Enron’s

37 In some cases, documents reviewed by the Joint Committee staff provided inconsistent
information relating to certain transactions. In such cases, the Joint Committee staff attempted to
develop the most reasonable description of the transaction.

48

=== PAGE 77 ===
involvement in tax shelter transactions, Federal tax litigation in which Enron has been involved,
and information relating to Enron’s involvement with specific transactions and entities. In
addition, the letter requested information relating to the qualified retirement plans and
compensation arrangements of Enron including, but not limited to, copies of all annual returns
relating to the qualified retirement plans, copies of any IRS information relating to such plans,
and information relating to nonqualified deferred compensation programs.

On February 27, 2002, the Joint Committee staff was briefed in Washington, D.C., on the
history of IRS involvement with Enron by IRS personnel from the IRS National Office in
Washington, D.C., and IRS personnel from Houston who were involved in the examinations of
Enron’s tax returns. At the same time, IRS personnel briefed Joint Committee staff on specific
information contained in the Joint Committee’s first document request and the logistics of
transmitting this information to the IRS National Office.

The Joint Committee staff made an initial document request to Enron on March 12, 2002.
This document request related to Enron’s Federal tax returns and business operations and did not
request information relating to the qualified pension plan and other compensation arrangements
of Enron. Pursuant to the terms of the disclosure agreement, the letter requested copies of
Enron’s Federal tax returns for the 1985-1995 period,*® as well as other information relating to
Enron’s business operations.

Pursuant to a request made by Enron, the Joint Committee staff met on April 23, 2002, in
Washington, DC, with representatives from Skadden Arps and two employees of Enron”? to
discuss the Joint Committee staff’s first document request and the parameters of the Joint
Committee staff investigation. Enron’s employees indicated that full compliance with the first
Joint Committee document request would produce 3,500 to 5,000 boxes of information for the
period requested. Much of the material requested was located at an off-site storage location in
Houston, Texas, with a third-party contractor. The Enron employees argued that it would be too
costly to produce the documentation requested by the Joint Committee staff. As a result of this
meeting, the Joint Committee staff agreed to narrow the first document request in order to
produce a manageable request for documentation relating to business operations of Enron
relevant to the Joint Committee investigation.

On April 25, 2002, the Joint Committee staff made a first document request to Enron
relating to qualified plans and compensation arrangements.

38 As mentioned above, the disclosure agreement required the Joint Committee staff to
attempt to secure Enron’s tax returns for years after 1995 from the IRS.

° Enron employees in attendance at the meeting were Mr. Jordan H. Mintz and Mr.
Edward R. Coats.

49

=== PAGE 78 ===
On June 7, 2002, at Enron’s request, lawyers from Skadden Arps and Enron employees”
met with Joint Committee staff to make a presentation concerning information requested by the
Joint Committee staff and information on certain structured transactions and other significant
transactions in which Enron engaged.”! During this presentation, the Enron employees provided
an oral description, with accompanying written material, of the structured transactions that are
addressed in depth in Part Three, below, of this Report.

During May, June, and July of 2002, the Joint Committee staff conducted an extensive
review of documents provided by Enron and the IRS in response to the Joint Committee staff
document requests.

On July 16, 2002, the Joint Committee staff interviewed Mr. Robert J. Hermann, Former
Vice President and Director of Taxes, for Enron Corp.”

During August through November of 2002, the Joint Committee staff conducted
interviews in Houston, Texas, and Washington, D.C., of current and former Enron employees,
certain members of Enron’s Board of Directors, and certain outside counsel to Enron. Also
during this time frame, the Joint Committee staff continued to review documents received from
Enron, the IRS, the Department of Labor, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, and others
in connection with the investigation.

In the course of its investigation, the Joint Committee staff received periodic briefings
from the IRS with respect to the status of the IRS review of ee s 1996 to 2001 tax returns for
purposes of filing a proof of claim with the bankruptcy court.? The Joint Committee staff also
received periodic briefings from the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation and the Department
of Labor with respect to Enron’s pension plans.

4° In attendance at the meeting were Enron employees Jordan Mintz, Edward Coats, and
James Ginty, lawyers from Enron’s counsel (Skadden Arps and Weil Gotschal & Manges LLP),
lawyers from Alston & Bird LLP (counsel for the Enron Examiner).

“| The company presentation and appendix thereto are contained in Appendix A to this
Report.

* The Joint Committee staff contacted Mr. Hermann after his name appeared in a May
22, 2002, Washington Post article that discussed the structured transactions in which Enron
engaged. April Witt and Peter Behr, Enron’s Other Strategy: Taxes; Internal Papers Reveal
How Complex Deals Boosted Profits by $1 Billion, The Washington Post (May 22, 2002) at A-1.
The article and the interview with Mr. Hermann provided useful information for this Report. A
follow-up telephone interview of Mr. Hermann took place on December 4, 2002.

*® The IRS’ deadline for filing a proof of claim regarding Enron’s tax liabilities with the
bankruptcy court is March 31, 2003. The Joint Committee staff has, in some cases, chosen not to
describe or discuss certain aspects of the investigation if the staff determined that doing so could
jeopardize the IRS’ interests in Enron’s pending bankruptcy proceedings.

50

=== PAGE 79 ===
Review of Enron’s tax returns

The Joint Committee staff requested Enron’s consolidated Federal tax returns for all
years since 1985. Each of these tax returns contains thousands of pages of schedules and
attachments. As noted in Table 4, below, since 1997, Enron Corp. prepared more than 1,000

Federal tax returns each year with respect to affiliated and other entities in which Enron held an
interest.

51

=== PAGE 80 ===
Table 4.-Enron’s Federal Tax Returns*

1997 1998 1999 2000
Total number of returns prepared for Enron 274 333 502 713
consolidated tax return
Total number of returns prepared for entities filed 58 164 178 190
outside of the Enron consolidated tax return**
Total number of entities/branches included in 628 842 1,048 1,485
foreign information returns
Total number of entities/branches included in 42 66 94 98
partnership returns
Total Number of Federal Tax Returns 1,002 1,405 1,822 2,486

Source: Enron presentation to Joint Committee staff, June 7, 2002, included in Appendix B to this Report.
* Includes pro-forma returns for check-the-box, accounting, and legal branches.
** Approximately 15-20 separate company or consolidated returns.

In addition, the Joint Committee staff was provided access by the IRS to returns of
partnerships and other entities that were not legally related to Enron, but with which Enron had
significant relationships. For example, in some instances, Enron may not have held an interest in
a partnership engaged in a transaction with Enron; however, partners in the partnership were
high-ranking Enron employees.

The proliferation of Federal tax returns prepared by Enron (note, for example, the 36
percent increase in returns from 1999 to 2000) is consistent with trends the Joint Committee staff
observed with respect to the operations of the company. See, for example, the discussion in Part
Three,V., below, about the increases in the numbers of off-shore entities utilized by Enron.

As Table 4, above, demonstrates, the scope of Enron’s activities, and the number of
entities associated with Enron Corp., was quite large in the period before it sought bankruptcy
protection. Enron Corp. and members of its consolidated group“ also held interests in hundreds
of other entities that were not themselves included in the consolidated return. For example, in
Enron’s international operations, approximately 1,300 foreign entities were established, a
majority of which were inactive.*> In addition, Enron and its numerous corporate subsidiaries
entered into transactions for which special-purpose entities were formed. The structured tax-
motivated transactions and structured financing transactions in which Enron affiliates engaged
involved the use of dozens of legal entities.“ As a result of the broad scope of Enron’s group

“4 ‘An affiliated group of corporations may elect to file a consolidated return in lieu of
separate returns. An affiliated group means one or more chains of included corporations
connected with a common parent, if stock ownership rules requiring 80-percent voting and value
are met. Includible corporations do not include foreign corporations; partnerships are not
included in a consolidated return. Secs. 1501 and 1504.

45 “Enron Corp. Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation, June 7, 2002,” at 42.

4© These transactions, and the entities involved in them, are described (with diagrams) in
Part Three of this Report.

52


=== PAGE 81 ===
and the numerous consolidated and nonconsolidated entities in which Enron had an interest, the
Joint Committee staff took the broad approach of examining transactions and patterns of
compensatory arrangements in which Enron engaged, rather than examining Enron’s structure or
tax posture on an entity-by-entity basis.

In conducting its review, the Joint Committee staff did not conduct the equivalent of an
IRS examination of Enron’s tax returns. Rather, the staff examined certain tax-driven
transactions of Enron that raised issues of tax policy and interpretation of the tax law. The staff
focused on these types of transactions rather than attempting generally to examine the activities
of Enron. An attempt to duplicate the type of work that the IRS performs when examining a tax
return for a corporation as large and complex as Enron would have required staffing, time, and
examination expertise well beyond that available to the Joint Committee staff.

The Joint Committee staff used Enron’s Federal tax returns as a resource to verify
information provided by the IRS and Enron. For example, the Joint Committee staff has
provided a book-to-tax reconciliation for certain years, the information for which was obtained
from Enron’s Federal tax returns. This book-to-tax reconciliation shows how Enron’s book
income was translated to taxable income on its Federal tax returns.

Document requests

The Joint Committee staff made seven written document requests (including requests for
information contained on other forms of media (e.g., videotapes and CD-ROMs)) to Enron
during the course of its investigation. Enron responded in 16 separate letters prepared by its
counsel, Skadden Arps. The document production from Enron totaled more than 100 boxes of
information.

The Joint Committee staff requested documents and information from the IRS on at least
six occasions. The IRS responses to these requests totaled more than 40 boxes of information.

On March 6, 2002, the Joint Committee staff requested documents and other information
from the Department of Labor relating to Enron’s qualified plans and other compensation
arrangements within the Department of Labor’s jurisdiction. Certain materials were provided to
the Joint Committee staff by the Department of Labor during the summer of 2002. On October
1, 2002, a follow-up letter was sent to the Department of Labor. On October 11, 2002, the
Department of Labor provided additional documents in response to the Joint Committee staff’s
requests.

On June 6, 2002, the Joint Committee staff met with staff of the Permanent
Subcommittee on Investigations of the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs with respect
to the Subcommittee’s investigation relating to Enron. The Joint Committee staff was afforded
the opportunity to review documents the Subcommittee had collected that might be relevant to
the Joint Committee staff investigation.

Interviews of individuals relevant to the Enron investigation

The Joint Committee staff considered interviews with current and former Enron
employees and other individuals with connections to Enron to be an important element of its

53

=== PAGE 82 ===
investigation. Between July 16, 2002, and January 23, 2003, the Joint Committee staff
conducted 46 interviews of individuals with information relevant to the Joint Committee staff
investigation."” Generally, each interviewee was asked a standard set of questions based upon
the individual’s particular knowledge of Enron. Some of the interviews were conducted by
telephone, but many were conducted in person in Houston, Texas, and Washington, D.C.

In some cases, individuals who the Joint Committee staff requested to interview were not
available. Some individuals refused to cooperate with the Joint Committee staff investigation.
Some individuals did not respond to repeated requests for an interview.

The Joint Committee staff who conducted the interviews took notes, but generally did not
record the interviews. After each interview, the Joint Committee staff compiled their notes into a
single interview record. These interview records have been used extensively in this Report to
detail the activities of Enron and, in some cases, the motivation or purpose for Enron’s activities.

It is important to note that the individuals interviewed by the Joint Committee staff were
not under oath. To the extent individuals made statements that were inconsistent with statements
made by others or with documents provided by Enron or other sources, the Joint Committee staff
attempted to resolve the inconsistency through follow-up interviews or further document review.
In some unresolved cases, the Joint Committee ultimately had to use its best judgment to resolve
inconsistencies.

Appendix A to this Report contains a list of individuals the Joint Committee staff
interviewed and their relationship to Enron. The document in Appendix A also contains a listing
of certain individuals who did not agree to the Joint Committee staff’s request for an interview.

Joint Committee staff travel

Joint Committee staff made four trips to Houston, Texas in connection with its
investigation (during March, August, and September of 2002). During these trips, the Joint
Committee staff met with IRS personnel from Houston and Dallas and interviewed current and
former Enron employees.

Other investigations and sources of information

The Joint Committee staff reviewed publicly available information relating to Enron,
including information made available by the Securities and Exchange Commission; the
Department of Labor; the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation; the Senate Committee on
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions; the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs; the
Senate Committee on Energy and Commerce; the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and
Transportation; the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs; the House
Committee on Financial Services; the House Committee on Energy and Commerce; the House
Committee on Education and the Workforce; and the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern
District of New York.

47 The Joint Committee staff sent more than 48 letters to potential interviewees and their
counsel and made numerous telephone calls in its attempts to schedule interviews.

54

=== PAGE 83 ===
The Joint Committee staff reviewed media reports relating to Enron’s activities for
information relevant to the Joint Committee staff investigation.

Outside advisors

The Joint Committee staff reviewed tax opinions and other documentation regarding the
tax advice provided by Enron’s outside advisors with respect to many of the transactions within
the scope of the investigation.*® Although the Joint Committee staff reviewed such opinions and
advice for purposes of analyzing the transactions, the Joint Committee staff did not examine the
propriety of this advice under present standards of professional conduct or similar rules relating
to Federal tax practice, or for purposes of determining whether there may have been violations of
tax statutes relating to tax return preparers or tax advisors.

48 Many of the tax opinion letters reviewed by the Joint Committee staff are included in
Appendix C to this Report.

55

=== PAGE 84 ===
Il. HISTORY OF THE COMPANY
A. Background

Enron Corp. is a Houston-based energy and commodities trading holding company
currently under Federal bankruptcy reorganization protection.” Through approximately 3,500
domestic and foreign subsidiaries and affiliates, Enron conducted business in diverse markets
and industries, including wholesale merchant and commodity market businesses, the

# Enron Corp., an Oregon corporation, and thirteen of its affiliates filed voluntary
petitions for Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization protection on December 2, 2001, in the
United States Bankruptcy Court, Southern District of New York. Simultaneously with the
filings, the companies collectively filed a motion requesting entry of an order jointly
administering and consolidating for administrative purposes only these Chapter 11 cases.
Additional affiliated entities were consolidated with the proceeding subsequent to the original
filings.

As of February 8, 2003, Enron reported that the following 79 Enron companies have filed
voluntary petitions for Chapter 11 reorganization: Artemis Associates, LLC; BAM Leasing
Company; Clinton Energy Management Services, Inc.; EBF LLC; Calypso Pipeline, LLC, EES
Service Holdings, Inc.; EESO Merchant Investments, Inc.; EFS Construction Management
Services, Inc.; ENA Asset Holdings, L.P.; ENA Upstream Company LLC; Enron Broadband
Services, Inc.; Enron Broadband Services, L.P.; Enron Capital & Trade Resources International
Corp.; Enron Communications Leasing Corp.; Enron Corp.; Enron Energy Information
Solutions, Inc.; Enron Energy Marketing Corp.; Enron Energy Services Inc.; Enron Energy
Services L.L.C.; Enron Energy Services North America, Inc.; Enron Energy Services Operations,
Inc.; Enron Engineering & Construction Company; Enron Engineering & Operational Services
Company; Enron Expat Services, Inc.; Enron Federal Solutions, Inc.; Enron Freight Markets
Corp.; Enron Fuels International, Inc.; Enron Gas Liquids, Inc.; Enron Global LNG LLC; Enron
Global Markets LLC; Enron India Holdings Ltd.; Enron Industrial Markets LLC; Enron
International Fuel Management Company; Enron Liquid Fuels, Inc.; Enron LNG Marketing
LLC; Enron LNG Shipping Company; Enron Management, Inc.; Enron Mauritius Company;
Enron Metals & Commodity Corp.; Enron Methanol Company; Enron Natural Gas Marketing
Corp.; Enron Net Works L.L.C.; Enron North America Corp.; Enron Power & Industrial
Construction Company; Enron Power Marketing, Inc.; Enron Processing Properties, Inc.; Enron
Property & Services Corp.; Enron Reserve Acquisition Corp.; Enron Transportation Services
Company; Enron Ventures Corp.; Enron Wind Constructors Corp.; Enron Wind Corp.; Enron
Wind Development LLC; Enron Wind Energy Systems Corp.; Enron Wind Maintenance Corp.;
Enron Wind Systems, Inc.; E Power Holdings Corp.; EREC Subsidiary I, LLC; EREC
Subsidiary II, LLC; EREC Subsidiary III, LLC; EREC Subsidiary IV, LLC; EREC Subsidiary V,
LLC; Garden State Paper Company, LLC; Intratex Gas Company; LINGTEC Constructors, L.P.;
National Energy Production Corporation; NEPCO Power Procurement Company; NEPCO
Services International, Inc.; Offshore Power Production CV; Operation Energy Corp.; PBOG
Corp.; Palm Beach Development Company, L.L.C.; San Juan Gas Company, Inc.; Smith Street
Land Company; Tenant Services, Inc.; The New Energy Trading Company; Zond Minnesota
Construction Company LLC; Zond Pacific, LLC; and ZWHC LLC.

56

=== PAGE 85 ===
management of retail customer (end-use) energy services, the operation of gas transmission
systems, and the management of energy-related assets and broadband services.

Enron’s roots can be traced to a domestic natural gas pipeline company formed in 1930.
For the next 30 years, the company remained a domestic natural gas pipeline company. In the
1960s, Enron began a series of changes that diversified the company into other energy markets.
Major expansion of the company’s operations occurred in the late 1980s and early 1990s as the
company moved from being a domestic company to a global provider of energy products. In the
mid and late 1990s, further expansion of Enron’s activities continued, including a shift from a
company based in physical energy assets to a provider of broader services, such as risk
management, communications, and financial services.

By the time it filed for bankruptcy protection, Enron had been transformed from a
domestic natural gas pipeline company into a global provider and trader of: (1) energy resources
and commodities (including electricity, crude oil, physical natural gas, liquefied natural gas,
wind power, and air emissions credits); (2) financial and risk management services (including
hedging, weather, energy price, and foreign exchange risk management); and (3) electronic
commerce (including trading in bandwidth capacity, operating a global Internet-based
transaction system for trading in wholesale and retail energy and other commodities, and
providing movies and other entertainment on demand). Enron also expanded into non-energy
resource businesses such as global metals trading and water resources. Much of Enron’s
business strategy attempted to take advantage of market opportunities in increasingly deregulated
energy markets, including natural gas and electricity, or in lesser regulated markets, such as
energy commodities trading and electronic commerce.

Enron has been recognized as a leading innovator™? and employer.”! Enron’s market
capitalization reportedly increased from approximately $2 billion in the mid-1980s to

5° Enron was named the “Most Innovative Company in America” for six consecutive
years by Fortune magazine, and also ranked among the top five companies in Fortune’s
categories of quality of management, quality of products and services, and employee talent in the
2001 rankings. Press Release, Enron Corp., Enron Named Most Innovative for Sixth Year
(February 6, 2001), at http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/200 1/ene/15-
MostInnovative-02-06-01-LTR.html (last visited January 22, 2003).

51 At the time it filed for bankruptcy, Enron employed approximately 25,000 employees
worldwide. Affidavit of Jeffrey McMahon Pursuant to Local Bankruptcy Rule 1007-2 at 5, In re
Enron Corp., et. al., Debtors (No. 01-16034 (Docket Entry No. 3)), available at
http://www.elaw4enron.com/default.asp (last visited January 27, 2003). Enron was named to
Fortune magazine’s list of “100 Best Companies to Work For in America” for 1998 (73°), 1999
(24"), and 2000 (22). Press Release, Enron Corp., Enron Named #22 of “100 Best Companies
to Work for in America” (December 18, 2000), at http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroon/
releases/2000/ene/111-FortuneBestCo.html (last visited January 22, 2003); Press Release, Enron
Corp., Enron Named One of “100 Best Companies to Work for in America” (December 21,
1999), at http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/1999/ene/fortune.html (last visited
January 22, 2003).

57

=== PAGE 86 ===
approximately $70 billion in early 2001. Enron reported consolidated revenues of $101 billion

for 2000, and ranked seventh on the Fortune 500 list of the country’s largest companies for
2001.>? As of December 31, 2000, the company had approximately 58,920 shareholders of
record with respect to its outstanding shares of common stock.-* Enron’s bankruptcy filing was
the largest corporate bankruptcy in U.S. history prior to the July 21, 2002, filing by Worldcom,
Inc.

52 Enron reported in 2001 that during the 15-year period that Mr. Kenneth L. Lay was
Chief Executive Officer of the company (1986 to 2001), its market capitalization increased from
$2 billion to $70 billion. Press Release, Enron Corp., Enron Announces Skilling Resignation;
Lay Assumes President and CEO Duties (August 14, 2001), at
http://enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/2001/ene/58-ENE-SkillingResignation-08-14-01-
LTR. html (last visited January 22, 2003).

53 http:/Awww.fortune.com/fortune/fortuneS00 (last visited January 22, 2003). Enron
moved up to fifth place on the Fortune 500 list for 2002, and was sixth on Fortune’s 2002 Global
500, which lists the world’s largest corporations. Id.

54 Affidavit of Jeffrey McMahon Pursuant to Local Bankruptcy Rule 1007-2 at 6, In re
Enron Corp., et. al., Debtors (No. 01-16034 (Docket Entry No. 3)), at
http://www.elaw4enron.com/default.asp (last visited January 27, 2003).

55 http://www.bankruptcydata.com/Research/15_Largest.htm (last visited January 22,
2003).

58

=== PAGE 87 ===
B. History of Business Operations
1. Formative years and the 1985 acquisition of Houston Natural Gas

The company that became Enron Corp. was incorporated as Northern Natural Gas
Company, a Delaware corporation, on April 25, 1930. The company changed its name to
InterNorth, Inc. (“InterNorth”) in 1980, and then to Enron Corp. in April 1986."

During the company’s first thirty years of existence its only business was transporting
and marketing natural gas. During the 1960s, it diversified its operations to include natural gas
liquids, petrochemicals, and exploration and production of natural gas and oils. Its revenues and
assets increased steadily during the 1970s and early 1980s. The company underwent major
expansion in the 1980s when it acquired Belco Petroleum Company (an oil and gas exploration
and production company) in 1983, Chemplex Company (a manufacturer of olefins, high- and
low-density polyethylene and adhesives) in 1984, and Houston Natural Gas Corporation
(“HNG”) on July 1, 1985. The HNG acquisition was a major contributing factor to the
company’s ultimate transformation from a regional natural gas pipeline to a global provider and
trader of energy and other products.

At the time of the 1985 acquisition of HNG, InterNorth was a publicly traded regional
interstate natural gas pipeline company based in Omaha, Nebraska. As of December 31, 1984,
InterNorth had approximately 35,000 miles of natural gas pipeline, $6.1 billion of total assets,
10,551 employees, and $7.5 billion of revenues during fiscal year 1984.°” Its natural gas
operations were sold to purchasers at various points in the upper Midwest, as well as in the
production area States of Texas, New Mexico, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado,
Montana, and Wyoming. Following the Federal deregulation of natural gas markets commenced
by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (“FERC”) in 1985,°° InterNorth sought to expand
its presence in the domestic natural gas industry by acquiring HNG. HNG was a publicly traded
intrastate natural gas pipeline company that had three large but separate pipeline systems based
in Texas, Florida, and California.°” HNG had approximately 14,000 miles of natural gas
pipeline, 3,100 employees, and $3.9 billion of assets as of December 31, 1984. InterNorth and

56 Enron Corp. reincorporated as an Oregon corporation in 1997.

57 InterNorth’s operating revenues were derived from the transmission and distribution of
natural gas at wholesale and retail (38 percent); the acquisition, production, transportation, and
marketing of natural gas liquids and petroleum products (52 percent); the exploration and
production of natural gas and oil (5 percent); and the production and marketing of plastic resins
and films, petrochemicals, and antifreeze (5 percent).

58 Various FERC orders mandated a fundamental restructuring of interstate pipeline sales
and transportation services, and further enhanced competition in the natural gas industry by
assuring comparability of pipeline sales and services offered by competitors.

59 HNG had been an intrastate natural gas pipeline company operating primarily in Texas
until 1984 when it acquired interstate pipeline systems based in Florida and California.

59

=== PAGE 88 ===
HNG reported market capitalization of $2.1 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively, as of March
1985.

InterNorth acquired HNG pursuant to a stock acquisition in which InterNorth paid HNG
shareholders $2.4 billion cash for all of HNG’s stock. For financial reporting purposes, the
InterNorth/HNG transaction was reported as the acquisition by InterNorth of HNG, effective
June 1, 1985, under the purchase method of accounting. For Federal income tax purposes, the
transaction was reported as a taxable purchase by InterNorth of HNG’s stock, and HNG and its
affiliates were included in InterNorth’s consolidated Federal income tax return beginning in
calendar year 1985.

The combination of InterNorth’s and HNG’s pipeline systems formed the largest natural
gas pipeline system in the United States, approximately 37,000 miles in length, and the first
nationwide natural gas pipeline network in the United States. HNG’s Houston pipeline served as
the hub of the company’s network and major interstate pipelines, and created a pipeline system
that extended from the borders of Mexico to Canada, and from Florida to the Arizona-California
border. The combined company’s major businesses included: (1) gathering and wholesale
marketing of natural gas through its pipeline system (approximately 63 percent of the company’s
assets); (2) exploration and production of natural gas and crude oil (approximately 25 percent of
the company’s assets); (3) production, purchase, transportation, marketing and trading of natural
gas liquids, crude oil, and refined petroleum products (approximately five percent of the
company’s assets); and (4) the manufacture and marketing of polyolefin plastic resins and related
products (approximately five percent of the company’s assets).

Although HNG was the smaller of the two combined companies, its officers and directors
took over management control soon after the acquisition.” The combined company first
operated under the name HNG InterNorth. HNG’s Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Mr.
Kenneth Lay, became the Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of HNG
InterNorth in February 1986. By the end of 1986, a majority of Enron Corp.’s officers and
directors were former officers and directors of HNG, the acquired company.

6 At the time of the HNG acquisition, InterNorth was the eighth largest producer of
polyolefin resins in the world.

61 This was contemplated in the agreement between InterNorth and HNG. Pursuant to
section 6.12 of the Agreement and Plan of Merger between the companies, InterNorth agreed and
covenanted to cause its Chairman and Chief Executive Officer to remain in those positions until
January 1, 1987, at which time Mr. Lay would assume those positions, and increase the
InterNorth board size to permit ten directors to be selected by HNG’s board or by Mr. Lay. The
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of InterNorth at the time of the acquisition left the
company in November 1985.

6 Mr. Lay became Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of HNG in June 1984. He
served in these capacities with HNG InterNorth and Enron Corp. until February 2001, at which
time Mr. Jeffrey K. Skilling was promoted to Chief Executive Officer of the company. Mr.
Skilling resigned from Enron in August 2001, and Mr. Lay once again became Chief Executive

60

=== PAGE 89 ===
2. Transition from natural gas company to diversified energy company: 1986-1995

During 1986 to 1995, Enron began its transformation from a domestic natural gas
company to a global provider of energy products. Immediately following the HNG acquisition,
Enron implemented a program of selective asset divestitures. Asset dispositions included certain
pipelines that were required to be sold as a condition to regulatory approval of the HNG
acquisition, retail natural gas operations, the petrochemicals business segment, and other smaller
operations.

At the end of 1986, Enron was predominantly a domestic business, with the company’s
foreign assets and foreign operating revenues comprising 10 percent and eight percent,
respectively, of the company’s worldwide totals. The company had oil and gas reserves in the
United States and Canada, most of which were held in its subsidiary, Enron Oil & Gas Company
(“EOG”).

By the late 1980s, however, Enron’s business began to change. Enron became involved
in buying and selling energy commodities, as well as exploring, developing, and transmitting
natural gas and liquid energy products. During 1987, Enron discontinued its speculative oil and
petroleum products trading operations conducted by Enron Oil Corp. in New York due to losses
incurred as a result of unauthorized trading activities. In 1989, Enron began entering into long-
term fixed priced energy contracts, and trading natural gas commodities through the use of
forward contracts and other instruments.

As recently as 1990, Enron viewed itself as a natural gas company. In its Annual Report
released in early 1990, Enron stated, “Enron enters the 1990s with a focused business strategy, a
strong set of values and a vision to become the premier integrated natural gas company in the
world. Enron’s business is natural gas, from the reservoir to the burner tip eed

Officer. Mr. Lay remained Enron’s Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer until he
resigned from those positions in January 2002. Mr. Lay resigned as an Enron director in
February 2002.

6 The divestitures and associated layoffs of employees reduced the company’s total
workforce from 8,800 employees in 1985 to 7,200 employees at the end of 1986.

64 See Table 5, Miscellaneous Foreign and Domestic Financial Information for Enron,
1991 to 2000.

5 As of December 31, 1989, EOG’s reserves were 91 percent natural gas and
predominantly domestic (91 percent located in the United States and nine percent located in
Canada).

66 Enron Corp., 1989 Annual Report, at 6 (1990). For the year ended December 31,
1989, Enron’s consolidated group of companies derived approximately 35 percent of its revenues
from natural gas operations, 63 percent from liquid fuels operations (including liquid natural gas,
gas liquids, and crude oil), and 2 percent from exploration and production. Jd. at 1.

61

=== PAGE 90 ===
In the early 1990s, Enron increased its natural gas trading and financing activities through
its subsidiaries, Enron Gas Marketing, Inc., Enron Finance Corp., and Enron Gas Services.”
During the period 1992-1994, Enron disposed of a substantial portion of its liquid pipeline assets,
including the Northern Border Pipeline in 1993, and its substantial Enron Oil Trading &
Transportation Company (“EOTT”) crude oil and trading operations in 1994, by transferring
those assets to unconsolidated partnerships such as Enron Liquid Pipelines, LP, Northern Border
Partners, LP, and EOTT Energy Partners, LP.® Enron’s disposition of EOTT was so significant
that it caused Enron to restate certain of its financial statements, beginning with those included in
its 1993 Annual Report.”

In 1994, Enron began purchasing and selling electricity after Enron’s power marketing
subsidiary obtained a no-action letter from the Securities and Exchange Commission exempting
its power marketing activities from regulation as an electric utility under the Public Utility
Holding Company Act. 70

In the 5-year period, 1991 through 1995, Enron’s annual revenues (restated after taking
into account the divestiture of EOTT) increased from $5.7 billion to $9.2 billion. Enron’s total
assets were $13.2 billion as of December 31, 1995.

67 Tp 1992, Enron adopted the mark-to-market method of accounting for financial
statement purposes for its trading operations. See Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to the
Joint Committee on Taxation (June 7, 2002).

68 Enron Liquid Pipelines, LP, Northern Border Partners, LP, and EOTT Energy L.P.
were classified as master limited partnerships. Enron reported to the Joint Committee staff that
the master limited partnership prospectus informed investors of the intent to register the
aforementioned as tax shelters under sec. 6111(c). See Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to
the Joint Committee on Taxation (June 7, 2002).

6 KOTT’s operations had accounted for revenues of $8.2 billion, $7.7 billion, and $6.4
billion of Enron’s consolidated revenues for 1991, 1992, and 1993, respectively. Enron Corp.,
Form 10-K for Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 1993 (note 3 to the consolidated income
statement). Enron’s reported revenues decreased from $13.5 billion in 1991 to $6.3 billion in
1992, with revenues from liquid fuels (including EOTT) decreasing from $9.9 billion to $2.0
billion for those years. Enron Corp., Form 10-K for Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 1991
(1992), at 23-24; Enron Corp., Form 10-K for Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 1992 (1993), at
20-21. Based on these reported amounts, the EOTT divestiture decreased Enron’s reported
consolidated revenues by approximately 55 percent and 44 percent for 1992 and 1993,
respectively. Id. See also Enron Corp., 1992 Annual Report (1993), at 42, 51 (disclosing
proposed spinoff of EOTT and reporting EOTT’s activities as discontinued operations).

7 Congressional Research Service, Financial Oversight of Enron: The SEC and Private-

Sector Watchdogs, Report of the Staff to the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs, at 47-
51 (October 8, 2002).

62

=== PAGE 91 ===
During the early 1990s, Enron also increased its foreign presence principally through the
development, acquisition, promotion, and operation of natural gas and power projects and the
marketing of natural gas liquids. A consortium that included Enron acquired a southern
Argentina pipeline system in 1992 to establish Enron’s first presence in South America. In April
1993, Enron made its first substantial investment in the European energy markets when it began
its Teesside operations, a combined cycle gas turbine power plant in the United Kingdom. In
1994, Enron formed Enron Global Power and Pipelines to develop energy projects in developing
nations. By 1995, Enron’s international activities included power plants or projects in Germany,
Guatemala, and the Philippines, its pipeline system in Argentina, retail gas and propane sales in
the Caribbean basin, and natural gas liquids processing at Teesside. By the close of 1995,
Enron’s foreign assets and revenues accounted for approximately 14 percent and 11 percent of
total worldwide assets and revenues, respectively.

3. Transformation to a marketing and logistics company: 1996-2001

The period 1996-2001 involved four significant company-wide themes: (1) expansion
into increasingly deregulated domestic energy markets such as natural gas and electricity; (2)
movement into global markets such as power plants, water, and metals; (3) transformation from a
physical assets company to a provider of risk management, communications, financial, and
energy services; and (4) a focus on attaining financial and operational objectives established in
January 1996. Enron promoted itself as an innovator and a company for the changing economy,
describing itself as having “metamorphosed from an asset-based pipeline and power generating
company to a marketing and logistics company whose biggest assets are its well-established
business approach and its innovative people.” ' The company’s Chief Executive Officers during
this period, Messrs. Lay and Skilling, oversaw the company’s transformation.

In 1996, Enron introduced “Enron 2000,” a plan that represented the company’s
commitment to achieving three specific financial objectives: (1) $1 billion of net income by the
year 2000; (2) 15 percent average compound annual growth; and (3) double-digit growth in each
individual fiscal year.’* Enron 2000 was introduced and described in the company’s year-end
earnings release issued to analysts, media, shareholders, and employees, and was communicated
to stock analysts and management personnel at separate meetings.’ In announcing Enron's
1996 earnings per share, Mr. Lay, chairman and chief executive officer of Enron, was quoted in
an Enron press release as saying, "Enron achieved its earnings and operational goals in 1996, the

7 Enron Corp., 2000 Annual Report, at 9 (2001).
7 Presentation to Enron Corp. Board of Directors’ Meeting, December 9, 1997
(describing the history regarding introduction of Enron 2000 and its importance as the standard

against which the company’s actual financial performance was to be measured). EC 000046072.

7 Enron Corp., 1996 Performance Review (January 17, 1997). EC 000103501.

63

=== PAGE 92 ===
first year of our Enron 2000 initiative to reach net income in excess of $1 billion and achieve a
minimum double digit growth in annual earnings per share."”*

Enron restructured its worldwide operations in January 1997. The restructured company:
(1) consolidated its international activities into Enron International (consisting of Enron
Development Corporation, Enron Joint Venture Management, Enron Americas, and Enron
Global Power and Pipelines); (2) established the Enron Gas Pipeline Group, which was
responsible for all of Enron’s North American pipeline companies; (3) established Enron
Ventures Corp. to manage its international and domestic engineering and construction activities;
(4) formed Enron Renewable Energy Corp. to conduct wind energy projects; (5) formed Enron
Capital Management to encompass Enron’s treasury and corporate risk management functions;
and (6) continued Enron Capital & Trade Resources, which was later renamed Enron North
America Corp.

Enron’s shift during this period from physical assets to services businesses was evidenced
by its growth in reported risk management assets (from $0.5 billion in 1992 to $21 billion in
2000) relative to net plant, property, and equipment (from $6.5 billion to $11.7 billion during the
same period). By March 2000, Enron was the sixth largest energy company in the world, with its
businesses divided into three core areas: (1) wholesale services, including the marketing and
delivery of physical commodities and financial risk management services; (2) retail energy
services business, including providing integrated energy and facility management outsourcing
solutions to commercial and industrial consumers worldwide; and (3) global services, including
asset-based businesses such as pipelines, engineering businesses, and international power,
pipeline, and distribution operations. Enron entered into contracts for physical delivery of
energy products, as well as financial contracts related to trading its wholesale commodity
products, including commodities contracts, forward contracts, swap agreements, securities
contracts, caps, floors, collars, futures contracts, repurchase agreements, and options.

Enron’s reported consolidated revenues increased from $13 billion in 1996 to $101

billion in 2000. During the same period, Enron’s reported total assets increased from $16.1
billion to $65.5 billion.”

Natural gas and electricity in the United States

At the beginning of 1996, Enron operated the second largest natural gas transmission
system in the world. Throughout the 1990s Enron also increased its power marketing activities,
which consisted of selling power at market-based rates. Shortly after announcing its January
1997 worldwide restructuring, Enron formed Risk Management & Trading Corp. to “manage
trading books” for various Enron entities. Soon thereafter, Enron formed Enron Energy Services

™ Press Release, Enron Corp., Enron Reports 12 Percent Increase in 1996 Earnings Per
Share, to $2.31 Per Share (January 21, 1997) at
http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/1997/12per.html (last visited January 26, 2003).

7 The asset and revenue figures were reported in the company’s financial statements
prior to charges and restatements announced and made in October and November 2001.

=== PAGE 93 ===
to sell energy and advisory services, such as long-term energy management, to large
consumers.’°

In early 1997, Enron took steps to increase its electricity development and production in
the northwestern United States when it announced a strategic energy alliance with Northern
California Power Agency, pursuant to which Enron would provide a comprehensive package of
services, including the sale of natural gas and financial and risk management products. This
event reportedly marked the first alliance of its kind following California’s deregulation of the
electric power industry. In July 1997, Enron acquired Portland General Corporation (“PGC”), an
electric utility holding company, and Portland General Electric (“PGE”), its affiliated electric
utility with approximately 685,000 residential and commercial retail customers in Oregon.
Enron’s acquisition of PGE and PGC was effected by a $1.9 billion stock swap in which Enron
issued 50.5 million shares of Enron stock to PGC shareholders in exchange for 49.6 million
shares of PGC stock. Enron also consolidated $1.1 billion of PGE’s debt, making the total
acquisition price approximately $3 billion.”” Enron considered PGE to be its platform to enter
the deregulated California electricity market.”® In October 1997, Enron entered the California
electricity market by offering consumers two weeks of free electricity and utility rates
guaranteed for at least two years.

Enron’s acquisition of PGE raised certain regulatory issues under the Public Utility
Holding Company Act that caused Enron to change its corporate domicile from Delaware to
Oregon. When Enron acquired ownership of all of the outstanding voting securities of PGE, an
Oregon public utility, Enron became a public utility holding company within the meaning of the
Public Utility Holding Company Act. The Public Utility Holding Company Act provided a
limited “intrastate exemption” from certain regulatory provisions if the holding company (Enron
Corp.) and its subsidiary utility (PGE) were domiciled within the same State. Concomitant with
the PGE acquisition, Enron Corp. reincorporated in Oregon, reissued its capital stock without par

76 As identified in Enron press releases, these long-term energy management customers
ultimately included, among others: The Chase Manhattan Corporation, IBM, Quebecor,
Starwood Hotels and Resorts, Compaq, Simon Properties, Sonoco, Owens-Illinois, Quaker Oats,
Eli Lilly, JCPenney, and Saks Incorporated. See Press Release, Enron Corp., Enron and Chase
Manhattan Bank Sign Long-Term Energy Management Agreement (February 2, 2000), at
http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/2000/ene/chase.html (last visited February 11,
2003); and Press Release, Enron Corp., Enron Reports Record First Quarter Recurring Earnings
of $0.47 per Diluted Share; Increases Earnings Expectations for 2001 (April 17, 2001), at
http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/200 1/ene/ENE-Q1-01-LTR.html (last visited
February 11, 2003).

™ The PGE acquisition was reported under the purchase method of accounting for
financial reporting purposes. For Federal income tax purposes, Enron treated the acquisition of
the stock of PGE and its affiliates as a tax-free reorganization pursuant to section 368(a)(1)(A)
when PGC was merged with and into Enron.

78 Enron Corp., Form U-1, Application-Declaration Under The Public Utility Holding
Company Act of 1935, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (February 28, 2002).

65

=== PAGE 94 ===
value, and ceased to be a Delaware corporation, in order to place Enron Corp. and PGE within
this intrastate exemption.

By 1999, Enron had become the largest merchant of power and gas in North America.
Enron’s gas pipeline group owned interests in four interstate pipelines, operated 32,000 miles of
pipelines in 21 states, and transported approximately 15 percent of the U.S. natural gas demand.

Foreign markets

During 1996 to 1998, Enron commenced marketing electricity and natural gas, delivering
energy and other physical commodities, and providing financial and risk management services
around the world. Construction of the combined cycle power plant project in Dabhol, India
began in 1996.” Years 1998 and 1999 brought further expansion into foreign markets, with
Enron making a substantial equity investment in Elektro, a Brazilian electricity transmission
system. In total, Enron’s foreign net proved reserves of natural gas and liquids had increased as
a portion of worldwide net proved reserves from four percent and 13 percent, respectively, at the
end of 1985, to 45 percent and 65 percent, respectively, at the end of 1998.®° Enron entered the
water business in July 1998 when it acquired Wessex Water Plc, a major U.K. water company.
The 1998 acquisition of Wessex Water for $2.2 billion, and the formation of a new water
company, Azurix Corp. (“Azurix”), was effected to allow Enron to own and operate strategic
water and wastewater assets, such as local distribution systems and treatment facilities, and to

develop related infrastructure. Azurix pursued water projects in Europe, Latin America, and
Asia.

During 2000, Enron opened a Tokyo office to pursue opportunities in Japan’s energy,
commodity, and financial sectors, with an initial focus on activities such as risk management,
multi-commodity market making, electronic commerce, and merchant asset development. In
May 2000, Enron entered the metals markets by acquiring MG plc, an independent international
metals market-making business, for approximately $2 billion.

Enron’s total international investment ultimately exceeded $7 billion, including more
than $3 billion in Latin America, $1 billion in India, and $2.9 billion in Britain. It owned or
operated electric power plants or transmission systems in the United Kingdom, Germany,
Turkey, Guatemala, the Philippines, the Dominican Republic, and off the coast of China, and
operated one or more of its businesses in approximately 20 countries and territories, including
Central America and the Carribean (Panama, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Puerto Rico, the Dominican
Republic, and Jamaica), South America (Colombia, Venezuela, Argentina, Brazil, and Bolivia),

® The Dabhol project became the subject of extensive litigation between Enron and the
State of Maharashtra, India, regarding energy prices charged by Enron.

80 “Net proved reserves” is a measure of energy reserves that have been proved to a high
degree of certainty, based on studies performed by engineers.

66

=== PAGE 95 ===
Europe (Poland, Italy, and Turkey), and Asia Pacific (People’s Republic of China, Guam, and
the Phillipines).®!

Enron used foreign subsidiaries and offshore entities to hold its investments throughout
the world. Enron located more than 140 subsidiaries in the Netherlands alone, including
subsidiaries for its broadband and wind energy units, and formed numerous subsidiaries in low-
tax jurisdictions such as the Cayman Islands and Bermuda.” By the end of 2001, Enron’s
worldwide ownership structure included approximately 1,300 different foreign entities, with over
400 entities formed in the Cayman Islands. 3 Much of Enron’s reported foreign earnings
remained offshore, as Enron’s reported undistributed earnings from foreign subsidiaries
increased from $185 million in 1993 to $1.8 billion in 2000.

By the end of 2000, Enron was reported to be the sixth largest energy company in the
world, with its foreign revenues accounting for approximately 23 percent of its total reported
worldwide revenues.

Communications businesses

Much of Enron’s activity during the late 1990s involved expansion into the
communications and financial services businesses by taking advantage of emerging technologies
such as the Internet and other forms of electronic commerce.™* Enron formed businesses
designed to facilitate the trading and transacting of business by others, and to sell technological
and communications capacity as a commodity.

One of Enron’s major business strategies during the late 1990s was the creation of an
online energy trading business that bought and sold contracts to deliver energy products such as
natural gas, oil, and electricity. In November 1999, Enron created EnronOnline, a global
Internet-based transaction system for wholesale energy and other commodities. EnronOnline
allowed participants to view commodity prices in real time and directly transact with Enron over

8! See Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation, (June
7, 2002). The assets held in the various international investments ranged from pipelines, power
plants, electricity, gas processing, gas compressions, and gas distributions. Id. See also Enron
website, factsheet Enron Global Services - International. See
http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/factsheets/egs/egsi.html.

82 For example, Enron Oil & Gas India, Ltd., which conducted upstream oil and gas
activities in India, was a Cayman Islands corporation with a registered office in Grand Cayman.

83 See Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation, (June
7, 2002). Approximately 250 entities were associated with active operations. Id. See Part Three
of this Report for a detailed discussion of Enron’s use of foreign entities.

8 See, e.g., Enron Corp., 1998 Annual Report, at 21 (1999); Enron Corp, 2000 Annual
Report, at 3 (2001).

67

=== PAGE 96 ===
the Internet free of commission.®* In May 2000, together with IBM and America Online, Enron
formed New Power Company to market power and natural gas over the Internet to homes and
businesses. In May 2001, Enron reported that approximately 60 percent of all Enron transactions
were being conducted online, with a 75 percent reduction in the cost of processing transactions.

Another significant event during this period was the creation of Enron Broadband
Services, the purpose of which was to buy and sell Internet access as a commodity.®* As part of
this effort, Enron launched broadband steering media services and the trading of bandwidth as a
commodity,®” and built what Enron called the first all-Internet Protocol backbone in the United
States (named the Enron Intelligent Network, or EIN). Enron also invested $10 million to
acquire 5.4 million shares of Rhythms NetConnections, Inc. (“Rhythms Net”), a privately-held
Internet service provider for businesses using digital subscriber line technology.®® Enron later
extended its Enron Intelligent Network broadband business to Europe through an agreement with
British Telecommunications PLC.

Enron also entered various other financial and services markets through a variety of
venues, including: (1) Enroncredit.Com, a real-time credit department for business-to-business

85 Enron Online commenced trading in November 1999. It reportedly generated
transactions involving $857 million of notional dollar value in its first two weeks, $336 billion of
notional value through 548,000 executed transactions during 2000, and $590 billion of notional
value by the time EnronOnline reported its one millionth transaction on May 23, 2001. 1999
Performance Review, EC 000101574; Enron Corp., 2000 Annual Report, at 3 (2001); Press
Release, Enron Corp., Enron Completes One Million Transactions on EnronOnline (May 23,
2001), at http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/001/ene/45-MillionthTransaction-LTR-
5-23-01.html (last visited January 22, 2003).

% This opportunity stemmed from the PGE acquisition. Enron acquired PGE’s
communications business, which Enron reported to be the basis for Enron Broadband Services,
in the PGE merger. Enron Corp., 1999 Annual Report, at 23 (2000).

87 This was accomplished through an Enron subsidiary, Enron Communications, Inc.,
which announced its first forward trade of bandwidth on December 2, 1999. The seller in the
transaction was Global Crossing Services. Press Release, Enron Corp., Enron Communications
Announces First Commodity Bandwidth Trade (December 2, 1999), at
http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/1999/ene/bandwidth.html (last visited January
22, 2003).

88 Enron’s initial Rhythms Net investment of $10 million reportedly grew to
approximately $300 million, though Enron was prohibited from selling any of the shares before
the end of 1999 because of a lock-up commitment it undertook when it acquired the shares.
Report of Investigation by the Special Investigative Committee of the Board of Directors of
Enron Corp., dated February 1, 2002 (“Powers Report”), at 77. As described below, Enron
entered into a purported hedging transaction with a newly formed special purpose entity in an
attempt to hedge against a decrease in Rhythms Net stock values while Enron was required to
hold the shares.

68

=== PAGE 97 ===
customers;®? (2) a 20-year exclusive relationship with Blockbuster Inc. to provide movies on
demand to households via the Internet;”’ (3) commodity transactions involving weather
derivative products; and (4) online emissions allowance auctions.”!

8° EnronCredit.com was described by Enron as being the first global online credit
department to provide live credit prices and information regarding hedging credit exposure
instantly over the Internet, and allowed customers to transact in bankruptcy swaps via
EnronOnline.

°° The Enron/Blockbuster movie-on-demand relationship, announced in July 2000, was
terminated in March 2001.

9! Enron’s first online emissions allowance auction was conducted March 2000 and
involved sulfur dioxide.

69

=== PAGE 98 ===
C. Recent Financial History

1. Use of off-balance sheet entities to enhance financial performance measures”

Financial objectives

By the late 1990s, Enron had amassed substantial debt relating to its capital expenditures
and investments in power plants, pipelines, electronic commerce, water, metals, and broadband
services. Many of Enron’s growth businesses required substantial upfront capital investments
long before positive cash flows and earnings reasonably could be expected from those
investments. These circumstances placed enormous pressure on the company’s Enron 2000
financial objectives of: (1) $1 billion of net income by the year 2000; (2) 15 percent average
compound annual growth; and (3) double-digit growth in each individual fiscal year. Further,
the company needed cash to service its increasing debt load.

Enron’s evolving business approach also required the company to access increased lines
of credit to ensure that the company had sufficient funds to settle energy contracts being traded
on its online trading system. Enron experienced large fluctuations of short-term debt from
quarter to quarter. These fluctuations potentially affected Enron’s credit rating, which in turn
affected Enron’s ability to obtain low-cost financing and to attract investment. In response to
this, Enron emphasized increasing its cash flow, lowering its debt, and smoothing its reported
earnings to satisfy the criteria set out by credit and rating agencies.

The company developed or used a number of financing, operational, and accounting
strategies to accomplish its financial objectives. These included: (1) using energy contracts
called “prepays,” which provided Enron a large advance payment to deliver natural gas or other
energy products; (2) designing hedges to reduce the risk of long-term energy delivery products;
(3) pooling energy contracts and securitizing them through bonds or other financial instruments
sold to investors; and (4) making the company “asset light” by disposing of capital-intensive
energy projects, such as power plants, that were traditionally associated with low returns and
persistent debt on the company’s books. Certain of Enron’s strategies, such as its use of
“accounting hedges,” reportedly were designed to reduce the effect of investment value declines
on Enron’s financial statements, without effectively changing the economic risks relating to the
asset.

Many of these strategies used special purpose entities (“SPEs”) formed by Enron or
Enron employees to conduct transactions with Enron and its affiliates. Instead of selling assets
to, or transacting hedging transactions with, independent third parties, Enron engaged in
transactions with unconsolidated, or “off-balance-sheet,” SPEs that Enron did not include in its
financial accounting statements.”? Enron used SPEs in synthetic lease transactions (sale to an

*? The Powers Report serves as a source of information regarding the off-balance sheet
transactions. See Part Three, below, for a more in-depth description of off-balance sheet entities.

°3 By October 2000, Enron had a total of approximately $60 billion in assets, of which

approximately $27 billion were in Enron’s unconsolidated affiliates. Use of unconsolidated
entities allowed Enron to include its share of the affiliates’ revenues in its income statement

70

=== PAGE 99 ===
SPE of an asset and a lease back of that asset); “sales” to SPEs of business assets with
prearranged commitments to repurchase the assets at a specified future date; and “sales” to
“hedging SPEs” of Enron stock and stock rights to provide credit support for hedging
transactions.”

Enron reported for financial statement purposes gains or losses on portfolio investments
on a mark-to-market basis, meaning that increases or decreases in the market value of Enron’s
portfolio investments increased or decreased Enron’s financial statement earnings. Decreases in
portfolio investment values adversely affected Enron’s financial statement earnings. Enron used
purported hedging structures in an attempt to offset its portfolio investment losses by taking the
position that the underlying portfolio investments were hedged, with Enron reporting offsetting
gains on the purported hedging positions.”®

while excluding related debt from its consolidated financial statements, thereby enhancing its
return on investment and certain other financial performance measures.

% Powers Report at 37. These off-balance structures and transactions were widely
reported in the press and have become an issue in Enron’s bankruptcy proceedings. Enron’s
unsecured creditors have attempted to obtain documents and testimony regarding 52 of Enron's
off-balance sheet affiliates: Rawhide Investors LLC; Ponderosa Assets LP; Sundance Assets LP;
Zephyrus; Choctaw; Hawaii 125-0; Cerebus; Cornhusker; Nikita/EOTT; ETOL; Motown;
Riverside; Service Co.; Slapshot; Marlin Water Trust; Atlantic Water Trust; Osprey Trust;
Whitewing Associates LP; Whitewing Associates LLC; LIM Cayman LP; LJM2 Co-Investment
LP; Condor; Raptor I; Raptor II; Raptor III; Raptor IV; Joint Energy Development Investments
Limited Partnership; Osprey, Inc.; Big Doe, LLC; Braveheart; Chewco Investments, LP; Firefly;
Yosemite; Big River Funding, LLC; Little River Funding, LLC; SONR #1, LLC; SONR #1 LP;
SONR #2, LLC; LJM Partners, LLC; LJM Partners, LP; LIM SwapCo; LJM Swap Sub, LP;
Talon, LLC; Harrier; Timberwolf; Pro[n]ghorn; Porcupine; Bobcat; Southampton Place, LP;
Southampton, LP; LJM2 Capital Management, LP; and LJM2 Capital Management, LLC.
Motion of Official Committee of Unsecured Creditors For Order, Under 11 U.S.C. Section
1103(c) and Fed. R. Bankr. P. 2004, For Production of Documents and Examination of
Witnesses Regarding Debtors’ Off-Balance Sheet Assets and Liabilities, filed by the Official
Committee of Unsecured Creditors of Enron Corp., et. al., In re Enron Corp., et. al., Debtor at 6
(01-16034) (Docket Entry No. 1352), available at http://www.elaw4enron.com/default.asp (last
visited February 4, 2003).

°5 The U.S. Government has alleged that Enron used off-balance structures for other
purposes, including to receive beneficial regulatory treatment of its California wind farms under
the Public Utility Holding Company Act, following Enron’s purchase of PGE. Criminal
Complaint, United States of America v. Andrew S. Fastow, at 7 (alleging improper use of RADR
special purpose entities to disguise Enron’s interests in wind farms); Complaint, United States
Securities and Exchange Commission v. Andrew S. Fastow, at 3-5 (alleging improper use of
RADR special purposes entities to achieve favorable financial benefits).

71

=== PAGE 100 ===
Three of Enron’s off-balance sheet structures that received significant attention included
the Chewco, LJM1, and LJM2 partnerships.

Chewco and JEDI

In 1993, Enron and California Public Employees Retirement System (“CalPERS”)
entered into a joint venture investment partnership called Joint Energy Development Investments
Limited Partnership (“JEDI I’), whereby each partner owned 50 percent of the venture. JEDI I
was an unconsolidated entity, which meant that Enron did not include JEDI I’s assets or debt in
Enron’s balance sheet.°° JEDI I made numerous energy-related investments during the period
1993 to 1997. In late 1997, Enron wanted to approach CalPERS for a substantial cash
investment in a second investment partnership to be called JEDI II. Concerned that CalPERS
would not invest simultaneously in both JEDIs, Enron sought a buyer for CalPERS’ interest in
JEDII. After no third party expressed interest, certain Enron employees, with the assistance of
Enron, formed Chewco Investments, LP (“Chewco”), a Delaware limited partnership, to acquire
and own the JEDI I interest held by CalPERS. Enron ultimately reached an agreement with
CalPERS for JEDI I to redeem CalPERS’ interest as a limited partner of JEDI I for $383 million.
The parties closed the transaction in November 1997 and Chewco replaced CalPERS as JEDI I’s
limited partner. Enron intended that Chewco be structured as an unconsolidated affiliate to
achieve off-balance sheet treatment for Chewco and JEDI I following CalPERS’ exit from the
joint venture.”

After CalPERS ceased to be a partner of JEDI I, Enron used JEDI I as an unconsolidated
affiliate to enhance or accelerate Enron’s reported financial statement earnings through
transactions paying Enron management fees and guaranty fees, and through JEDI I’s ownership
of Enron’s stock or stock rights. By treating JEDI I and Chewco as unconsolidated entities after
CalPERS departed from the venture, Enron reported increased net income of $45 million (out of
$105 million total reported net income) in 1997, $107 million (out of $703 million reported total
net income) in 1998, $153 million (out of $893 million reported total net income) in 1999, and
$91 million (out of $979 million reported total net income) in 2000.78

96 Enron’s investments in JEDI I were accounted for under the equity method of
accounting, which meant that Enron included its net ownership interest in JEDI I in Enron’s
balance sheet. Enron Corp., 2000 Annual Report (2001), at 42.

97 The Powers Report stated that under then applicable generally accepted accounting
principles (“GAAP”), Chewco was required to satisfy two requirements for non-consolidation:
(1) any control of Chewco by Enron or an Enron affiliate as a general partner had to be limited;
and (2) Chewco had to have a minimum of three percent outside equity at risk. Financial
Accounting Standards Board, Emerging Issues Task Force, No. 90-15, Impact of Nonsubstantive
Lessors, Residual Value Guarantees, and Other Provisions in Leasing Transactions (nullified by
Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No. 46, Consolidation of Variable Interest
Entities, an Interpretation of ARB No. 51, at Appendix D1).

8 Enron Corp., Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(November 8, 2001).

72

=== PAGE 101 ===
LJM1, LJM2, and the Raptors

LJM Cayman, LP (“LJM1”) and LIM2 Co-Investment, LP (“LJM2”) (collectively the
“LJM Partnerships”) were established by Enron employees to function as off-balance-sheet SPEs
intended to transact business with Enron to improve Enron’s financial statements. The LIM
transactions had the effect of boosting Enron’s reported earnings through the use of purported
hedging transactions and asset transfers.

From June 1999 to June 2001, Enron entered into approximately 20 distinct purported
asset sales or hedging transactions with the LIM partnerships.” In the asset sales category,
Enron transferred assets to the LJM entity to remove the asset from Enron’s books. The effect in
some of the transactions was that no associated risk passed from Enron, because transactions of
this type generally require that the benefits and burdens of ownership pass from the transferor to
the transferee.'!°° The LIM hedges were intended to be accounting hedges, not economic hedges,
designed to permit Enron to record gains on hedging positions to offset investment losses in the
value of underlying portfolio investments on Enron’s financial statements.

LJM1 was organized as a limited partnership in the Cayman Islands. The first LIM1
transaction involved stock issued by Rhythms Net that Enron had purchased at the initial public
offering for $10 million and which later increased in value to over $300 million. Enron reported
the appreciation in the investment’s stock price as earnings on its financial statements, but
wanted to protect its income statements from any loss if the stock price declined. In order to
achieve this protection, Enron devised a strategy whereby LJM1 purportedly could provide a
hedge on the Rhythms Net stock. In 1999, Enron recognized after-tax income of $95 million
from the Rhythms Net investment.

In October 1999, LIM2 was formed as a Delaware limited partnership. The first seven
LJM2 transactions consisted of Enron purportedly selling poorly performing assets to LJM2,
which enabled Enron to move debt off of its balance sheet and report additional earnings and
cash flow from asset sales on its financial statements. One stated purpose of LJM2 was to
provide a “source of private equity for Enron to manage its investment portfolio risk, funds flow,

°° The definition of a hedging transaction varies widely depending upon the purpose for
which the term is used. For example, a hedging transaction for Federal income tax purposes is
defined as any transaction that is entered into in the normal course of a trade or business that is
properly identified as managing the risk of price changes, currency fluctuations, interest rate
changes, or any other risk prescribed in regulations with respect to ordinary property or
borrowings. Sec. 1221(b)(2). By contrast, a hedging transaction for financial accounting
purposes is defined as a derivative that is designated as a hedge, but only to the extent that the
changes in the value of the derivative are effective in offsetting changes in the fair value or cash
flow of an exposure or changes in the value of net investment in a foreign operation. See
Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 133, Accounting for Derivative
Instruments and Hedging Activities.

100 Powers Report at 11-12.

73

=== PAGE 102 ===
and financial flexibility.” The transactions between Enron and LJM2 that had the greatest
impact on Enron’s financial statements, however, increased Enron’s earnings through the use of
purported hedges. These involved four SPEs known as the “Raptors,” a series of complex
transactions that began in mid-2000 and terminated in 2001.! The Raptors hedges were used
by Enron to offset mounting mark-to-market losses attributable to investments otherwise
reportable on Enron’s income statement.

In three of the four Raptors, an SPE was established and LJM2 provided the SPE with a
$30 million investment. LJM2’s ability to provide the hedge to Enron was created by Enron
transferring its own stock or stock rights to the Raptors entity at a substantially discounted price.
In these cases, Enron’s stock price needed to remain high in order for LIM2 and the Raptor
entity to be able to honor the Raptors entity’s commitment to Enron pursuant to the hedge. The
first Raptor (Raptor I) was formed in April 2000 and involved an SPE named Talon I, LLC
(“Talon”). Enron and LJM2 established two additional Raptor structures, Raptor II and Raptor
IV, that did not materially differ in structure from Raptor 1° Enron reportedly provided
assurances to LIM2 that LIM2 would recoup its $30 million investment plus an additional $10
million profit within six months of each SPE’s establishment. The Raptors hedging transactions
purportedly transferred Enron’s risk to an SPE holding Enron’s own stock and stock contracts
and, therefore, did not transfer meaningful risk to an unrelated third party.!°*

Raptor III differed from the other Raptors in that it was intended to hedge a single Enron
investment, The New Power Company (“TNPC”), rather than Enron’s investments in
unaffiliated companies. Unlike the other Raptors, Raptor III held the stock of TNPC, the
company whose stock it was intended to hedge, rather than Enron stock.

Throughout 2000 and into 2001, the assets of the Raptor SPEs declined in value as the
value of Enron stock and stock contracts and the TNPC stock supporting the Raptor SPEs’
creditworthiness declined. By the end of December 2000, the asset and collateral values
declined to the point that the Raptor SPEs had virtually no assets or capital to support their hedge
obligations to Enron. In response to this, Enron structured several complex financial transactions
in an attempt to provide further credit support to the Raptors entities.'°

101 | JM2 Summary, materials provided by Enron. EC 000052043-44.

102 Enron disclosed the first Raptor in the Form 10-Q that it filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission for the second quarter of 2000, and provided more detailed disclosures
for all four Raptors in the Form 10-Q that it filed for the third quarter of 2000 and in its 2000
Form 10-K.

103 Raptor II was formed in June 2000 and Raptor IV was formed in August 2000.
104 Powers Report at 97-98.

105 These financial arrangements included placing a “collar” (i.e., purchasing a put option
at a strike price below the current market price of the security and selling a call option at a price
above the current market price of the security) on the Raptor hedges in October 2000, creating a
45-day guarantee arrangement to support all four Raptor transactions in December 2000, and

74

=== PAGE 103 ===
In the last two quarters of 2000, Enron reported revenues of approximately $500 million
on derivative transactions with Raptor entities, which offset mark-to-market losses attributable to
Enron’s merchant investments, and recognized pre-tax earnings of $532 million (including net
interest income).!© Enron’s reported pre-tax earnings for the last two quarters of 2000 totaled
$650 million. Reported earnings from the Raptors accounted for approximately 80 percent of
that total. In total, Enron reportedly used the Raptors structures to offset Enron investment
losses totaling approximately $1 billion.’”

2. Financial performance and liquidity issues"

Enron’s investment in its growing broadband business and foreign operations adversely
affected Enron’s liquidity position in the late 1990s and thereafter. Capital expenditures for its
broadband business were expected to reach an estimated $1.1 billion for 2000 and 2001, with
broadband capital expenditures comprising 47 percent of the company’s estimated 2001 total
capital expenditures. ° Although the Dabhol power project in India was expected to be a strong
contributor to Enron’s earnings, after reportedly investing $3 billion in Dabhol, the plant was
shut down in 2001. The Azurix and Wessex Water projects in the United Kingdom also faced
financial and operational difficulties.!!° Enron’s earnings performance was further adversely
affected by start-up losses in its broadband business and the California energy crisis. Enron

restructuring the Raptors in March 2001 by placing additional Enron shares at risk to support
them. Report Prepared by the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on
Governmental Affairs U.S. Senate, The Role of the Board of Directors in Enron’s Collapse,
Report 107-70 (July 8, 2002) at 117.

106 Powers Report at 119, 128.
107 Powers Report at 132.

108 Fora listing of selected historical Enron financial information, see Table 3, below,
Miscellaneous Financial Information, 1985-2000.

10° Enron Corp., Form 10-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (April
2, 2001). Enron reported a gross margin of $318 million from broadband services, with a $60
million loss before interest, minority interests, and taxes, for its 2000 year. Id.

10 Enron reported a $326 million charge to earnings in its 2000 financial statements,
reflecting Enron’s portion of impairments recorded by Azurix related to assets in Argentina, and
a $287 million write-off of Azurix asset impairments in its third quarter 2001 financial
statements. Enron Corp., 2000 Annual Report (2001), at 42; Press Release, Enron Corp., Enron
Reports Recurring Third Quarter Earnings of $0.43 Per Diluted Share; Reports Non-Recurring
Charges of $1.01 Billion After-Tax; Reaffirms Recurring Earnings Estimates of $1.80 for 2001
and $2.15 for 2002; and Expands Financial Reporting (October 16, 2001), at
http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/200 1/ene/68-3QearningsLtr.html (last visited
January 27, 2003).

75

=== PAGE 104 ===
reportedly incurred in excess of $500 million in trading losses in the California markets over the
summer of 2000.

As part of its strategic plan, Enron made efforts to raise cash by selling large holdings in
various businesses. In 1999, Enron Corp. and EOG established the latter as a public company
independent of Enron. The 1999 EOG transaction involved the exchange by Enron of
approximately 76 percent of its stock ownership of EOG for EOG’s China and India operations,
and generated a pre-tax financial reporting gain of $454 million ($345 million after-tax).!"!
Approximately $600 million of cash was transferred by EOG to EOGI-India, Inc., an Indian
subsidiary acquired by Enron Corp. to be used by Enron to finance international activities. Also
during 1999, Enron attempted to sell PGE. Enron reached agreement with Sierra Pacific
Resources (‘‘Sierra”) to sell PGE to Sierra for approximately $3 billion in cash, but the parties
terminated the agreement in April 2001 J

Enron attempted to sell a large portion of its foreign assets during 2000, but these
attempts also failed. One example, called Project Summer, involved Enron’s attempt to sell
approximately 80 percent of its non-European international businesses for $6.08 billion in
cash.!!3 Enron believed that if consummated, Project Summer would have allowed Enron to
reduce its annual dividends to be paid on its common stock, one of its financial strategies to
reduce cash outflows, without raising investor concerns that the dividend cut was driven by a
lack of cash.'!*

Investor concerns regarding Enron’s financial condition began to appear in late 2000. To
address these concerns, Enron President and Chief Operating Officer Jeff Skilling issued a press
release on November 24, 2000, stating that “rumors of a potential profit warning are not true.”
On January 25, 2001, and on March 22, 2001, the company issued press releases reaffirming its
confidence in “‘strong business prospects for 2001” and stating it was “comfortable” with
estimates and previously announced targets for 2001. Enron restructured a portion of its debt in

‘ll Enron treated the EOG exchange transaction as a tax-free split-off under section 355
for Federal income tax purposes. See Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to the Joint
Committee on Taxation (June 7, 2002).

12 Enron’s disposition of PGE’s assets, which was part of its 1998-2000 strategic plan,
had been under consideration since 1997. See 1998-2000 Operating & Strategic Plan,
Presentation to Board of Directors (December 9, 1997). EC 000046107. Enron expected to use
the PGE sales proceeds to reduce debt and fund higher growth opportunities. Board
Presentation: Project Granite (November 5, 1999). EC 000052176. After the aborted sale of
PGE to Sierra, Enron reached agreement with Northwest Natural Gas in October 2001 to sell
PGE for $1.8 billion, including $1.55 billion in cash, but these negotiations terminated in May
2002.

3 Handout for Project Summer, Meeting of the Enron Corp. Board of Directors’,
August 1, 2000. EC 000043574 et. seq.

114 Id.

76

=== PAGE 105 ===
February 2001 and issued $1.9 billion face value of 20-year zero coupon notes that yielded $1.25
billion in proceeds, most of which were used to refinance existing debt.!'5 On April 17, 2001,
Enron announced an increase in its earnings expectations for 2001. On June 19, 2001, Chief
Executive Officer Skilling announced the company remained “very confident” that it would meet
its previously-announced increased earnings expectations for 2001. On July 12, 2001, Mr.
Skilling announced renewed confidence in achieving the 2001 earnings expectations and new
increased earnings guidance for 2002.11¢

In general, the financial markets did not react favorably to Enron’s performance or
earnings announcements during the first nine months of 2001. Enron’s stock price, which had
peaked at $90.75 per share in August 2000 and opened 2001 at $83.13 per share, declined
throughout 2001. Enron’s stock closed at $58.10 and $49.10 per share on March 30, 2001, and
June 29, 2001, respectively. By September 28, 2001, the end of the third quarter, Enron’s stock
was trading at $27.23 per share.

At this point in time, Enron had reported financial information to the public that had
portrayed Enron as a company that was increasing its revenues, net income, assets, and market
capitalization. To the public, Enron appeared to have achieved the financial goals established in
1996 with its implementation of Enron 2000.

Table 5, below, provides information that illustrates Enron’s growth for the years 1985
through 2000, including its attainment of $1 billion of net income.

15 The $1,000 zero coupon notes were offered at an issue price of $655.24, which
represented an annual yield to maturity of 2.125 percent. The notes were convertible into Enron
common stock, upon certain contingencies being satisfied, at a conversion premium. Enron was
not obligated to make interest or principal payments with respect to the notes prior to their
scheduled maturity of February 2021.

16 The following month, in August 2001, Mr. Skilling resigned his position with Enron
Corp.

77

=== PAGE 106 ===
‘ouy ‘Aueduiog 2 sous MOG WO wyJOUID BIE JOYY| [BOOST Oy) Ul poyiodai sv ore saotid 903s
parsnfpe-1ydg ‘uorssrmuoD oSueyoxg pur sontinseg oy) YIM P2]l} Y-O] SULIO,| pue syiodor jenuUE s uOIUT WO JJeIS SoNTUILOD IUIOL Oy) &q potiduiog :aonog

“syoeUOS Se3 YOOIG-f 0} SuNEpoI od1eYS SuLLINdOI-UOU UOT EOPF B JOIVY (p) ‘JoIeosOY) pue GGT JOJ prEMUMOP pajejsol aq 0} SoNUsAeT s Aueduioo
oy} posnes YoIYyM “LLO JO SMINSOAIP E661 OU) IO9[Jo1 sreaK yuonbosqns pur 066] JOJ soNSIy onUdAeI oY], (€) ‘spotted osoy) Sulnp Surpue}sjno pue ponsst YO0)s
pouzayoid Jo onfeAa oY} JUNODIR OUT dyR} JOU OP SoINSYY osoyL, “Pol SEM Y-O] W4O,] oy? oJep oy} puew pus Teoh JURAZTAI OY} UD9MJOq UT JUIOd k Je SoreYs SUIpUe)s]NO

pue oonid yoyzeur yooyjor yorya ‘reak yURAD]OI OY} JO} SBUIY Y-O] WO, s Aueduioo oy) ul poyodas se ore QQOZ YBnom) E66] JOJ soNSY oY], “UOLeUIOJUT

areys Surpueysyno pue soorid yoyzeur sak Jo pus UO paseq are 7GG] YBNOI) CBG OJ SoNSYY OUT (Z) ‘6661 PUP ‘C66I “1661 JO Youe Sutinp y1[ds 4903s [-10J

-Z 8 pip ‘diog uosugq “uoy) sours syt[ds yoo}s [-Z 9eIY) OY} JOJ JUNODIE 0} aouid poysn{pe-r[ds ¢9°C¢ B 0} SIOAUOD YOIYA ‘OO’ Sp$ SBM “CRT ‘TE JoquIsdeq UO aoud
yools [enjoe oreys Jod s uorug ‘ojdurexa Jo.J ‘siseq solid [enjoe [eoLIOJSTY Ue UO OU ‘sIseq posn{pe-]ds & UO dOLId YOO}s $s ,UOIUY SMOYS UUUNIOD STYT, (1) ‘S3I0ON

S79 €1'e8 g's9 6L6 €S6'l 8001 0007
VEE 8c br Vee £68 708 Ov 6661
681 €S°87 v'67 OL SLE cle 8661
6TI 8L'07 97 ,SOl SI £07 L661
Cll 99 17 91 p8s 069 eel 9661
9°6 90°61 Cel OcS 819 v6 S661
OL S7SI 0?! €Sp OIL 06 rool
o8 os'vl Cll cee 1¢9 03 £661
V9 6S‘ II col 90¢€ blo v9 c66T
ce SL'8 VOl TET 86t Ls 1661
Ea4 v3'9 86 (44 434 ce 0661
67 OcL 16 9 Lee 86 6861
Lil 8S'V L838 601 S67 £8 8861
sl 68'P v'6 67- Oce :) L861
ST v6'V VOl LSS 8ST- €'6 9861
oz €9's$ U7$ 6L-$ 4x4) v9or$ Ss6r
1(paysnfpe
[sae]lop -y1ds) [saeflop [sae]jop
jo suoly[iq] aaeys Jed ao11d [sae[jop jo suoly[rar] jo suoT] [ra] [s1e]jop
uonezieyides y0}s UOWTUTOD jo suoly|iq] syooq aulodur jo suol[iq] RAUL. ©
yoyrey] puo-1v9 X syasse [B10], dod aulo0sul 19N suyeisdo sonusadyy

000Z 9} S861 ‘UoReULIOsUT feIoUBUT,] sNOaMET|AISTA—"S A148.

78

=== PAGE 107 ===
3. Accounting irregularities, adjustments, and non-recurring charges to earnings for
financial reporting periods 1997 to 2001

Certain of the company’s accounting practices came under scrutiny when an Enron
employee warned Enron management “that we will implode in a wave of accounting
scandals.”'!” In August 2001, Ms. Sherron Watkins, Vice President for Corporate Development,
sent a memorandum to Mr. Lay raising numerous areas of concern regarding accounting issues
with respect to the Raptor, LJM, and Condor transactions, !!® including the disclosure of related
party transactions and equity derivative transactions. The memorandum also outlined some
solutions, including retaining the services of a law firm (other than Enron’s general counsel,
Vinson & Elkins) to investigate these transactions, and retaining the services of an accounting
firm (other than Enron’s auditors, Arthur Andersen).

In October 2001, at Enron’s request, Vinson & Elkins conducted an investigation into the
issues presented in Ms. Watkins’ memo by addressing the following areas of concem: (1) the
apparent conflict of interest involving Mr. Fastow’s ownership in the LJM partnerships; (2) the
accounting treatment accorded the Condor and Raptor structures in Enron’s financial statements;
(3) the adequacy of public disclosures of the Condor and Raptor transactions; and (4) the
potential impact on Enron’s financial statements of the Condor/Whitewing and Raptor vehicles.
Each issue was given separate consideration and Vinson & Elkins’ findings were consistent with
the company’s overall approach. Vinson & Elkins concluded that “facts disclosed through our
preliminary investigation do not, in our judgment, warrant a further widespread investigation by
independent counsel and auditors.”!!

On October 16, 2001, Enron announced its first quarterly loss in four years when it
reported a net loss of $618 million for the quarter ended September 30, 2001, after taking into
account after-tax non-recurring charges of $1.01 billion.’”° The non-recurring charges consisted
of a $287 million write-off of asset impairments relating to Azurix Corp., Enron’s U.K. water
company, for its planned dispositions of its North American and certain South American service-

17 Mis. Watkins memo to Mr. Lay (August 2001). See
http://www.news.findlaw.com/hdocs./docs/enron/empltr2lay82001 .pdf.

M8 The Raptor, LJM, and Condor transactions are discussed in greater detail in Part
Three of this Report.

"19 7 etter from Mr. Max Hendrick II of Vinson & Elkins to Mr. James V. Derrick, Jr. of
Enron Corp., dated October 15, 2001. E68562.
http://news.findlaw.com/hdocs/docs/enron/veeron101051Itr.pdf As discussed in Part Three of
the Report, Vinson & Elkins also participated as an advisor in the Condor structured transaction.

120 The Form 10-Q filed by the company with the Securities and Exchange Commission
reported the loss at $644 million. Previously, Enron had not reported a net loss since the second
quarter of 1997.

79

=== PAGE 108 ===
related businesses;!”! a $180 million charge associated with the restructuring of Enron’s
broadband businesses; and a $544 million loss principally relating to “Enron’s interest in The
New Power Company, broadband and technology investments, and early termination during the
third quarter of certain structured finance arrangements with a previously disclosed entity.” 22 At
the same time, Enron announced that it was making a $1.2 billion reduction to shareholders’
equity. Information disclosed in the company’s Securities and Exchange Commission filings
explained that the $544 million charge related in large part to a pre-tax charge of $710 million
associated with the termination of the Raptors special purpose entities, and that the $1.2 billion
equity reduction was required to correct Enron’s improperly recording an investment in the
Raptors partnerships as an asset rather than as a reduction to equity.’

Enron’s liquidity position deteriorated as it attempted to deal with the fallout from its
adverse earnings announcements. On October 25, 2001, Enron drew down on approximately $3
billion of its available bank lines to repay outstanding and expiring commercial paper obligations
and provide immediate cash liquidity. Just a few days later, on October 31, 2001, Enron
announced its Board of Directors had appointed a special investigative committee to be chaired
by Mr. William C. Powers, Dean of the University of Texas Law School, to examine and take
actions with respect to the off-balance sheet transactions between Enron and related parties,
including, as appropriate, making reports to the Securities and Exchange Commission.'™

The financial markets continued to react negatively to Enron’s situation, and Enron’s
stock dropped to $13.90 per share on October 31, 2001. On November 8, 2001, Enron
announced that it was restating its financial statements for the periods 1997 through 2000 and the

121 This was in addition to a $326 million charge reflecting Enron’s portion of

impairments recorded by Azurix related to assets in Argentina that was reflected in Enron’s 2000
financial statements.

122 Dress Release, Enron Corp., Enron Reports Recurring Third Quarter Earnings of
$0.43 Per Diluted Share; Reports Non-Recurring Charges of $1.01 Billion After-Tax; Reaffirms
Recurring Earnings Estimates of $1.80 for 2001 and $2.15 for 2002; and Expands Financial
Reporting (October 16, 2001), available at http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/
2001/ene/68-3QearningsLtr.html (last visited October 28, 2002).

3 The explanatory information was contained in a Form 8-K filed on November 8,
2001, and in the company’s third quarter 2001 Form 10-Q filed on November 19, 2001. The
accounting errors pertaining to the $1.2 billion restatement of equity were made in the second
quarter of 2000 and in the first quarter of 2001.

124 The three-month investigation culminated in the February 2002 release of the Powers
Report. According to Mr. Powers’ testimony before the House Committee on Finance Services,
the report would be a “helpful starting point for the necessary further investigations by
Congressional Committees, by the Securities and Exchange Commission, and by the Department
of Justice.” See Testimony of William C. Powers, Jr., Chairman of the Special Investigative
Committee of the Board of Directors of Enron Corporation, Before the House Committee on
Financial Services (February 4, 2002).

80

=== PAGE 109 ===
first two quarters of 2001 to reflect the retroactive consolidation of certain investments that
Enron previously had reported as off-balance sheet entities. These entities included: (1) JEDI
and Chewco, each of which should have been consolidated beginning in November 1997; and (2)
a wholly-owned subsidiary of LJM1 that engaged in the Rhythms Net hedging transactions that
should have been consolidated beginning in 1999. Enron announced that earnings for the
periods 1997 through the second quarter of 2001 were adjusted downward by a total of $569
million, with $396 million attributable to JEDI I and Chewco, and $103 million attributable to
the LJM1 subsidiary.'2> Enron filed a Form 10-Q quarterly report with the Securities and
Exchange Commission on November 19, 2001, that included detailed information regarding
these restatements. The Form 10-Q restatements varied slightly from those announced earlier by
Enron in the November 8, 2001, press release.

Table 6, below, summarizes the restatements as set forth in Enron’s November 19, 2001,
Form 10-Q.

'25 Bnron reported these adjustments in a Form 8-K filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission on November 8, 2001. Enron also decreased its third quarter 2001
earnings by $17 million at the same time.

81

=== PAGE 110 ===
“1007 “61 JOQUISAON UO UOISSIUIUIOD) osueyoxg pure sorjLindseg 9Y) YM polly 0-01 WO] S UOIU WOIJ JJe}S 99}}TUTWIOD) yuror oy} kq poyidurop :90INOS

‘atqeordde you = W/N :3I0ON

V/N IL- €OI- 66€- €Ls- 9E6'% 60S‘E s[e10.L
000T- S 0 0 fs 60 v0r 1007 OZ
OOOT- 67 0 9 ge 09r Sty 1002 OT

CLI- 8e- 8- 16- LEI- C8 6L6 0007

0 OI- co" est- 8SC- seo £68

6661

0 9- 0 €€l- 6cI- y9s €OL 8661

o$ Is-$ o$ 82-$ 6L-$ 97%$ sol$ L661
(T9d-u0u)
yuowysn{pe uon.10d poy.10de.1

Aymnba uoy.0d liaact aUI0IUI 49U poj}ejsal se Ayjeygrur se potsed
s10jdey RYO WALT pure oomay | 0} 3U0UNSH{py | IUIODUT JaN QUIODUI JON suyunod0y
[sxeqjoq Jo SuOTTTA]

uoIUY JOJ syuauIazEISay SuNUNddV |Y-OT WAOA “1007 ‘6T J9qQUIAAON—"9 2142.

82

=== PAGE 111 ===
Prior to Enron’s October and November announcements of its third quarter earnings loss
and its earnings restatements, Enron had reported shareholders’ equity of $11.7 billion as of June
30, 2001, in its second quarter 2001 Form 10-Q filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission on August 14, 2001. The aggregate effect of the charges to third quarter 2001
earnings and equity adjustments reported on October 16, 2001, and the restatements announced
in November 2001, was a decrease in Enron’s net income for the periods 1997 through 2001 of
approximately $1.7 billion. This included $399 million relating to JEDI and Chewco, $103
million relating to LJM1, $710 million relating to LJM2 and the Raptors entities, $287 million
relating to Azurix, and $180 million relating to the broadband businesses.'”° Enron’s equity
diminished from the $11.7 billion it had reported as of June 30, 2001, to $9.6 billion it reported
as of September 30, 2001 aes

Enron’s stock price, which had moved slightly upward in early October 2001, plummeted
during the weeks following its announcement of its third quarter loss on October 16, 2001. Its
per share price dropped from $34.30 on October 16 to $13.90 at the close of trading on October
31, 2001.

4. Illiquidity and failed merger attempts during November 2001

Enron’s stock continued its downward slide during early November, closing at $8.41 per
share on November 8, 2001, the day it announced its earnings restatements for 1997 through
2001. The company’s debt structure had become increasingly difficult to support as the
company’s weakening credit ratings and declining stock price triggered defaults under various
debt covenants. Enron debt coming due in the fourth quarter of 2001 reportedly had increased
from less than $1 billion dollars to $2.8 billion, as Enron’s cash on hand reportedly had
decreased from $3 billion dollars to $1.2 billion.'*

On November 9, 2001, Enron announced that it had reached agreement to be acquired by
Dynegy, Inc. (“Dynegy”), a global provider of energy and communications services, in a $9
billion stock-for-stock acquisition. ° As part of the negotiations, Dynegy (through Chevron

26 The $1.2 billion Raptors equity adjustment made during third quarter 2001 did not
involve an earnings restatement because the prior erroneous entries had not been reflected in the
company’s income statements.

127 Enron Corp., Form 10-Q for the Fiscal Quarter Ended September 30, 2001 filed with
the Securities and Exchange Commission, at 6 (November 19, 2001).

vi Wendy Zellner & Stephanie Anderson Forest, The Fall of Enron, Business Week
(December 17, 2001).

129 Enron later reported in its bankruptcy filings that Dynegy had agreed to pay
approximately $9 billion in Dynegy stock and assume approximately $13 billion in Enron debt.
Motion Of The Debtors Pursuant To Rule 1015(B) Of The Federal Rules Of Bankruptcy
Procedure For Joint Administration Of Cases, In re Enron Corp. et.al., Debtors (No. 01-16034)
Docket Entry No. 2), at 6, at http://www.elaw4enron.com/default.asp (last visited February 5,
2003).

83

=== PAGE 112 ===
Texaco Corporation, which owned approximately 27 percent of the combined common stock of
Dynegy), provided Enron a $1.5 billion cash infusion in exchange for a preferred stock interest
in Enron’s subsidiary, Northern Natural Gas Company, and certain option rights to acquire
Northern Natural Gas Company in the event the merger terminated.!*°

Enron’s announcement of the ongoing Dynegy merger negotiations temporarily bolstered
Enron’s stock price. Enron’s stock price increased slightly to $9.06 per share by the close of
business on November 19, 2001, the day Enron provided detailed information to the Securities
and Exchange Commission regarding its 1997 through 2001 earnings restatements. On
November 20, 2001, however, Enron warned that continuing credit worries, reduced asset
values, and reduced trading activity could weaken fourth quarter 2001 earnings. Enron’s stock
price fell to $6.99 that day, and to $4.11 by the close of trading on November 27, 2001.

Enron’s financial condition continued to deteriorate, and the Dynegy merger agreement
unraveled on November 28, 2001. That same day, Enron shut down EnronOnline, and various
ratings agencies downgraded Enron’s long-term debt to “below investment grade” (i.e., junk
bond) status. Enron announced it had temporarily suspended all payments other than those
necessary to maintain its core operations, and that it was evaluating and exploring options to
protect its core energy businesses. Enron’s stock fell from $4.11 to $0.61 per share on
November 28, and closed at $0.26 per share on November 30, 2001. Enron was on the brink of
bankruptcy.

5. Bankruptcy reorganization and present condition

Enron Corp. and thirteen of its affiliates filed voluntary petitions for Chapter 11
bankruptcy reorganization protection on December 2, 2001 3! On the same date, Enron filed
suit against Dynegy, alleging Dynegy had wrongfully terminated its proposed merger with Enron
and sought damages of at least $10 billion.!° Within the next several days, numerous other

130 Dynegy exercised its option rights to acquire Northern Natural Gas Company when
the merger negotiations terminated. Enron Corp., Form 8-K, filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission (August 19, 2002), at Exhibit 99.1.

131 The affiliates included, among others, Enron North America Corp., the wholesale
energy trading business; Enron Energy Services, Inc., the retail energy marketing operations;
Enron Transportation Services Company, the holding company for pipeline operations; and
Enron Broadband Services, Inc., the bandwidth trading operation. Excluded from the bankruptcy
filing were Northern Natural Gas Pipeline, Transwestern Pipeline, Florida Gas Transmission,
EOTT, PGE, and numerous Enron International entities. Press Release, Enron Corp., Enron
Files Voluntary Petitions for Chapter 11 Reorganization; Sues Dynegy for Breach of Contract,
Seeking Damages of at Least $10 Billion (December 2, 2001), at
http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/200 1/ene/PressRelease] | -12-02-
Olletterhead.html (last visited October 28, 2002).

132 Dress Release, Enron Corp., Enron Files Voluntary Petitions for Chapter 11
Reorganization; Sues Dynegy for Breach of Contract, Seeking Damages of at Least $10 Billion

84

=== PAGE 113 ===
Enron affiliates filed petitions to be included in the consolidated bankruptcy proceeding.'** In its
bankruptcy filing, Enron Corp. (separately, not including any affiliates) listed its assets at $24.8
billion and liabilities at $13.1 billion.'** The combined listed assets of Enron Corp. and its
thirteen affiliates that initially filed for reorganization protection totalled $63.4 billion. Enron
and certain of its consolidated debtors continue to operate businesses and manage properties as
debtors in possession pursuant to the Federal Bankruptcy Code.'

On January 15, 2002, the New York Stock Exchange suspended trading of Enron stock
and moved to delist the company’s shares from the exchange. '*° On January 17, 2002, Enron
discharged Arthur Andersen, its auditor. On February 2, 2002, the Powers Report was delivered
to the Enron Corp. Board of Directors. On February 12, 2002, the company announced that the
total claims of its creditors exceeded the fair market value of its assets and that it did not expect
equity interest holders to receive any interest in the reorganized company.'7 In March 2002, the
USS. Trustee in the bankruptcy proceeding appointed an Employment-Related Issues Committee
to investigate issues relating to current and former employees of Enron. On May 24, 2002, the
bankruptcy court for the Southern District of New York approved the appointment of Neal
Batson, as the Examiner for Enron Corp.

While under bankruptcy reorganization protection, the company has attempted to sell its
non-core assets (primarily global assets and broadband services segments), restructure to protect
its core businesses (wholesale gas and power, coal, retail businesses in North America and
Europe, and natural gas pipeline businesses), and settle litigation and other claims.

(December 2, 2001), at http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/
2001/ene/PressRelease1 1-12-02-01letterhead.html (last visited January 22, 2003).

133 In November 2001, Enron Europe, the company’s European energy-trading arm, filed
for creditor protection under the laws of the United Kingdom.

134 The company reported that this total debts figure, as reported in the corporation’s
voluntary petition for bankruptcy reorganization, did not reflect off-balance sheet and contingent
obligations.

135 & total of 75 Enron companies are reported as Enron bankruptcy debtors in the most
recent Monthly Operating Report filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and the
bankruptcy court. Enron Corp., Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
at 4-9 (January 9, 2003). As of February 8, 2003, Enron reported that 79 Enron companies have
filed voluntary petitions for Chapter 11 reorganization.

136 Enron’s stock fell to $0.26 per share on November 30, 2001, just prior to its
bankruptcy filing.

'37 Tn Forms 8-K filed by the company with the Securities and Exchange Commission on
and after February 12, 2002, the company has stated it “believes the existing equity of the
company has and will have no value and that any plan ... confirmed by the bankruptcy court will
not provide the company’s existing equity holders with any recovery.”

85

=== PAGE 114 ===
Major business asset dispositions completed during Enron’s bankruptcy reorganization
include: (1) the February 2002 sale and licensing of certain North American gas and electric
power trading assets, including EnronOnline; (2) the sale of Enron Oil & Gas India, Ltd.; (3) the
sale of various wind energy assets and holdings; (4) the sale of its domestic and European metals
businesses; and (5) the May 2002 sale by Azurix Corp. of Wessex Water Ltd. On August 27,
2002, Enron commenced its auction of 12 major assets, including PGE, *® several power plants,
and its interests in the Transwestern, Florida Gas Transmission, and Northern Plains pipelines.
On October 10, 2002, the bankruptcy court approved the sale of the newly constructed
headquarters building, Enron Center South.”

On August 15, 2002, Enron and Dynegy announced settlement of their dispute regarding
the termination of merger discussions in late 2001. Pursuant to the settlement, Enron received
$25 million cash and agreed to forego claims regarding Dynegy’s exercise of its option to
acquire Northern Natural Gas Company relating to Dynegy’s $1.5 billion equity infusion made
during November 2001.

Enron filed with the bankruptcy court its Statement of Financial Affairs (“Statement”),
which provides certain financial and other information regarding the company as of the
bankruptcy filing date. Among other things, the Statement reported that Enron and its affiliates
paid senior management $309.9 million in salary, bonuses, long-term incentives, deferred
payments, loan advances, expense reimbursements, director’s fees, and other payments during
the year preceding the bankruptcy filing.'“° The company has filed Monthly Operating
Statements for the periods of December 2001 through October 2002 with the bankruptcy court,
and with the Securities and Exchange Commission as attachments to Form 8-K filings. These
statements are unaudited and do not contain a balance sheet. The company has certified to the
Securities and Exchange Commission that it does not have an independent auditor, it believes
that retention of an independent auditor is not feasible, and it does not intend to provide audited
financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2001, or any subsequent unaudited
quarterly financial statements.'“!

138 Enron’s earlier agreement to sell PGE to Northwest Natural Gas Company terminated
in May 2002.

139 Enron had commenced construction of this structure, a 40-story, 1.2 million square
feet office headquarters in downtown Houston, Texas, in 1999.

140 Statement of Financial Affairs, Exhibit 3b.2 (ist of all insider payments made within
one year immediately preceding the commencement of the bankruptcy case). These same
insiders also received $434.5 million of compensatory stock value during this period relating to
exercised Enron stock options and Enron restricted stock, measured at the time of the exercise of
the option or the lapsing of the stock’s restrictions.

141 Enron Corp., Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (August
13, 2002). The company has stated, however, that if a comprehensive review of accounting
adjustments, including asset impairments and writedowns, related to previously reported
financial information, were conducted, and a consolidated balance sheet as of December 31,

86

=== PAGE 115 ===
Enron now describes itself as being “in the midst of restructuring its business with the
hope of emerging from bankruptcy as a strong and viable, albeit smaller, company.” Enron

presently Teports assets of $47.3 billion, including 9,000 miles of pipeline, and 14,000
employees. 8

2001, were prepared in accordance with GAAP, an estimated $14 billion writedown of assets
would be required. Monthly Operating Statement for the Period December 2 to 31, 2001, filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission on April 22, 2002. The same report stated an
additional downward adjustment of $8 billion to $10 billion relating to price risk management
assets as of December 31, 2001, could also be required in such a case.

142 bhttp://www.enron.com/corp/ (last visited January 22, 2003).

43 hitp://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/factsheets/company.html (last visited
February 8, 2003).

87

=== PAGE 116 ===
D. Enron’s Federal Income Tax Position
1. Enron’s consolidated Federal income tax filings

Enron Corp. is a calendar year taxpayer that uses the accrual basis method of accounting
for Federal income tax purposes. Enron Corp. files consolidated Federal income tax returns in
which it reports the consolidated taxable income of its affiliated group within the meaning of
section 1504(a).'“* Enron reported 346 entities as members of its affiliated group in its 2000 tax
return.'“5 Enron’s consolidated group also includes numerous single member limited liability
companies that Enron treats as disregarded entities for Federal income tax purposes.'“

The IRS master file account information pertaining to Enron Corp. as of January 8, 2003,
shows that Enron filed Federal income tax returns for each of its taxable years from 1988
through 2001. Enron filed its Federal income tax return for its 2001 taxable year in September
2002.'4” Enron’s tax return for calendar year 2002 is not due until March 17, 2003.

Mr. Robert J. Hermann signed Enron’s Federal income tax returns for the years 1985
through 2000 in his capacity as an officer of the company. '“8 Mr. Jordan H. Mintz signed

144 Th general, an affiliated group is defined for this purpose to mean one or more chains
of corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent if the common parent
owns, directly or indirectly, at least 80 percent of the total voting power and value of the stock of
such corporations. Certain corporations, including tax-exempt corporations, life insurance
companies, foreign corporations, section 936 corporations (regarding the Puerto Rico and
possessions tax credit), regulated investment companies, real estate investment trusts, domestic
international sales corporations, and S corporations, generally are not eligible to be included in
an affiliated group. Sec. 1504(b).

145 Form 1120, Enron Corp., 2000 (Form 851 Affiliations Schedule).

146 Enron North America, Corp. (a subsidiary of Enron Corp.) alone reported in excess of
100 such entities. See Diagram of Enron North America - Disregarded entities. EC2
000025345. Under the Treasury Department’s “check-the-box” entity classification regulations
issued in December 1996, a domestic entity (other than a corporation and certain other ineligible
entities) with a single owner is disregarded as an entity separate from its owner for Federal
income tax purposes unless such entity elects to be treated as an association taxable as a
corporation. Treas. Reg. secs. 301.7701-3(b)(1)(ii) and 301.7701-2(c)(2). Such a disregarded
entity is treated as a branch or division of its sole owner for Federal income tax purposes.

147 Enron filed documents with the Federal bankruptcy court which state that PGE has
ceased to join in the filing of Enron’s consolidated Federal income tax returns as a result of a
May 7, 2001, transaction that caused PGE to cease to qualify as a member of Enron’s affiliated
group. Docket No. 8232, paragraph 27.

148 Mr. Hermann signed the returns as “Vice-President, Tax” for the tax years through

1995, as “VP & General Tax Counsel” for the tax years 1996 through 1998, and as “Managing
Director and General Tax Counsel” for the tax years 1999 and 2000.

88

=== PAGE 117 ===
Enron’s Federal income tax return for the 2001 taxable year as Enron’s Managing Director and
General Tax Counsel.

Table 7, below, provides a reconciliation of Enron’s consolidated financial statement net
income and Enron’s consolidated taxable income for 1996 through 2000. The information
contained in the table is based on Enron’s tax returns as filed without regard to audit
adjustments. !? In addition, the information contained in the table is based on Enron’s financial

statements as initially reported, without regard to earnings restatements as announced on
November 19, 2001.'%°

149 The IRS examination of tax years 1996 through 2000 is ongoing.

150 See Table 6, above, November 19, 2001, Form 10-Q Accounting Restatements for
Enron, for a detailed listing of Enron’s restatements. It is impossible to fully assess Enron’s
book to tax differences prior to determination of Enron’s ultimate tax liability, which is under
review by the bankruptcy court, and without a restatement of Enron’s financial statements for
these periods to reflect generally accepted accounting principles.

89

=== PAGE 118 ===
“uINjol Xe} OY) UT poyodar

se sjuounsn{pe xe} 0} YOoq s,uoIUY Jo s]iejap JoUINY sureJUOD YW xIpueddy ‘uonIppe uy “uoNEUasord sty) suTeJUOD g xIpueddy *Z00Z ‘Z oun ‘yeIs saTUTIOD
juror oy) 0) UONRIUAseId UOIU UI poyodel se sjuNoUTY (9) ‘s}UNOUTE soy) Jo s[reJap [eUONIppe surejUOS Y xIpuoddy UI UOHeT[IOUOOeL WINJal XB} OF Bununosoe
jeloueuy oy, ‘slusWaIE)s [eIouRULY poyeplosuoo UI popnjoul JOU (€-TOLL' LOE “99S “Bor ‘searL) sasodind xvy Joy sonnus popreseisiq (¢) ‘sjunoure osoyp Jo sjrejap
jeuontppe sureyuoo y xIpuoddy ut uonerrouoged winjor xe} 0} SUTUNODIE JeIOUBUY OY], “SUINJOI XE} SWODUT [PIOPI-] ayeredos of1J 0} pornbos ose sdiysiouried (p)
“((E)(Q) POST *99S) UINIaI Xe] PayepP![OSUOD UT UOIsNIOUT Joy B[qIBI]o JOU are sUOTJeIOIOD UBIoIO, (¢) “sJUNOUTE osotp JO S|Ie}op [PUCTIIPpe SUTEIUOD Y xipuoddy ur
uonelfouosal UINjeI xe} 0} SuNUNODOR JeIoURUY oY], “((Z)(B)POST *99S) 380} ONJBA puke a}0A JuooIed Cg BuNeoUT Jou suonelodiog (Z) ‘powoder Ayjeursii0 sy (1)

IOL‘€ gcr'I- €SL- vOS- Ol€-
LeI- €@Z 1OI- 18Z- €6C-
9IS‘s- 898°7- 889'I- €Z0'I- €8I‘I-
vSI- vl- Ls- ¢9- L9-
09S‘T- Z8E- 76" o €lI-
0¢- ce- L@- pe- 6I-
6rl- ZI- €- ver Ge
99's 0 0 0 0
LE€s- 906- €€e- sl 8II-
18b- See- 60I- @ZI- LOI-
€6l 8zI- Sv Ce- 6SI
968'S ZIT Z19'T 196 cert
€8s‘eL out 868'T ooE'T TET
BSz (aal v1 0 0
S79‘EI L66'€ rss'l O0E€‘T CEL
996'8- 006‘T- 686- vbr- €Ly-
668°9- 8E9- 61€- 1IZ- Crl-
CCL I- OILI- 1Zs- br- ZEC
cre- SI- 6v1- 68I- 96-
6L6 €68 €OL col pss
0002 6661 8661 L661 9661

SOON
WINDY XV, poyepljosuog uo poylodey owosuy aqexe J,

saoualajjiIq XBI, 0} YOog 19410 ITV
UWINJOY XB], Jag [es19Ady ssurwseq Ainby

saouslayjiq, uoretse1doq,

uononpag suondg 4901

juounsn{[py souvinsuy JI] poumo Aueduod

(jso19)UT

Aylgoutu 10 Aynbo “3'2) Yoog JOJ JOU XB, 10J Qo] SB poywal], somNjoN.NS
(6SZI UONdes) sfeg saNONNsUOD

syuoursn(py Joye] O} YR] ION

sjuounsnipy diyssouyeg JON

Saxe], OWOdU] [e10pe,F

sluoUNsHIpY XBL, 01 YooR esis

TS
wINJaY XVI, poyepljosuod uo poylodsy swiosuy Yyoog
<XeL, JO} papnyouy Sununosoy [eloueuRy Joy pelfosuD you sonnu”

XB], JO] JOU INQ syoog JoJ ope UONeUTUNTY Auedutoo19}UT
THOT SUIOSUy JON SN

»Sdiyssounreg
,suonesodioy USIOI0.}
SuonesodsoD onsourog

Tinjoy XBL, poyeprjosuo.y ul popnpouy JOU SoNNUY Wor; SWIOSU] YON SS9’]

JusUTE}eIg SWODUT [eIOURULY Poyepr[OsuoD UT povoday owiosuy 39N

[saeyjop Jo surat]

0007-9661 eWosUy aIGexe J, 0) aWIODUT JUAUIIIEIG [elUBULT Jo UOHETTIIUOIIY ‘saleIpIsqns pue *diog uo1ug—Z a1qe 1,

90

=== PAGE 119 ===
2. Interaction between Enron and the Internal Revenue Service

Selected information regarding Enron’s tax department

Prior to the 1985 acquisition of HNG by InterNorth, HNG had a tax department with 24
employees, and InterNorth had approximately 55 tax department members. The 1985
HNG/InterNorth combination created a combined tax department with approximately 80
employees, led by Mr. Hermann, who had served as HNG’s Vice President of Corporate
Taxes.!>! The size of the Enron tax department decreased in the late 1980s as a result of
recommendations by external management consultants that the company’s tax department should
be reduced to about 40 employees.

Enron's tax department went through significant expansion and reorganization during the
1990s. Beginning in 1989 or 1990, when Enron’s business was moving beyond physical assets
into financial products, Enron’s tax department began “managing” Enron’s tax liability, rather
than merely preparing a tax return to report income resulting from Enron’s operations. During
the late 1980s Enron had been reporting net operating losses for Federal income tax purposes,
resulting in a cumulative reported net operating loss carryover of approximately $404 million
available from its 1990 taxable year.'** Enron had “tight sands” tax credits, however, that Enron
could utilize only if it had taxable income that generated a Federal income tax liability. It
became advantageous for Enron to begin reporting positive taxable income for Federal income
tax purposes, rather than net operating losses, to ensure full utilization of the tight sands tax
credits. In its 1990 annual report letter to its shareholders and customers, Enron reported that the
tight sands tax credits, combined with a Texas severance tax exemption, could be worth more
than $100 million to Enron on a present value basis.'°? For 1991, Enron reported Federal taxable
income of $167.5 million after fully utilizing its $404 million net operating loss carryover from
1990.'** Enron also reported that its tight sands tax credits amounted to $17 million in 1991 and
could exceed $40 million in 1992. By this time, Enron recognized the importance of Federal
income tax benefits, such as the tight sands tax credits, as a means of favorably affecting income

‘51 The information regarding Enron’s tax department was obtained during the course of
interviews conducted by the Joint Committee staff.

152 Enron reported a consolidated net operating loss carryover of $403 million, available
until 2003, in its notes to its 1990 annual report. Enron Corp., 1990 Annual Report, at 47 (1991).
The actual amount of the carryover reported on Enron’s 1991 tax return was $404 million.

153 Enron Corp., 1990 Annual Report, at 6 (1991). The letter stated the successful move
to longer term contracts and “the supportive role Enron Oil & Gas played in the passage of tight
sands legislation were significant accomplishments in 1990.” Id.

154 Enron Corp., 1991 Annual Report, at 43 (1992).

155 Tq. at 3. Enron stated that the “positive impact of the tight gas sand tax credit,
continued emphasis on cost control and net revenue from other marketing activities should allow
EOG earnings to continue to improve despite low natural gas prices.” Id.

91

=== PAGE 120 ===
for financial reporting purposes.!* © From the period 1991 through 1995, Enron claimed tight
sands tax credits of approximately $150 million.'*”

In 1991, Enron also started expanding into international business ventures. In order to
win bids on international ventures, the tax department provided tax planning methods involving
the establishment of offshore companies to reduce U.S. tax on income from the ventures.'°® This
led to staffing increases in the international tax area in Enron’s tax department personnel and in
other areas as well, causing the staff to approximately double in size from the late 1980s to 1996.
Enron’s tax department grew from a staff of 83 in 1996 to 253 in 2000.'°? The majority of these
employees were located in Houston, although a few were in Portland, Oregon, and others were in
Enron’s office in London, England. By the end of 2001, however, the tax department had
decreased to 183 employees. By 2002, the Enron tax department had further declined to 117
employees.

During the second half of the 1990s, the Enron tax department was divided into 12
separate and distinct functions. These functions included: Managing Director/General Tax
Counsel; Planning; Reporting & Analysis; Tax Systems; Structured Transactions; Audits; Sales
and Use Tax; Ad Valorem Tax; Administrative; Azurix; PGE - Portland; and London.!® At the
beginning of 2001, Enron’s tax department was organized into several groups, generally with a
vice president in charge who reported to Mr. Hermann. These groups included: Corporate
Reporting and Analysis; Corporate — International; Corporate - Tax Planning; Enron North

156 Enron was able to reduce its income tax expense (and increase its financial statement
net income) by the amount of its tight sands tax credits. See e.g., Enron Corp., 1993 Annual
Report (1994), at 52, n.3. Enron reported that it utilized tight sand tax credits of approximately
$42.5 million in 1992, and that it expected to utilize approximately $50 million of the credit in
1993. Enron Corp., 1992 Annual Report, at 31 (1993). Enron reported it would continue to
support a possible extension of the credit qualification period beyond 1992, and that it would
continue to benefit from the credit after 1992 because it applied to previously qualified
production through 2002. Enron Corp., 1992 Annual Report 31 (1993).

157 See Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation, (June
7, 2002).

158 These offshore structures are discussed in more detail in Part Five.C., below, of this
Report.

159 See Appendix B, Enron Corp. Tax Department Summary Headcount Analysis, Enron
Corp. Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation (June 7, 2002), at 8.

160 See Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation, (June
7, 2002).

92

=== PAGE 121 ===
America; Enron Energy Services; Europe; Enron Broadband Services; Gas Pipeline Group;
Audits; and Structured Transactions.!*!

Enron's tax department was proactive. Over time the tax department generated benefits
for Enron that equaled, or eventually far outstripped, the budgeted cost of the tax department
itself. The benefits generated by Enron’s tax department included financial earnings as well as

«og 162
tax savings.

Enron’s tax department obtained the services of external tax advisors for general tax
advice that included: tax return preparation, transfer pricing documentation, State tax issues, tax
audit support, and Federal tax consulting.’ Enron estimated that it paid $14 million in external
U.S. tax advisor fees in connection with such advice during the late 1990s.1%4

During the period 1997 through 2000, Enron prepared more than 1,000 Federal tax
returns for each year with respect to its affiliated and related entities. From 1997 to 2000, the
total number of Federal tax returns prepared by the department increased from 1,002 to 2,486.1
Similarly, the total number of State income and franchise tax returns prepared by the department
increased during this period from 622 to 1,422,167

Enron’s tax department prepared an annual report measuring the total tax savings
generated by the department. The tax department transmitted the report to Enron’s Board of
Directors each December, before the Board approved the bonus pool for employees. In the late
1990s, the pay and bonuses of the tax department personnel were determined, like those of other
Enron employees, on a ranking system with different levels. The base pay and bonus for any
particular individual in the tax department were not specifically dependent on the tax savings

161 Appendix B, Tax Department Organization As Of January 1, 2001, Enron Corp.
Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation (June 7, 2002), at 7; a description of the
Structured Transactions Group is included in Part Three. A of this Report.

162 These benefits are described in more detail with respect to the structured transactions
described in Part Three.A., below, of this Report.

163 See Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation, (June
7, 2002).

164 Tq. These estimates do not include external tax advisor fees paid with respect to
Enron’s structured transactions.

165 See Part Two, Background and Methodology. See also Appendix B, Enron Corp.,
Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation, (June 7, 2002).

166 Id.

167 See Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation, (June
7, 2002).

93

=== PAGE 122 ===
generated by that individual. A general discussion of Enron employee compensation is described
in more detail in Part Four of this Report.

IRS examination of Enron tax returns

From 1990 to the present, the IRS conducted four examinations of Enron’s Federal
income tax returns. The examinations were divided into four audit cycles as follows: (1) taxable
years 1983 through 1987; (2) taxable years 1988 through 1991; (3) taxable years 1992 through
1994; and (4) taxable years 1995 through 2001. The first three audit cycles were closed by the
IRS in 1993, 1996, and 1998, respectively. '® The net agreed deficiencies with respect to these
examination cycles totaled $4.3 million. The audit cycle for 1995 through 2001 is currently
under examination by the Irs.‘

Each of the IRS’s examinations of Enron’s tax returns was coordinated through a team
manager and a team coordinator. The IRS team generally included revenue agents, economists,
engineers, and specialists in financial products, international examinations, and computer
audits.!”° Each IRS team that examined Enron’s 1985 through 1987 and 1988 through 1991
audit cycles consisted of 11 individuals. The IRS team size increased to 13 individuals for the
1992 through 1994 audit cycle, and to 27 individuals for the 1995 through 2001 audit cycle. The
team manager for the last three audit cycles was the same IRS employee. The IRS assigned a
different revenue agent as the team coordinator for each of the four audit cycles.

The IRS reported certain audit adjustment information to the Joint Committee staff.
According to those reports, the adjustments to taxable income made by the IRS audit teams for
Enron’s taxable years 1988 through 1995 were as follows: -$18.8 million for 1988, -$27.3
million for 1989, -$11.7 million for 1990, $19.7 million for 1991, $101.6 million for 1992, $85.9
million for 1993, and $211.8 million for 1994. The total net adjustments made by the IRS audit
teams for taxable years 1988 through 1994 increased Enron’s taxable income by $361.2 million.

For the 1995 through 1999, the IRS issued 854 information document requests to Enron
through March 5, 2002. Some of the information or materials requested included or involved:
planning materials, partnership filings and returns, phantom stock deductions, other deductions,
balance sheets, reorganization materials, affiliates’ receivables, commodity derivatives and
commodity physical positions, employee status, company policies, and general information. As
of March 5, 2002, Enron had completed its responses to 830 requests. The outstanding requests
involved related party transactions, potentially abusive tax shelters, development costs,

168 Internal Enron management documents reported that Enron had “successfully
concluded the audit of the 1989-1991 tax returns, sustaining the deductibility of Net Operating
Loss carry forward, which allowed recognition of $10 MM in tax benefit during third quarter
1995.” 1995 Performance Review. EC 000102767.

169 The Joint Committee staff understands that the IRS examination of Enron’s 1995
taxable year is complete and that proposed adjustments have been made with respect to 1995.

170 The IRS team for the 1995 through 2001 audit cycle also included specialists in
employee plans and a specialist in excise taxes.

94

=== PAGE 123 ===
partnership income/loss, trading in the context of financial deals, capital gains, political
contributions, and certain self-audit adjustments. The IRS expects to propose or make
adjustments to one or more of the years in the open audit cycle, which could affect Enron’s tax
liability for such years.

Enron’s overall working relationship with the IRS was described by Mr. Hermann as
“professional” and “good” from the mid-1980s through the mid-1990s.'7! Mr. Hermann reported
that Enron’s expansion into international markets in the mid-1990s complicated the IRS’s
development of an audit plan and audit team to examine the tax implications of this growth,
resulted in the IRS exploring irrelevant issues, and caused the working relationship between the
IRS and Enron to deteriorate.!”” During IRS briefings, the Joint Committee staff was told that
the relationship between Enron and the IRS became strained in the later years.

Enron’s involvement in the coordinated industry case program

The IRS uses a coordinated industry case program’? (“CIP”) to coordinate the
examination of large and highly diversified taxpayers. Pursuant to the CIP, over 1,600 of the
largest corporate taxpayers are audited on an ongoing basis for a period of one or more years. If
a taxpayer is chosen for the CIP, the taxpayer and all of their effectively controlled entities are
included in the case. Unrelated entities may also be included in the case if they are associated

1 Joint Committee staff interview.

172 Id.

173 The CIP was created to centralize control of large cases and obtain uniformity and
consistency in management. See Internal Revenue Manual Ch. 4.45.3.1 (Primary Control—
Overview). CIP cases generally are selected based on factors that potentially indicate a high
level of tax complexity. Such factors include the taxpayer’s gross assets (usually starting at $500
million), gross receipts (usually starting at $1 billion), the number of entities involved, the
number of separate and distinct major industries the taxpayer is involved in, and the specialized
staff-related resources required to conduct the audit. Each of these factors is considered for a
specific taxpayer and if certain thresholds are met the case qualifies as a CIP case. Usually, once
a corporation qualifies as a CIP case it will remain in the program even if there may be a change
in its circumstances. See Internal Revenue Manual Ch. 4.45.2.1 (Case Selection--Identification
of Cases). Irrespective of whether a case exceeds the required threshold, a case may be included
in the program if it is determined to be sufficiently complex and would likely benefit from using
the team approach of the CIP. Likewise, cases meeting the thresholds may be excluded from the
examination under the CIP. See Internal Revenue Manual Exhibit 4.45.2-1 (Criteria for the
identification of Coordinated Industry Program cases).

Audit-related work in CIP cases is carried out by a team of revenue agents and other
specialist members (such as international tax specialists, employment and excise tax specialists,
economists, and engineers) who are responsible for reviewing and analyzing the tax liabilities of
the corporate taxpayer in their respective area of specialization over a period of approximately 26
months. See Internal Revenue Manual Ch. 4.45.7.1 (Examination Cycle).

95

=== PAGE 124 ===
with the taxpayer in activities that have significant tax consequences. In 2001, over 400 cases
and 3,700 returns were closed after being examined under the cip.!™ Enron has been a CIP
program participant since January 1989.

3. Enron’s Federal income tax payments

Enron filed Federal income tax returns for 1996 through 2001 that reported a tax liability
(before payments and credits) only for its 2000 and 2001 taxable years. These returns report that
Enron paid no Federal income taxes with respect to taxable years 1996 through 1999.'° Enron’s
taxable year 2000 Federal income tax return reported a tax liability of $63.2 million, tax
payments and other credits of $70.1 million, and an overpayment of $6.9 million. Enron’s
taxable year 2001 Federal income tax return reported a total tax of $13,331, but a refund due to
Enron of $20,428.'”°

Table 8, below, contains selected information regarding the company’s taxable years
1986 through 2001, based on Enron’s consolidated Federal income tax returns as filed without
regard to audit adjustments.!””

174 These returns related to a number of different taxable years. See Department of
Treasury, Program Performance Report for FY2001, at http:/Avww.ustreas.gov/gpra/200Irpt.pdf.

5 This is consistent with the IRS master file account information pertaining to Enron
Corp. as of January 8, 2003.

There have been conflicting accounts regarding whether Enron paid Federal income taxes
during its profitable years. For example, a January 17, 2002, analysis of Enron’s financial
documents by Citizens for Tax Justice concluded that Enron received a net tax rebate of $381
million for the five-year period 1996 to 2000, even though it had U.S. profits before Federal
income taxes of $1.785 billion for the same period. http://www.ctj.org/html/enron.htm. The
Congressional Research Service, however, concluded that Enron paid U.S. Federal taxes during
1996 through 2000. Congressional Research Service, Report for Congress: Enron and Taxes,
No. RS21149 (February 12, 2002).

176 Although Enron made no Federal income tax payments with respect to its 2001
taxable year, Enron’s 2001 return reported a credit for Federal tax on fuels of $33,759, which
exceeded the reported tax due of $13,331 and created the reported refund of $20,428.

7 These figures do not include taxes paid by related entities that were not included in
Enron’s consolidated group. For example, EOG was not included in Enron’s consolidated
Federal income tax return for those periods in which Enron owned less than 80 percent of EOG,
and the figures do not include any taxes paid by EOG during such period. See Appendix B,
Enron Corp., Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation, (June 7, 2002).

96

=== PAGE 125 ===
“1002-9861 “dioD uosug ‘QZT1 Suli0,] :oornog

“8ZP‘OT$ JO ONP pungol v YIM “GCL‘EC$ JO SUPOIO xb} ‘TEEET$ JOTOOT 10g xed powder uolug (1) :SaION

SOv- cO oler 9 16E 617I- ev 6v9l ere s[e10.L
0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 1007
6°9- v0 O'OL (a) 0 0 oly a4 0007
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6661
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8661
T'0- v0 0 0 0 0 0 0 L661
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9661
88 0 ai4 vor G'9C- (4) 0 Los S661
O's- 0 Ov 0'6£ Ltt c0 0 S°%9 v661
c9- 0 o'9s 8'6v C6C- c'0 0 L’8L £661
6'€- 0 0°09 9s vCl- £0 0 789 7661
0°9- 0 Ove! O'sIT 10€- 80 v'06 69S 1661
9°6- 0 viv Sle 0 v0 vie 0 0661
L'O- 0 x4 el 0 10 cl 0 686T
O- 0 oll 0 0 0 0 0 8861
0 0 9°0 9°0 0 9°0 0 0 L861
10 0 el vil 0 vi 0 0 9861
xBy
pred12a0 syIpa.19 syuswAed syIpa.td nur Xb} dUIOUI AULD,
Joonp xey | aqepunjey xe xB} [BIO], «| aqupunjaruoN | sexe} yO | seyeusei[V aepnsay

[sae[op Jo suor]r]
SUINJEY PepudsuUly 10 [BUISIIO 19d
“100Z-986T 10J SOXe], [e19paq “S'S, UOIUY 0} SuUHLpY UOHeULIoJUT p2}2[9S—"g ad2.L

97


=== PAGE 126 ===
4. Enron’s reported present Federal income tax position

Enron reported net operating losses (before net operating loss carryovers) for each of its
taxable years 1996 through 1999. Enron did not seek to carry back those net operating losses to
receive a refund of income taxes paid in earlier years. Instead, Enron carried forward these net
operating losses ($3.1 billion) into 2000.'78 The net operating losses for 1996 through 1999
prevented Enron from obtaining closure for Federal income tax audit purposes with respect to
those years.!” As aresult, Enron adopted a strategy to pay tax for 2000 to close out the audit for
1996 through 1999. Late in 2000, Enron entered into a number of transactions intended to
generate taxable income in 2000 that would absorb the entire $3.1 billion net operating loss
carryover to that year.'®° In its 2000 Federal income tax return, Enron reported $3.1 billion of
taxable income (before its net operating loss deduction), which Enron offset with its reported net
operating loss carryover from 1999 to 2000 of approximately the same amount. The following
year, 2001, Enron recognized losses from closing out the transactions that had generated taxable
income in 2000. This resulted in a net operating loss of $4.6 billion on Enron’s 2001 Federal
income tax return.'®!

5. Federal income tax claims in Enron’s bankruptcy proceeding
Enron Corp. and each of its affiliates included in the consolidated bankruptcy proceeding

that filed a Statement of Financial Affairs with the bankruptcy court (except one company, Enron
LNG Shipping Company) listed the IRS as a creditor holding an unsecured claim, with the total

8 The $3.1 billion net operating loss carryover (as reported in Enron’s 1999 return)
consisted of $337.5 million from 1996, $503.5 million from 1997, $752.8 million from 1998, and
$1.4 million from 1999. The 1996 loss amount of $337.5 million differs slightly from the $310.2
million reported on Enron’s 1996 return. Enron reported its consolidated alternative minimum
tax net operating loss carryover from 1999 to 2000 as $2.9 billion.

179 net operating loss carryover from a year closed under the generally applicable
limitations provisions of Section 6501 may be examined for purposes of adjusting the net
operating loss deduction allowable in a subsequent open year. Rev. Rul. 56-285, 1956-1 C.B.
134; Rev. Rul. 65-96, 1965-1 C.B. 126. This rule has the effect of keeping open Enron’s taxable
years for which it had reported unexpired net operating losses (1996 through 1999), for these
limited purposes, beyond the generally applicable limitations periods.

180 These transactions were part of the Project NOLy transaction that is described in Part
Three of this Report, which by itself generated $5.5 billion of the taxable income that Enron
reported in its 2000 tax return. A member of Enron’s tax department described the transactions
“as generating income [to] close tax years”. In that person’s words, “we needed a statute and so
in the year 2000 we managed our taxable income to pay $60 million in tax so that we’d have a
statute and use up the $3 billion NOL we had.” Joint Committee staff interview.

181 The intent of Project NOLy was to generate sufficient income in taxable year 2000 to

use the company’s $3.1 billion net operating loss carryover, and reverse the income recognized
by Enron the following year (in 2001).

98

=== PAGE 127 ===
amount of the claim being unknown. Enron Corp. listed as an asset a Federal income tax refund
of $63.2 million in its Statement of Financial Affairs, Schedule B, filed with the bankruptcy
court on June 17, 2002. On August 1, 2002, the bankruptcy court ordered that the IRS has until
March 31, 2003, to file proofs of claim or interests against any of the Enron entities that are part
of the consolidated bankruptcy proceeding. Under that order, the IRS may seek an extension of
the deadline for filing its proof of claim beyond March 31, 2003.

99

=== PAGE 128 ===
PART THREE: DISCUSSION OF SELECTED TAX MOTIVATED TRANSACTIONS
AND BUSINESS ARRANGEMENTS USED BY ENRON

This Part Three of the Report addresses Enron’s participation in arrangements that were
designed to achieve significant tax and financial accounting benefits. As early as the late 1980s,
Enron recognized the importance of managing its Federal income tax liability by generating
taxable income to absorb certain temporary energy credits. In the 1990s, Enron began to engage
in structured transactions that were motivated largely, if not entirely, to achieve certain desired
tax benefits. These tax-motivated transactions, referred to in this Report as “Projects,” initially
were done to shelter capital gain that Enron realized from its sales of subsidiary stock. As Enron
began reporting net operating losses for Federal income tax purposes, its need for tax savings
diminished. Around the same time, however, the importance to Enron of reporting of financial
statement earnings increased dramatically.'® In essence, Enron’s tax department was given a
new responsibility -- to contribute to Enron’s bottom line earnings, much like Enron’s operating
business units. To achieve this objective, the tax department, in consultation with outside
experts, designed transactions to meet or approximate the technical requirements of tax
provisions with the primary purpose of manufacturing financial statement income. The slogan
“Show Me the Money!” exemplified this effort.'**

Along with the change in responsibility came an organizational change to Enron Corp.’s
tax department. In 1998, Enron segregated the personnel responsible for the Projects into a
separate group within Enron’s corporate tax department. Known as the structured transactions
group, the employees in this group handled all aspects of the Projects.

This Part of the Report analyzes in detail the Projects that were done by Enron’s
structured transactions group. Each analysis has been written to “tell the story” of the Project,
beginning with a brief overview of the Project, followed by the relevant background information,
how the Project was implemented, a diagram that depicts the Project structure, the role of outside
advisors, and any significant event that occurred subsequent to the Project. Each analysis then
discusses the significant tax issues raised by the Project and concludes with specific
recommendations (if appropriate). In order to provide a brief discussion of the relevant present-
law tax laws that are implicated by the Projects, each Project has been classified into one of the
following categories: (1) structured transactions that raise corporate tax issues; (2) structured

'8? For example, as part of its “Enron 2000” plan, Enron announced its commitment to
achieving $1 billion of net income by the year 2000. See Presentation to Enron Corp. Board of
Directors, December 9, 1997 (describing the history regarding introduction of Enron 2000 and its
importance as the standard against which the company’s actual financial performance was to be
measured. EC000046072.

183 This is documented by Enron presentation materials titled “Show Me the Money!
Project Steele Earning Benefits.” The expected pre-tax operating earnings from this transaction
was approximately $133 million. The Project Steele materials in Appendix B contain the
document. EC2 000038546.

100

=== PAGE 129 ===
transactions that raise partnership tax issues; (3) other structured transactions; and (4)
transactions in which Enron served as an accommodation party.

This Part of the Report also analyzes Enron’s use of corporate-owned and trust-owned
life insurance arrangements, structured financings arrangements, and offshore entities. This Part
of the Report concludes with a general discussion of certain of Enron’s off-balance sheet
partnership arrangements that were motivated by financial reporting objectives.

101

=== PAGE 130 ===
I. STRUCTURED TAX MOTIVATED TRANSACTIONS
A. Background and Rationale

In the early 1990s, Enron engaged in several structured financing transactions in which
Enron received upfront payments in exchange for the future delivery of a specified commodity
such as crude oil or natural gas (“commodity prepay transactions”).'** The commodity prepay
transactions originally were entered into in order to generate current taxable income to use tax
credits generated by Enron Oil and Gas that would have otherwise expired. In the mid-1990s,
Enron continued its use of structured financing transactions and used other structured
transactions to shelter capital gain income on the sale of Enron Oil and Gas stock.!*

Although providing financial accounting benefits, the early structured transactions,
including the commodity prepay transactions, were primarily engaged in for Federal income tax
benefits. However, as Enron began to report losses for Federal income tax purposes, the
importance of immediate tax deductions declined. At the same time, the importance of financial
accounting income to Enron increased. As a result, Enron’s focus shifted from structured

transactions that could shelter specific tax items to transactions that could generate financial
accounting benefits.

Arguably, the primary reason for engaging in most of the subsequent structured
transactions after 1996 was for the financial accounting benefits they generated rather than the
Federal income tax benefits.!®° Indeed, many of the structured transactions were designed to
permit Enron to begin reporting the financial accounting benefits of a transaction immediately
even though the Federal income tax benefits (which generated the financial accounting benefit)
would not occur until significantly into the future.!®” In some of the structured transactions,

184 The commodity prepay transactions are discussed in more detail later in this Part of
the Report.

185 For example, Enron issued investment unit securities (discussed later in this Part of
the Report) to monetize part of its investment in Enron Oil and Gas common stock. In addition,
Project Tanya and Project Valor were structured transactions that Enron engaged in to shelter
taxable income on capital gain on the sale of Enron Oil and Gas stock.

186 Th all of the structured transactions discussed in this Report, except two structured
transactions in which Enron was an accommodation party, the origin of the financial accounting
benefits was the reduction in Federal income tax that the transaction was anticipated to provide
either currently or in the future.

187 Statement of Financial Accounting Standards 109 (“SFAS 109”), Accounting for
Income Taxes, generally provides that assets and liabilities that are recorded at different amounts
for financial reporting purposes and income tax purposes create differences for which a deferred
tax asset or liability generally must be reported in the financial statements. However, certain
basis differences may not result in taxable or deductible amounts in future years when the related
asset is recovered or settled because the tax law provides a means for the taxpayer to recover the
asset in a tax-free transaction. In such situations, if management reasonably represents that,

102

=== PAGE 131 ===
specific attributes intentionally were incorporated to accelerate the recognition of the associated
financial accounting income and enable the income to be reported as operating income in lieu of
a reduction in income tax expense. In general, operating earnings are more valuable to a
business than a reduction in income tax expense because many stock analysts and valuation
specialists utilize operating earnings when analyzing the appropriate value and stock price for a
business.'** In addition, because the relevant accounting standard does not use present value
concepts, in many cases the reported financial accounting income significantly exceeded the
present value of the anticipated Federal income tax benefits.'?

Organization of the structured transactions group

The general tax-planning group within Enron’s corporate tax department initially was
responsible for implementing the structured transactions. However, in June of 1998, Mr.
Hermann segregated the personnel responsible for the structured transactions into a separate

without incurring significant cost, the company will use a tax planning action that permits the
asset to be recovered in a tax-free transaction, then no deferred taxes are reported in the financial
statements. Because no deferred tax asset or liability is reported, such difference will increase or
decrease income reported in the financial statements in the year the basis difference arises,
irrespective that such tax planning action may not be undertaken for until a later year. In many
of the structured transactions, Enron represented that it would use tax-planning actions in the
future to recover a basis difference in a tax-free manner and, consequently, did not report
deferred taxes on such basis differences (i.e., increased financial accounting income). The Joint
Committee staff has not addressed whether the financial accounting treatment reported by Enron
is appropriate as it is beyond the scope of the Report.

188 Commonly, stock analysts and valuation specialists use earnings before income,
taxes, and depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) to value a company. Using EBITDA,
stock analysts and valuation specialist ignore the tax expense line in an income statement (among
others). Accordingly, because the compensation of a business entity’s executive officers often is
tied to the market or trading value of the entity, some executives place much greater priority on
increasing operating income and are generally less concerned about the entity’s net income. For
example, an increase in operating earnings of $10 for a company trading at a multiple of fifteen
times EBITDA would be expected in increase the market value of a company by $150. From
1997-2001, two Enron structured transactions enabled Enron to increase operating income by a
total of approximately $260 million (and to increase net income by approximately $170 million).

189 The difference between the reported financial accounting income and the present
value of the Federal income tax benefits can be significant because, unlike some financial
accounting rules, SFAS 109 does not determine deferred tax assets and liabilities on a present
value or discounted basis. Enron and its advisors used this rule to devise transactions that could
report financial statement benefits that were significantly in excess of the anticipated present
value of the Federal income tax benefits. Although not discounting income taxes for financial
reporting can result in anomalies, as highlighted by some of the structured transactions, the
conceptual and implementation issues with discounting income taxes for financial reporting are
numerous and complex.

103

=== PAGE 132 ===
“structured transactions” group within Enron’s corporate tax department.'*° The group
apparently was separated due to the increase in the number of structured transactions, the
ongoing responsibilities associated with implementing and administering existing structured
transactions, and the time expended to review proposed structured transactions. The structured
transactions group was modeled after similar groups established by a select group of
corporations and financial institutions. Mr. Maxey headed the structured transactions group,
which had (at its peak) over twenty-five attorneys and accountants.

The structured transactions group’s focus was to synthesize tax, finance, legal, and
accounting principles to enhance economic returns to Enron. The structured transactions group
effectively was responsible for managing a structured transaction from its inception to final
execution. The group handled all aspects of the entities involved in a structured transaction,
including the bookkeeping, financial reporting, tax reporting, investor reporting, dividend
payments, and corporate governance responsibilities. Although many of these formalities were
not tax-related, they were centralized in the structured transactions group as well, because other
corporate departments were not always responsive to requests to perform the additional functions
required to demonstrate the substance of entities that otherwise generally were ignored for
financial accounting purposes and overall corporate management. Effectively, the group
operated substantially independent of the remaining tax professionals and, to some extent,

operated as a standalone business unit.!7!

Operation of the structured transactions group

The structured transactions group completed 11 large structured transactions over seven
years. One additional structured transaction was approved but never implemented because of
Enron’s bankruptcy. The ideas for the structured transactions primarily were brought to the
attention of Enron’s corporate tax department via referrals from Enron’s finance department or
direct calls to Mr. Hermann or Mr. Maxey. The promoters of the transactions comprised a select
group of investment banks, law firms, and accounting firms.

In general, Enron would listen to a “pitch” and then evaluate the idea.’ The structured
transactions group used a multistage process to evaluate the ideas. The first part of this process
was to determine whether the transaction was technically sound. Enron generally reviewed a

190 Although those responsible for the structured transactions were part of the planning

group until 1998, for purposes of this Report they are referred to as part of the structured
transactions group.

191 Ty many cases, Enron tax personnel outside of the structured transactions group had
limited knowledge of the transactions being undertaken by the group even when they were

responsible for tax matters affecting a business unit that was a party to a transaction.

12 Tn addition, Enron tax personnel periodically traveled to New York, Washington
D.C., and other locations to seek out tax advantageous transactions.

104

=== PAGE 133 ===
general tax opinion provided by the promoter'”? and would raise concerns and issues specific to
Enron’s organization and tax situation. In addition to structured transactions personnel, other
senior level tax personnel reviewed aspects of a proposed structured transaction based on their
specific technical expertise. For a structured transaction to proceed, Mr. Hermann required
counsel to indicate that it could provide a “should” level opinion.'™

The second part of the process was to fit the structured transaction into Enron’s business
strategy. Effectively, the structured transaction would need to be attached to an existing
transaction that the company was contemplating to provide a purported business purpose for the
transaction. Finding a business purpose for a structured transaction was the most important and
the most difficult aspect of the development of a structured transaction. For example, an Arthur
Andersen memorandum discussing a structured transaction stated “the biggest issue to be
resolved [is the] business purpose.”!”° The difficulty of obtaining reasonable operational
purposes for entering into some of the structured transactions resulted in Enron representing that
its business purpose for some structured transactions was the financial accounting benefits
obtained.'®° Other structured transactions were able to fit into to an existing business
transaction; however, based on the documents reviewed by the Joint Committee staff, their stated
business purposes for the structured transactions were lacking or tenuous and, in general,
unrelated to underlying business transaction.

If an idea satisfied the technical and business strategy requirements, accounting, finance,
legal, and other relevant personnel would become involved in further vetting the idea. If a
transaction appeared to satisfy all parties, the transaction generally would be sent to Mr. Causey,
Chief Accounting and Information Officer, for approval. Whether additional approvals were

193 Generally, the promoters provided a general explanation of the expected accounting
treatment for an idea. In some cases, they provided internal opinions or opinions written by

accounting firms based upon a hypothetical transaction that effectively mirrored the idea being
promoted.

194 The “should” level requirement was added after the first two structured transactions.
Those transactions received “more likely than not” tax opinions.

195 Memo from Robert P. Palmquist of Arthur Andersen to Robert J. Hermann dated
October 27, 1995, item # 4, EC2 000037798, attached in Project Tanya materials in Appendix B.

196 Projects Steele, Cochise, and Teresa all relied heavily on this “business purpose.”
However, claiming that a financial accounting benefit constitutes a substantial non-tax purpose
fails to consider the origin of the accounting benefit (i.e., reduction of taxes) in these transactions
and significantly diminishes the purpose for having a substantial non-tax purpose requirement.
See, e.g., American Electric Power, Inc. v. U.S., 136 F. Supp. 2d 762, 791-92 (S.D. Ohio, 2001)
(“AEP’s intended use of the cash flows generated by the [corporate-owned life insurance] plan is
irrelevant to the subjective prong of the economic substance analysis. If a legitimate business
purpose for the use of the tax savings ‘were sufficient to breathe substance into a transaction
whose only purpose was to reduce taxes, [then] every sham tax-shelter device might succeed,””
citing Winn-Dixie v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. 254, 287 (1999)).

105

=== PAGE 134 ===
needed depended upon the general Enron corporate approval guidelines for engaging in a
transaction. In many cases, the Board of Directors or one of its committees approved the
structured transactions.

Once a structured transaction was approved, Enron would enter into an agreement with
the promoter detailing the responsibilities of each party and setting forth the compensation to be
paid. In general, the engagement letters reviewed by the Joint Committee staff indicate that
Enron would pay a fee of approximately $8 to $15 million to the “idea provider” selling the
specific transaction and would incur approximately $800,000 to $1.2 million for the legal work
including the tax opinion for a transaction.’

Besides engaging in structured transactions for its own tax and financial accounting
benefits, Enron also acted as an accommodation party, for a fee, in two structured transactions
with Bankers Trust. In addition, it appeared that the structured transactions group viewed this
role as a new source of value to Enron. Highlighting the transformation of the tax department,
Mr. Maxey stated that because of the group’s successful completion of structured transactions,
“the relationships developed by group members with outside parties have grown, enabling the
group to act as facilitator for other entities or to joint venture with other entities to provide
similar services to other companies in addition to Enron. In effect, we have created a business
segment for Enron that generates earnings and interacts with other entities for profit.”!*8

Table 1, below summarizes certain tax and accounting information regarding 12 of
Enron’s structured transactions. The table shows that Enron’s financial accounting benefits that
it expected to derive from the structured transactions were front loaded to provide immediate
reporting of earnings for its financial statements, even though the bulk of the tax benefits would
not be derived, if at all, until well into the future. The table also lists the promoter of the
transaction, the primary tax opinion provider, and project fees paid by Enron with respect to each
transaction.

‘87 Two exceptions to the general range of fees paid for the idea were the fees paid to
Arthur Andersen for Projects Tanya and Valor. Arthur Andersen was paid $500,000 and
$100,000, respectively, for the idea and the tax opinion on these transactions. The General
Background Materials in Appendix B contain the Estimated Project Fees schedule (6/4/01) for
certain structured transactions. EC2 000036379.

198 Tnteroffice memorandum dated October 2, 2000 to Richard J. Causey from R. Davis
Maxey. EC2 000038284 - EC2 000038285.

106

=== PAGE 135 ===
*uoUID9I3e YoRd 0} Ayeds9)UNOD oY} Kq PoAtodoI USEq OALY SJUSUAed [Je JOU “BUTT

Aojdnzyueg s uorug 0) ang “Ayredsoyunoo oy) pue uoIUG UsEMIOq SJUOWIIOISE [eN}OwIIUOD UO pase are So9q 199fO1g (9) PUL ‘sULO] Sumasjjo oy) uo peolds oyeJ-}so19]UT
ue Jo WO} OY} UT sem eTTeYTeA Jooforg UI UONedionsed 10J 99} S,uoIUA “apesouoy Jooforg ul BuIsesuUo JOJ UOT [IW C/E[$ pled sem uosuq “Ayaaroodsoi ‘eyTeYTeA pue
opeSousy syoofo1g Ul (ISMIL, S1OYU 0} JOssadons oY}) YURG ayosynaq pur isn], sIoyULg 0} Ayed uoHepouTUOSoR UL sem UOIUA (¢) + xtpuoddy ut ‘[QQZ JoquiaAoN
‘SMOLA YSeD 2 sBurureg 39fo1g Jo ArewuNg dnoip suonsesues], pomnjonng JoquisaoN oy} ST SBUIARS XB] BWODUI [e1opay poyefoid 10j UOTFBULIOJUT aoINOg (p) ‘saxe)
UI UONONpel sJeIPOUTUT Ue UY) JoyseI sesso] SuNvIodo jou posesrOUl UT Por]Nser syyouag oy SIeOA oY Jo Aueul oj sassoy Sunesodo you pey uosug osneoog *oye1 Xe}
quoolod c¢ eB Sutsn poynduioo sBuraes xe) esopa,j (€) {peziyeod aq JOU | [IM s}iJouag SuNUNodoe [erouvUly oY JO Auewt yey) AOI] St yt ‘Burpy Aojdnsyueg s,uosug 0} ong
“g xipuoddy ut ‘1007 JOqUIOAON ‘sMOp,] YseD 7 sBuruseg yoofo1g Jo Arewung dnospH suonoesuesy, poimjong JOQUIaAON oY) S} ouUTOOUT Sununosoe jeloueury poyoofoid
JO} UOTeUTIOJUT BOING (Z) ‘SuIpY Aojdnayueq s ,uosU 0} anp sjunoure swOoUT poyodor oy} Jo AuwU Jo [eSIOAEI OY} 199]J91 JOU SOOP OWOdUT Sununosoe jeroueuly (1)

‘SION
9°L8 V/N V/N 720°C LS7 6L0°C Is9 STeIOL
= = a OLE 0 69€ = (tooz) 1 Aurel,
6 SUDA 2% UOSUIA | YON] 2% e110[9q viv 0 90¢ 7 (0007) | Awe],
— SUPATA 27 UOSUT A yueg eyosineq 0 0 v9 91 (0007) BeUIeA
or SUDITA 2 UOSUTA | sYyonoL 7% SHLO[9C CEE 0 87E 88 (6661) JopuoD
— 7 stu, SIoyUR 0 0 if I (8661) epesoucy
PIed 29 Jone
a ‘ssneng ‘dung ‘uny stu sioyueg 601 $6 ell Le (8661) SeMOL
SI BUIPIONS 2 URULIBOYS ueyeyur osey) LOT Is LOI Ig (8661) eysedy
or surg] suospntonon, SMU SIOyUR IvI _ aa 101 (8661) estys05
(a Suipreds 29 Suny yma, sJoyuRg €97 9L- LS@ 927 (L661) BS219],
IT ‘ssne. ee stu, SIoxUR 8L 6€ £8 s9 (L661) 9199
10 uosiopuy InyWy uesiopuy Inyyy (4) (43) (4) 7 (9661) JOTRA
0 uosiopuy Inywy uesiopuy InyNVy 99 99 99 99 (S661) eAueL
au0duy
SSUIABS Sugunosdy | 1007 Ysnoay)
$22,J Joptaoig uormidgQ xey [e1epeq | 1007 Ysnoszyy jepueury aulo0suy, oureN
poforg [810], xey A1eulig 19}0WI01g pepoforg SSUIARS poyefoig suyunods.y pofoig
[B01 xB [e19poT R0L fepueuly

[sae[jop Jo suor|Tur]
(100Z-S66T) SUONoesURA], paanjon.yg S,UOIUT JO $2a,J pue syoueq—T 3142,

107

=== PAGE 136 ===
Reporting of activities to management

As the number of transactions entered into by Enron increased, the structured transactions
group began preparing reports for Mr. Causey and senior tax personnel summarizing the
executed transactions, the cash flow savings by year, the financial statement earnings impact, and
new transactions under consideration by the group. This report was updated fairly frequently
and was conveyed to appropriate personnel. Appendix B contains the Structured Transactions
Group Summaries of Project Earnings & Cash Flows November 2001 report, as well as other
reports prepared by the group regarding its activities.

DK A CE CE 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 8 8 ER 2 OO OR 2 OK

The following discussion provides an overview of selected tax motivated structured
transactions into which Enron entered. The discussion includes information on the development
and implementation of each transaction, the reported financial accounting and tax implications,
the role of outside advisors in the transaction, a discussion of the relevant tax authorities, and
recommendations by the Joint Committee staff.

108

=== PAGE 137 ===
B. Transactions That Raise Corporate Tax Issues

Beginning in 1995, Enron, in consultation with outside tax advisors, engaged in a series
of structured transactions that were designed to satisfy the literal requirements of the corporate
tax laws, yet produce results that were not contemplated by Congress and not warranted from a
tax policy perspective. Several of the projects were structured to duplicate and accelerate tax
deductions. The reported tax benefits (and corresponding financial statement benefits) were
predicated on the interaction of the corporate tax-free transfer rules and the basis rules that apply
to such transfers. For example, Projects Tanya (done in 1995) and Valor (done in 1996) relied
on these rules, along with the rules regarding the treatment of contingent liabilities, to duplicate
losses in connection with a widely-marketed transaction known as the “contingent liability” tax
shelter. Projects Steele (done in 1997) and Cochise (done in 1999) also relied on these rules to
duplicate losses in connection with certain built-in loss assets owned by Bankers Trust.

Project Teresa (done in 1997) relied on the interplay between the corporate redemption
and dividends received deduction rules (while avoiding the extraordinary dividend rules), in
concert with the partnership basis rules, to purportedly increase Enron’s tax basis in its building
by approximately $1 billion.

This section of the Report begins with a brief discussion of relevant Cay etn tax rules
and then describes in detail Projects Tanya, Valor, Steele, Cochise, and Teresa. Ee)

1. Discussion of relevant corporate tax laws

In general, the Federal income tax laws treat a corporation as a separate entity apart from
its shareholders. Corporations and shareholders generally are each subject to tax on distributed
corporate income. A corporation pays income tax on its income (regardless of whether such
income is distributed to its shareholders), while its shareholders include in their income amounts
that the corporation distributes to them.

Tax-free transfers to controlled corporations

A transferor that transfers appreciated (or depreciated) property to a corporation in
exchange for stock in the corporation, and immediately after the transfer is in “control” of the
corporation, generally does not recognize gain (or loss) on the exchange. However, a
transferor does recognize gain to the extent the transferor receives money or other property as
part of the exchange.””!

1° The next section of this Report discusses the general partnership tax rules (which is
relevant to Project Teresa).

200 Sec. 351(a). For this purpose, section 368(c) defines “control” as the ownership of
stock possessing at least 80 percent of the combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled
to vote and at least 80 percent of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock of the
corporation.

201 Sec. 351(b)(1).

109

=== PAGE 138 ===
If an exchange satisfies the requirements of a tax-free transfer, then the transferor’s basis
in the stock received in the exchange is the same as the transferor’s basis in the property
transferred, decreased by (1) the amount of any money or other property received by the
transferor and (2) any loss recognized by the taxpayer on the exchange, and increased by the
amount of gain (or dividend) recognized by the transferor on the exchange." The transferee
corporation’s basis in the property received in the exchange generally equals the transferor’s
basis in such property, increased by any gain recognized by the transferor on the exchange.”

Assumption of liabilities

A corporation’s assumption of a liability in connection with a transfer of property does
not prevent a transaction from qualifying for tax-free treatment, nor is such assumption generally
treated as a receipt of money by a transferor.2 The assumption of a liability does reduce the
transferor’s basis in the stock received in the exchange,” and it may result in the recognition of
gain by the transferor to the extent the liabilities assumed exceed the total amount of the adjusted
basis of the property transferred.” In addition, if it appears that the principal purpose of the
transferor with respect to the assumption of the liability was to avoid Federal income tax (or was
not a bona fide business purpose), then the assumption is considered to be money received by the
transferor on the exchange.” 7

Treatment of certain contingent liabilities

An exception to the basis reduction and gain recognition requirements applies with
respect to a liability, the payment of which would give rise to a deduction (and that has not
resulted in the creation or increase of basis of any property). A liability that falls within this
exception is not treated as money received by the transferor and does not reduce the transferor’s
basis in the stock received in the exchange.” This exception was enacted in 1978 to protect a
cash basis taxpayer from having to recognize gain on the transfer of its accounts payable on the
incorporation of a going business concern.”” Although this rule was enacted primarily with cash

202 Sec. 358(a).

203 Sec. 362(a).

204 Sec. 357(a).

205 Sec. 358(d)(1).

206 Sec. 357(c)(1).

207 Sec. 357(b)(1).

208 Secs. 357(c)(3)(A) and 358(d)(2).

209 §_ Rep. No. 95-1263, 95" Cong., 2d Sess. 184, reprinted in 1978-3 C.B. 482 (1978).

110

=== PAGE 139 ===
method taxpayers in mind,”!° accrual method taxpayers also have properly relied on the
exception. In some cases, however, taxpayers have utilized the exception to achieve tax benefits
not envisioned by Congress. Eventually, Congress revisited the tax treatment of assumed
liabilities and enacted section 358(h) in 2000.7!' This provision reduces the basis in stock
received by a transferor in connection with a tax-free transfer (but not below its fair market
value) by the amount of any liability that is assumed in the exchange if such liability was not
treated as money received by the taxpayer.” For this purpose the term “liability” includes any
fixed or contingent obligation, without regard to whether the obligation is otherwise taken into
account for tax purposes.

Deduction of liabilities by transferee corporation

In general, a transferee corporation may be entitled to a deduction of an assumed liability
as appropriate under its method of accounting.” In this regard, the IRS has ruled that a
transferee corporation may deduct certain environmental liabilities assumed in a tax-free
transaction.”!

210 The reasons for change states that “[t]he committee therefore believes that it is
appropriate to resolve the ambiguity as to whether for purposes of sections 357(c) and 358(d) the
term liabilities includes deductible liabilities of a cash basis taxpayer.”

As part of the Technical Corrections Act of 1979, Congress changed the requirement that
only cash basis taxpayers could exclude certain liabilities for purposes of sections 357(c) and
358(d). See S. Rep. No. 96-498, 96" Cong., 1 Sess. 62 (1979).

211 Section 358(h), added by The Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000, Pub. L.
No. 106-554, sec. 1(a)(7) (Dec. 21, 2000).

212 Sec, 358(h)(1). This rule does not apply to any liability if (1) the trade or business
with which the liability is associated is transferred to the person assuming the liability, or (2)
substantially all of the assets with which the liability is associated are transferred to the person
assuming the liability. Sec. 358(h)(2).

213 This has not always been the government’s position. See, e.g., Holdcroft Transp. Co.
v. Commissioner, 153 F.2d 323 (a Cir. 1948) (in a transfer to which the predecessor of section
351 applied, the transferee corporation could not deduct payments made in satisfaction of tort
claims even though the transferor would have been entitled to the deductions if it had made the
payments). Over the years, however, the IRS generally has refrained from asserting a Holdcroft-
type argument.

214 Rey. Rul. 95-74, 1995-2 C.B. 36. In the ruling, an accrual-basis taxpayer (“P”’)
operated a manufacturing plant on land it owned. When P purchased the land, it was not
contaminated by any hazardous waste (but the land became contaminated as a result of P’s
operations). P transferred all of the assets of the manufacturing business (including the plant and
the land) to a newly-formed subsidiary (“S”) in exchange for stock. S also assumed the
liabilities of the business (including the environmental liabilities) as part of the exchange. Two
years later, S began soil and groundwater remediation efforts.

111

=== PAGE 140 ===
Acquisitions made to avoid income taxes

If a taxpayer engages in certain transactions for the principal purpose of evading or
avoiding Federal income tax by securing the benefit of a deduction, credit, or other allowance
that would not otherwise have been available, the Secretary of the Treasury (the “Secretary”) has
the authority to disallow the resulting benefits.”!> The Secretary may only exercise this special
authority with respect to three defined transactions: (1) if any person or persons acquire, directly
or indirectly, control (defined as at least 50 percent of vote or value) of a corporation; (2) if a
corporation acquires, directly or indirectly, property of another corporation (not controlled,
directly or indirectly, by the acquiring corporation or its stockholders) where the basis of the
property is determined by reference to the basis in the hands of the transferor corporation; or (3)
if a corporation acquires at least 80 percent control (measured by both vote and value, but
excluding certain nonvoting preferred stock) of another corporation, an election pursuant to
section 338 is not made, and the acquired corporation is liquidated pursuant to a plan of
liquidation adopted within two years after the acquisition date.

Redemptions between related corporations

If one or more persons are in control!° of each of two corporations, and one corporation
(“acquiring corporation”) acquires stock of another corporation (“issuing corporation”) in
exchange for property, then the transaction is treated as a distribution in redemption of the stock
of the acquiring corporation.”” In determining whether the acquisition is to be treated as a
distribution in part or full payment in exchange for the stock, reference is made to the stock of
the issuing corporation”!

If the distribution is treated as a dividend distribution, the transferor and the acquiring
corporation are treated in the same manner as if the transferor had transferred the stock so

The IRS concluded that the contingent environmental liabilities assumed by S were not
included in determining P’s basis in S stock. In addition, the contingent environmental liabilities
were not treated as money received by P. The IRS also concluded that the contingent
environmental liabilities were deductible by S or capitalized as appropriate under its method of
accounting. The IRS analogized the fact pattern to that in Rev. Rul. 80-198, 1980-2 C.B. 113
(transfer of trade accounts receivable in connection with the incorporation of a sole
proprietorship). The IRS stated that, for business reasons, P transferred substantially all of the
assets and liabilities of the manufacturing business to S, and P intended to remain in control of S.
P would have been able to deduct/capitalize the remediation costs had P incurred the costs.

715 Sec, 269.

216 For this purpose, “control” means the ownership of stock possessing at least 50
percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 50
percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock. Sec. 304(c).

217 Sec. 304(a)(1).

218 Sec. 304(b)(1).

112

=== PAGE 141 ===
acquired to the acquiring corporation in exchange for stock of the acquiring corporation in a
section 351 exchange, and then the acquiring corporation redeemed the stock it was treated as
issuing in the transaction.”!? The determination of the amount that is a dividend is made as if the
property were distributed by the acquiring corporation to the extent of its earnings and profits
and then by the issuing corporation to the extent of its earnings and profits.””°

Dividends received deduction

In general, a corporation is entitled to a deduction for a percentage of the amount
received as dividends from a domestic corporation that is subject to taxation under Chapter 1 of
the Code.2”!_ The amount of the dividends received deduction generally depends on the corporate
shareholder’s ownership of the distributing corporation. If the shareholder is a member of the
same affiliated group as the distributing corporation (generally 80 percent vote and value), then
the dividends may be “qualifying dividends” and a 100 percent dividends received deduction
applies.” An 80 percent dividends received deduction applies if the corporate shareholder owns
20 percent or more of the vote and value of the stock of the distributing corporation;”” in other
cases, a 70 percent dividends received deduction generally applies?” If a corporation is a
partner in a partnership that receives a dividend, the corporate partner may be entitled to a
dividends received deduction. Little guidance exists in applying the various ownership
thresholds under the dividends received deduction to a corporate partner receiving dividends
through a partnership.”

219 Sec, 304(a)(1) last sentence. See Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-34,
section 1013(a) (August 5, 1997) (change to section 304(a)(1) last sentence). Prior to this
change (which took effect on June 9, 1997), the stock that was acquired was treated as having
been received by the acquiring corporation as a capital contribution.

220 Sec. 304(b)(2).

21 Sec, 243(a).

222 Sec, 243(a)(3) and (b).
223 Sec, 243(c).

224 Sec. 243(a).

225 Tn a somewhat analogous situation, the IRS held that two unrelated domestic
corporations that form a partnership, each corporation being a 50 percent partner in the
partnership, are each treated as owning 50 percent of all of the assets of the partnership. Asa
result, the partnership’s ownership of 40 percent of the stock of a foreign corporation will be
treated as owned 20 percent by each corporate partner for purposes of the deemed paid foreign
tax credit. Rev. Rul. 71-141, 1971-1 C.B. 211.

113

=== PAGE 142 ===
Extraordinary dividends

Generally, if a corporation receives an extraordinary dividend with respect to stock and
the corporation has not held the stock for more than two years after the dividend announcement
date, then the basis of such corporation in the stock is reduced (but not below zero) by the non-
taxed portion of the dividends. 26 The non-taxed portion of the dividend is generally the amount
of the dividends received deduction with respect to the dividend.” An extraordinary dividend
means any dividend if the amount of such dividend equals or exceeds ten percent (five percent in
the case of preferred stock) of the taxpayer’s adjusted basis in such share of stock.”

In 1997, Congress amended the extraordinary dividend rules in connection with
redemptions between related corporations.””” In the case of any stock redemption that would not
have been treated (in whole or in part) as a dividend if the related corporate redemption rules had
not applied, then any amount treated as a dividend with respect to such redemption is treated as
an extraordinary dividend without regard to the holding period.”*° In other words, such
dividends are per se extraordinary dividends. In addition, only the basis in the stock redeemed in
the related corporate redemption transaction (i.e., the hypothetically issued acquiring corporation
stock) is subject to the general basis reduction rule.”

The Treasury Department has applied the extraordinary dividend rules in the partnership
setting pursuant to a Congressional grant of authority.”

Earnings and profits in a consolidated group

A corporation that is a member of a consolidated group must compute its earnings and
profits so as to reflect the earnings and profits of any subsidiary of that particular member.”*?

226 Sec. 1059(a)(1). If the non-taxed portion of the dividends exceeds the corporation’s
basis in the stock, then the excess is treated as gain for the taxable year in which the
extraordinary dividend is received. Sec. 1059(a)(2).

227 Sec. 1059(b).
228 Sec. 1059(c).

229 Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-34, section 1013(b) (August 5, 1997)
(effective for distributions and acquisitions after June 8, 1997).

230 Sec. 1059(e)(1)(A) (iii).
31 Sec. 1059(e)(1)(A) (last sentence).

232 Sec, 1059(g); Treas. Reg. sec. 1.701-2(f) example 2. In the example, a partnership
composed of two corporate partners received an extraordinary dividend. The partnership was
treated as an aggregate of its partners for purposes of section 1059. As a result, the partnership
had to make appropriate adjustments to the basis of the stock it owned, and the corporate
partners had to make appropriate adjustments to the basis in their partnership interests.

114

=== PAGE 143 ===
This rule is designed to treat the two entities as a single entity by reflecting the earnings and
profits of lower-tier members in the earnings and profits of higher-tier members and
consolidating the consolidated group’s earnings and profits in the common parent.” If the
location of a member within a consolidated group changes, then appropriate adjustments must be
made to the members to prevent earnings and profits from being eliminated.

Real estate mortgage investment conduits”**

In general, a real estate mortgage investment conduit (“REMIC”) is a self-liquidating
vehicle that holds a fixed pool of mortgages and issues multiple classes of investor interests. A
REMIC is not treated as a separate taxable entity. Rather, the income of the REMIC is allocated
to, and taken into account by, the holders of the interests in the REMIC under detailed rules.7°”
In order to qualify as a REMIC, all of the interests in the REMIC must consist of one or more
classes of regular interests and a single class of residual interests. A regular interest is an interest
in a REMIC that is issued with a fixed term, designated as a regular interest, and unconditionally
entitles the holder to receive a specified principal amount (or other similar amount) with interest
payments that are either based on a fixed rate (or to the extent provided in regulations, at a
variable rate) or consist of a specified portion of the interest payments on qualified mortgages
that does not vary during the period such interest is outstanding. The holder of a regular interest
generally recognizes income in an amount equal to the taxable income that would be recognized
by an accrual method holder of a debt instrument that has the same terms as the regular interest.

In general, a residual interest is any interest in the REMIC other than a regular interest,
and which is so designated by the REMIC, provided that there is only one class of such interest
and that all distributions (if any) with respect to such interests are pro rata. Holders of residual
REMIC interests are subject to tax on the portion of the income of the REMIC that is not
allocated to the regular interest holders. Specifically, the holder of a residual interest takes into
account the holder’s daily portion of the taxable income or net loss of the REMIC for each day
during the holder’s taxable year in which such holder held such interest. The amount so taken

233 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.1502-33.
234 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.1502-33(a)(1).

35 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.1502-33(f)(2). For example, if P transfers all of S’s stock to
another member in a section 351 transaction (and Treas. Reg. sec. 1.1502-13 applies), the
transferee’s earnings and profits are adjusted immediately after the transfer to reflect S’s
earnings and profits immediately before the transfer from consolidated return years. Also, if the
transferee purchases S’s stock from P, then the transferee’s earnings and profits are not adjusted.
The regulation also provides for an anti-avoidance rule warning that adjustments must be made
as necessary to carry out the purpose of the section.

236 Although unrelated to the general corporate tax laws, a general discussion of the rules
relating to REMICs has been included in this section because REMICs were used in connection
with Projects Steele and Cochise.

237 See sections 860A through 860G.

115

=== PAGE 144 ===
into account is treated as ordinary income or loss. The daily portion is determined by allocating
to each day in any calendar quarter, a ratable portion of the taxable income or net loss of the
REMIC for such quarter, and by allocating the amount so allocated to any day among the holders
(on such day) of residual interests in proportion to their respective holdings on such day.

A holder’s basis in a residual interest is increased by the amount of taxable income of the
REMIC that is taken into account by the holder. The basis of such an interest is decreased (but
not below zero) by the amount of any distributions received from the REMIC and by the amount
of any net loss of the REMIC that is taken into account by the holder.

Because of the interest income and deduction accrual rules pertaining to REMIC residual
interests, such interests typically produce non-cash “phantom” interest income accruals that
cannot be offset by net operating losses or negated by the tax-exempt status of a REMIC residual
interest holder.”* Unlike non-statutory securitization structures, the holder of the residual
interest in a REMIC is not required to demonstrate any degree of equity substantiality through a
minimum threshold of cash return entitlement, which makes the REMIC a highly efficient
securitization structure. Therefore, REMIC residual interests typically have little or no fair
market value because they have nominal (if any) entitlement to cash distributions from the
REMIC. In fact, REMIC residual interests often have a negative fair market value because,
although the non-cash “phantom” interest income accruals are reversed by non-cash “phantom”
interest deductions, such deductions may accrue only years after the income inclusions, and
REMIC residual interest values reflect the time value of money relating to this timing mismatch.
The magnitude of these timing differences depends (among other things) upon the structure of
the REMIC regular interest tranches and, in particular, their interest rates and terms to maturity
in relation to each other and to the REMIC assets.”*?

oe Primarily because of the REMIC excess inclusion rules that require this result,

REMIC residual interests have been described as “intensely regulated by arcane and complicated
tax rules that are designed principally to maximize a holder’s tax liability.” Kirk Van Brunt, Tax
Aspects of REMIC Residual Interests, 2 Fla. Tax Rev. 149, 152 (1994). However, others point
out that the excess inclusion rules “tend to reduce the excessive differences in after-tax yields for
high and low marginal rate taxpayers,” in part because excess inclusion income may not be offset
by net operating losses or negated by the tax-exempt status of the holder of a REMIC residual
interest. Bruce Kayle, Where Has All the Income Gone? The Mysterious Relocation of Interest
and Principal in Coupon Stripping and Related Transactions, 7 Va. Tax Rev. 303, 351 (1987).

239 «Income and deductions created by timing differences will ultimately offset each
other and net to zero. However, timing is everything and the pain of a substantial tax liability on
phantom income in one year is only partially eased by the prospect of offsetting phantom losses
in a later year.” Kirk Van Brunt, Tax Aspects of REMIC Residual Interests, 2 Fla. Tax Rev. 149,
156 (1994).

116

=== PAGE 145 ===
Lease versus financing”

The IRS has issued a number of revenue rulings and revenue procedures addressing the
issue of whether an agreement is a lease or a conditional sales contract (i.e., a financing
arrangement).”*! A synthetic lease transaction is a transaction that is structured as an operating

240 Although unrelated to corporate tax laws, a general discussion of synthetic lease
arrangements is included in this section because Project Teresa involved such an arrangement
(though this Report does not focus on issues raised by the synthetic lease arrangement).

241 Th Rev. Rul. 55-540, 1955-2 C.B. 39, the IRS stated that whether an agreement,
which is in form a lease, is in substance a conditional sales contract depends upon the intent of
the parties as evidenced by the terms of the agreement and the facts and circumstances existing at
the time of the execution of the agreement. The IRS subsequently issued a number of rulings in
distinguishing a lease from a conditional sales contract. See, e.g., Rev. Rul. 55-541, 1955-2 C.B.
19 (sale rather than a lease), Rev. Rul. 55-542, 1955-2 C.B. 59 (sale rather than a lease), Rev.
Rul. 60-122, 1960-1 C.B. 56 (two transactions, one considered a lease and the other considered a
sale), and Rev. Rul. 72-408, 1972-2 C.B. 86 (sale rather than a lease).

In Rev. Proc. 75-21, 1975-1 C.B. 715, the IRS set forth guidelines that it would use for
ruling purposes in determining whether certain transactions purporting to be leases are, in fact,
leases for Federal income tax purposes. On May 7, 2001, the IRS published Rev. Proc. 2001-28,
2001-19 I.R.B. 1156, which modifies and supersedes Rev. Proc. 75-21. The new revenue
procedure, like its predecessor, applies to leveraged lease transactions.

The leading case in determining the tax ownership of leased property in a sale-leaseback
transaction is Frank Lyon Co. v. United States, 435 U.S. 561 (1978). In Lyon, Worthen Bank &
Trust Company (“Worthen”) constructed a bank building and sold it to Frank Lyon Company
(“Lyon”) for approximately $7.64 million. Lyon invested $500,000 of its own funds and
financed the remaining purchase price with a mortgage from New York Life Insurance Company
payable over 25 years. Lyon then leased the bank building to Worthen for 25 years (equal to the
term of the mortgage). The rental payments under the lease also matched in time and amounts
the payments due under the mortgage. Under the lease, Worthen had the option after 11 years,
15 years, 20 years, and 25 years, to repurchase the building at a price equal to: (1) the
outstanding balance on the mortgage and (2) $500,000 plus six percent compound interest over
the lease term. If Worthen did not exercise its option to repurchase the building, it could renew
the lease for eight additional five-year terms. The rents under the renewal were calculated to
return Lyon’s investment plus six percent compound interest. Worthen was responsible for all
expenses associated with the maintenance of the building (a “net lease” arrangement).

The Supreme Court respected the form of the transaction and held for the taxpayer. The
Court wrote:

In short, we hold that where, as here, there is a genuine multiple-party transaction

with economic substance which is compelled or encouraged by business or regulatory
realities, is imbued with tax-independent considerations, and is not shaped solely by tax-

117

=== PAGE 146 ===
lease for financial accounting purposes but a financing arrangement for tax purposes. The
primary benefit is that the lessee does not record the debt incurred to finance the property
acquisition or the rent obligation to the lessor as a liability on its balance sheet. For income tax
purposes, the transaction is structured so that the lessee (and not the lessor) is treated as the

owner of the property. As a result, for tax purposes, the lessee is entitled to the depreciation and
interest deductions.””

2. Projects Tanya and Valor

Brief overview

Projects Tanya and Valor were structured to accelerate and duplicate certain deductions
within the Enron consolidated group. Each transaction involved a tax-free transfer of assets and
unrelated contingent liabilities by Enron to an Enron subsidiary in exchange for stock in the
subsidiary. The transferred assets had a value that only slightly exceeded the projected amount
of the contingent liabilities.“? The transferred assets had a tax basis that significantly exceeded
the net value of the stock received in the exchange. Therefore, a sale by Enron of the subsidiary
stock would result in a significant capital loss (i.e., an acceleration of a future loss). In addition,
the contingent: liabilities would give rise to a future tax deduction when paid by the subsidiary
(resulting in a duplication of the loss).

Project Tanya — background”
Reported tax and financial statement effects

In connection with Project Tanya, Enron reported a short-term capital loss of $188.515
million on its 1995 return. Enron also deducted a total of $76.68 million in connection with the
assumed liabilities in its 1996 through 2000 tax returns.

The $188.515 million loss that Enron reported on its tax return did not result in a
corresponding loss for financial statement purposes. Thus, the tax savings associated with the

avoidance features that have meaningless labels attached, the Government should honor
the allocation of rights and duties effectuated by the parties. Jd. at 583-84.

242 The IRS has issued agency decisions addressing synthetic lease arrangements. For
example, in 1998 FSA LEXIS 413 (February 26, 1998), the IRS concluded that a transaction
structured as a synthetic lease was a lease for Federal income tax purposes and not a financing
arrangement. The IRS reached a contrary result in FSA 19992003 (January 12, 1999).

243 Project Tanya involved the assumption of liabilities relating to deferred compensation
and post-retirement medical, life insurance, and executive death benefit obligations. Project
Valor involved the assumption of certain risks associated with third-party commodity contracts.

244 ‘The information regarding Project Tanya was obtained from Joint Committee staff

interviews of Robert J. Hermann, Robert D. Maxey, Greek L. Rice, and Mary K. Joyce, as well
as from documents and information provided by Enron and the IRS.

118

=== PAGE 147 ===
loss resulted in an increase in financial statement earnings (i.e., earnings through a reduction in
the provision for income tax expense) of $65.8 million.” Enron reported $46.5 million of the
earnings in 1995 and the remaining $19.3 million in 1999 (upon the IRS’s completion of its
review of the stock sale that generated the capital loss).“*

Development of Project Tanya

Arthur Andersen, Enron’s outside auditor, brought the idea for Project Tanya to Enron in
August 1995.74” Robert J. Hermann, Managing Director and General Tax Counsel of Enron
Corp., named the transaction after a hurricane. 48 Arthur Andersen, aware that Enron had
significant capital gain in 1995 from the sale of stock in Enron Oil & Gas, proposed the
transaction as a means to offset a portion of the capital gain. Originally, the transaction
contemplated the assumption of potential environmental liabilities; however, Enron did not have
such liabilities. So the transaction was customized to involve the assumption of deferred
compensation and post-retirement benefit obligations. The transaction had to be completed in
December 1995 (presumably to offset the capital gain that was recognized in the same year).

The Finance Committee of Enron Corp.’s Board of Directors approved the transaction on
December 11, 1995. The next day, Richard D. Kinder, a member of the Enron Corp. Board of
Directors, presented the details of the transaction at a meeting of the Board of Directors. At that
meeting, the Board of Directors approved and ratified the transaction.?~°

Implementing the transaction was a time-consuming process, but the Enron tax group
received help from different parts of the company for document production. The Enron tax
group also depended heavily on Arthur Andersen in implementing the transaction. Enron’s
Human Resources Department did the modeling for the transaction.

45 The calculation is 35 percent (i.e., the statutory Federal corporate income tax rate) of
$188.515 million.

246 The General Background Materials in Appendix B contain the Structured
Transactions Group, Summary of Project Earnings & Cash Flows, November 2001. The IRS
review of Project Tanya is discussed in greater detail below.

247 ERMI Structure Presentation by Arthur Andersen, dated August 14, 1995, EC2
0000378 17-37827.

248 This tax Project was named for the Atlantic tropical storm, as listed by the World
Meteorological Organization, that began with the letter “T” in the year the project was
commenced. Projects Teresa, Tomas, and Tammy I and II were also named using this
convention.

>49 Agenda item #3 of the Meeting of the Finance Committee of the Enron Corp. Board
of Directors, December 11, 1995, EC2 000037848.

250 Minutes of the Meeting of the Board of Directors of Enron Corp., December 12,
1995, EC2 000037855-56.

119

=== PAGE 148 ===
The purported business purpose of the transaction was to provide an incentive for human
resource personnel to manage the deferred compensation and post-retirement benefit obligations
by allowing the employees to share in the successes that may result from their management
efforts. According to an Arthur Andersen memo, “the biggest issue to be resolved [is the]
business purpose for [the subsidiary’s] managing these items.”?>!

Implementation of Project Tanya

In December 1995, Enron Corp. transferred two intercompany promissory notes to Enron
Management, Inc:?? (1) a 20-year promissory note with a tax basis of $120.84 million, and (2) a
10-year promissory note with a tax basis of $67.7 million. As part of the transfer, Enron
Management, Inc. also assumed certain contingent liabilities of Enron Corp. -- a contractual
assumption of Enron Corp.’s deferred compensation obligations of approximately $67.7 million,
and a contractual assumption of post-retirement medical, life insurance, and executive death
benefit obligations of approximately $120.8 million. Enron Management, Inc. also assumed
responsibility for administering Enron Corp.’s other compensation and benefit plans. These
employee benefit liabilities were segregated from the employee benefit liabilities that were not
involved in the transfer.

In exchange for the two promissory notes (and the assumption of the contingent
liabilities), Enron Corp. received 20 shares (i.e., all of the issued shares) of a newly created class
of voting preferred stock in Enron Management, Inc. The preferred stock had a reported tax
basis of $188.555 million.2 The preferred stock provided for a nine percent annual dividend
and represented $40,000 of Enron Management, Inc.’s existing net equity. In addition, the class
of preferred stock was entitled to three percent of any increase in Enron Management, Inc.’s net
equity up to a maximum redemption value of $340,000.

On December 28, 1995, Enron Corp. sold the 20 shares of Enron Management preferred
stock to Patricia L. Edwards and Mary K. Joyce (10 shares to each), both of whom were officers
in Enron Corp.’s Human Resources Department and were involved in the management of
deferred compensation and post-retirement benefit obligations.” The sales price of the stock

251 The Project Tanya materials in Appendix B contain a Memo from Robert P.
Palmquist of Arthur Andersen to Robert J. Hermann dated October 27, 1995, item # 4, EC2
000037798.

252 Enron Management, Inc. was a wholly-owned subsidiary of Enron Corp. and a
member of the Enron consolidated group.

253 The tax basis equaled the tax basis of the promissory notes Enron Corp. contributed
to Enron Management, Inc.

254 According to current Enron management, the shares were offered to Ms. Joyce and
Ms. Edwards because of their cost-management knowledge and expertise regarding the various
pension and deferred compensation liabilities contributed to Enron Management, Inc. Letter
from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Chief of Staff of the Joint Committee
on Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 5.

120

=== PAGE 149 ===
was $40,000, and Enron Corp. reported a capital loss from the stock sale of $188.515 million
($40,000 amount realized less a tax basis of $188.555 million).

The terms of the Enron Management preferred stock, as contained in a Stock Sale and
Purchase Agreement, included a put option after five years for the shareholders and a call option
after six years. The holders of the preferred stock had the right to elect one of the six directors of
Enron Management, Inc. i

It was anticipated that in 2002, Enron Management, Inc. would be liquidated into Enron
Corp., and Enron Corp. would assume the deferred compensation and post- “retirement benefit
obligations that Enron Management, Inc. had assumed from Enron Corp. in 1995.5

The diagram on the next page depicts the general structure of Project Tanya.

255 Current Enron management is not aware of any investment information or advice
provided to either Ms. Joyce or Ms. Edwards in connection with the investment. In addition,
current Enron management is not aware of any payments that were made to Ms. Joyce or Ms.
Edwards regarding the economic outlay for the Enron Management, Inc. preferred stock. Letter
from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Chief of Staff of the Joint Committee
on Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answers 6 and 8.

256 Current Enron management is not aware of any promises or commitments made by
Enron to Ms. Joyce or Ms. Edwards regarding a return of their investments. Letter from Enron’s
counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Chief of Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation,
dated January 13, 2003, answer 9.

257 Project Tanya Structure Overview, EC2 000038324.

121

=== PAGE 150 ===
?

/ SOnNtGerT
{ wou O'OZ1$
‘901 SV4

SS .

spe

.

OHI 99S sGujwea (eyo,
S661 22qQus03Q wep GuyysojD
Stquow Z @yNDexa OY BWI

“29Y DION \

sng ddd’

sonmiqery ~~. Syn
voy szrog : \ of ; \
sugjgduioy =} 4 MOHIMNLZ9S =} | MOU TOZIS
pouzjaq =” \

a

yo1S

7. WAdCUry\

uoJUg

oS UOUTUOZ)

pouzjold
%O0S

poajalg
0S

SOMNQEYT/ NISSV «>>>

yung CD

dyuaueg 7

wonnodso> (—]

sup Oe
PREpOUOD dVVD Sony ENB

pussy]

ainjonijg UuOHOesUeI

jenuepyuod

eAue | yal0id

122

EC2 000038325

=== PAGE 151 ===
Role of outside advisors

Arthur Andersen promoted the transaction to Enron. In connection with Project Tanya,
Arthur Andersen provided a tax opinion which concluded that the overall tax result of the
transaction, “more likely than not,” is the recognition of a capital loss by Enron on the sale of the
Enron Management, Inc. preferred stock. The specific tax issues discussed in the opinion were:
(1) the qualification of the transfer of the intercompany promissory notes to Enron Management,
Inc., subject to the contractual assumption of the contingent liabilities, as a tax-free contribution;
(2) Enron Corp.’s tax basis in the Enron Management, Inc. preferred stock not being reduced by
the deferred compensation and post-retirement benefit liabilities; (3) Enron Corp.’s loss on the
sale of the Enron Management, Inc. preferred stock not being a duplicated loss (and thus a
disallowed loss) under the Treasury consolidated return regulations; and (4) the contribution of
the assets in exchange for the Enron Management, Inc. preferred stock not being considered an
acquisition made to evade or avoid income taxes.

Arthur Andersen’s fee in connection with Project Tanya was approximately $500,000.78

Appendix C, Part I to this Report contains the tax opinion Enron received in connection
with Project Tanya.

Subsequent developments

In the years following the transaction, Enron Management, Inc. claimed the following
deductions in connection with the assumed employee benefit obligations: $16.977 million on its
1996 return; $16.217 million on its 1997 return; $13.682 million on its 1998 return; $14.7
million on its 1999 return; and $15.103 million on its 2000 return.

In July 1998, Ms. Edwards left Enron and sold her 10 shares to Ms. Joyce for $85,000.
In 2001, Enron notified Ms. Joyce that it intended to exercise the call option pursuant to the
Stock Sale and Purchase Agreement and purchase the 20 shares of Enron Management, Inc.
preferred stock. The purchase price was $440,000 (i.e., $22,000 per share).”” The stock
purchase occurred in year 2000.

The IRS reviewed the transaction and ultimately allowed the $188.515 million short-term
capital loss to Enron in its audit of Enron’s 1995 consolidated tax return.” The IRS is in the
process of auditing Enron’s tax returns for years 1996 through 2001.

258 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 7; confirmed by information obtained from interviews.

25° According to current Enron management, the price was the result of negotiations
between Ms. Joyce, Mr. Richard A. Causey and other personnel who are no longer at Enron.
Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation,
dated January 31, 2003, answer 1.

260 There were disagreements within the IRS regarding the proper tax treatment of the
transaction. The IRS Houston field office (including the audit team responsible for the Enron

123

=== PAGE 152 ===
Project Valor — background”

Reported tax and financial statement effects

In connection with Project Valor, Enron reported a short-term capital loss of $235.327
million on its 1996 tax return. Enron also deducted $181.73 million in connection with the
assumed liabilities in its 1997 tax return, and a total of $88.56 million in connection with the
assumed liabilities in its 1998 through 2001 tax returns.

The $235.327 million loss Enron reported on its tax return resulted in an increase in
financial statement earnings (i.e., earnings through a reduction in the provision for income tax
expense) of $82.38 million.°? However, it appears that Enron never recorded any benefits from
Project Valor in its financial statements.”

Development of Project Valor

Project Valor was patterned after Project Tanya, though Project Valor involved different
types of contingent liabilities. Project Valor was designed to generate a capital loss that could be
used to offset capital gain realized by Enron from the sale of additional stock in Enron Oil &
Gas.

It appears that Ben F. Glisan, Jr., recruited from Arthur Andersen in 1996 to be a Director
at Enron Capital Trade & Resources Corp. (“Enron Capital Trade”),”™ led the effort to

audit) believed that the capital loss should be disallowed. The IRS Houston field office
forwarded to IRS District Counsel Office a proposed notice of deficiency that would have
disallowed the loss on the grounds that the transaction lacked economic substance, or
alternatively, that it lacked business purpose. The IRS District Counsel Office, in consultation
with the Corporate Division of the Office of Chief Counsel, declined to support the audit team’s
position. As a result, the issue was not included in the Revenue Agent Report for Enron’s 1995
tax year. The Project Tanya materials in Appendix B contain a Memo dated August 16, 1999,
from IRS District Counsel, Houston District to Chief, Quality Measurement Staff, Houston
District, regarding this matter.

261 The information regarding Project Valor was obtained from Joint Committee staff
interviews of Robert J. Hermann, Jordan H. Mintz, Robert D. Maxey, and Greek L. Rice, as well
as from documents and information provided by Enron and the IRS.

262 The calculation is 35 percent (i.e., the statutory Federal income tax rate) of $235.327
million.

263 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 12; confirmed by information obtained from

interviews.

264 Enron Capital Trade is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Enron Corp. and a member of
the Enron consolidated group.

124

=== PAGE 153 ===
implement Project Valor. Sometime in September 1996, Mr. Glisan began assembling a team to
restructure certain commodity contracts used by Enron in its commodity business. Mr. Glisan
was considered the team leader of Project Valor, and he reported to Andrew Fastow (who was
Managing Director of Enron Capital Trade). In early December 1996, Mr. Hermann asked
Jordan H. Mintz (who had recently been hired by Enron Capital Trade as its Vice President of
Taxes) to assist in the project, which Mr. Hermann wanted completed before December 31,
1996. Mr. Mintz became the tax representative of the team.2© Other significant participants in
Project Valor included Richard Kieval (who was selected to manage the risk management
liabilities), Bill Bradford (who was selected to manage the credit risk liabilities), Debra Culver
(internal counsel representative on the team), and Paige Grumulaitis (Assistant Business Unit
Coordinator).”°

Unlike Project Tanya, Project Valor apparently was not presented to Enron Corp.
management for formal approval.“®” Rather, Mr. Glisan informally presented an overview of the
concept to Mr. Fastow, and Mr. Fastow gave Mr. Glisan an informal approval to proceed. To
account for control policies, Ms. Culver (from internal counsel) was included on the team.

The purported business purpose of the transaction was to provide an incentive for
employees responsible for managing Enron’s potential credit risk obligations and fixed price and
risk management contract liabilities to manage effectively such liabilities by allowing the
employees to share in the successes that may result from their management efforts.

Implementation of Project Valor

Enron Capital Trade was a purchaser and marketer of natural gas and wholesale
electricity. In addition, it managed a portfolio of contracts offering physical and financial energy
products and services. In support of its business activities, Enron Capital Trade would enter into
various swaps, options, and forward contracts with unrelated parties, including numerous fixed
price and risk management contracts (“FPRM contracts”). Due to changes in commodity prices
and interest rates, some FPRM contracts were liabilities to Enron Capital Trade (because it
would owe a payment to the counterparty pursuant to the contract). Enron Capital Trade also
had certain credit risks that were characterized as liabilities in its financial records.

26 The project was approximately 25 to 50 percent complete when Mr. Mintz became
involved.

266 IRS compilation of interviews with Ben Glisan, Paige Grumulaitis, Bill Bradford,
Jordan Mintz, Richard Kieval, and Debra Culver.

267 However, current Enron management understands that Project Valor was presented to
and approved by the Board of Directors of Enron Capital Trade. Letter from Enron’s counsel
(Skadden, Arps), to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation, dated January 13, 2003,
answer 17.

268 TRS compilation of interview with Mr. Glisan.

125

=== PAGE 154 ===
On December 20, 1996, Enron Capital Trade transferred to Enron Capital Trade Strategic
Value Corp. (“ECT Strategic”)°” two intercompany promissory notes: (1) a 10-year promissory
note with a tax basis of $217 million, and (2) a 10-year promissory note with a tax basis of
$50.32 million. As part of the transfer, ECT Strategic assumed certain contingent liabilities of
Enron Capital Trade -- a contractual assumption of $5.01 million of Enron Capital Trade’s credit
reserve obligations and a deemed assumption of $262.27 million of Enron Capital Trade’s FPRM
contract liabilities.?”° Pursuant to a Liability Management Agreement between Enron Capital
Trade and ECT Strategic dated December 20, 1996, ECT Strategic assumed responsibility for
managing the FPRM contract liabilities and the credit reserves, but any restructuring of the
FPRM contracts or the credit reserves required prior approval by Enron Capital Trade.
Employees who were responsible for the management of these liabilities, including Richard
Kieval and Bill Bradford, were transferred to ECT Strategic.

In exchange for the promissory notes (and the assumption of the contingent liabilities),
Enron Capital Trade received 40 shares (i.e., all of the issued shares) of a new class of ECT
Strategic voting participating preferred stock. The preferred stock had a reported tax basis of
$235.367 million.””’ The preferred stock paid a nine percent annual dividend and represented in
the aggregate, $40,000 of ECT Strategic’s net equity. In addition, the class of preferred stock
was entitled to four percent of any increase in ECT Strategic’s net equity up to a maximum
redemption value of $2 million.

On December 27, 1996, Enron Capital Trade sold the 40 shares of ECT Strategic
preferred stock to three employees involved in the monitoring of the commodity trading
activities — Mr. Kieval (who purchased 30 shares for $30,000), Mr. Bradford (who purchased
five shares for $5,000) and Mr. Glisan (who purchased five shares for $5,000).7”” Thus, the
aggregate sales price of the stock was $40,000, and Enron reported a capital loss from the stock
sale of $235.327 million ($40,000 amount realized less a tax basis of $235.367 million).

26° ECT Strategic, formerly known as Enron Gas Gathering Inc., was formed in March
1985, to manage various gathering assets of Enron. In connection with Project Valor, its name
was changed to ECT Strategic, and its purpose was altered to undertake responsibilities.
associated with credit reserve obligations and FPRM contract liabilities.

270 Th order to avoid a breach of the terms of the FPRM contracts (which required
consent for any assignment), Enron Capital Trade and ECT Strategic entered into a Master Swap
Agreement and a Liability Management Agreement. These agreements replicated the economics
that would have resulted from an actual transfer of the FPRM contracts to ECT Strategic.

211 This amount equals the aggregate basis in the promissory notes of $267.37 million
less approximately $32 million of premiums on unrealized liabilities that were assumed by ECT
Strategic in connection with the transfer.

27 Current Enron management is not aware of any payments that were made to Messrs.
Kieval, Bradford, or Glisan specifically to cover the economic outlay for the ECT Strategic
preferred stock. Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint
Committee on Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 15.

126

=== PAGE 155 ===
The terms of the ECT Strategic preferred stock included a put option exercisable by the
shareholders (requiring ECT Strategic to redeem its shares) after five years””? and a call option
exercisable by ECT Strategic (requiring the preferred shareholder to sell the stock to ECT
Strategic) after six years.” The holders of the ECT Strategic preferred stock had the right to
elect one of the six directors of ECT Strategic.

Role of outside advisors

In connection with Project Valor, Arthur Andersen provided a tax opinion, dated
December 27, 1996, which concluded that the overall tax result of the transaction, “more likely
than not,” is the recognition of a capital loss by Enron Capital Trade on the sale of the voting
participating preferred stock of ECT Strategic. The specific tax issues discussed in the opinion
were: (1) the qualification of the transfer of the intercompany promissory notes to ECT
Strategic, subject to the contractual assumption of the contingent liabilities, as a tax-free
contribution; (2) Enron Capital Trade’s tax basis in the ECT Strategic preferred stock not being
reduced by the amount of the credit reserve obligations and FPRM contract liabilities assumed
by ECT Strategic; (3) Enron Capital Trade’s loss on the sale of the ECT Strategic preferred stock
not being a duplicated loss (and thus a disallowed loss) under the Treasury consolidated return
regulations; and (4) the contribution of the assets for ECT Strategic stock not being considered
an acquisition made to evade or avoid income taxes.

Arthur Andersen’s fee in connection with Project Valor was approximately $100,000.?”°

Appendix C, Part II to this Report contains the tax opinion Enron received in connection
with Project Valor.

Subsequent developments

In the years following the transaction, ECT Strategic claimed the following deductions in
connection with the assumed credit risk and risk management liabilities; $181.729 million on its
1997 return; $49.099 million on its 1998 return; $26.064 million on its 1999 return; $10.317
million on its 2000 return; and $3.085 million on its 2001 return.?”°

2733 ‘The price at which the preferred stock could be put to the company would be equal to
four percent of any increase in ECT Strategic’s net equity up to a maximum redemption value of

$2 million.

24 The right to call the preferred stock had a maximum redemption value of $2 million.

275 Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 22.

276 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on

Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 18. The total of these losses exceeds the amount of the
loss reported in 1996 in connection with the sale of the ECT Strategic preferred stock.

127

=== PAGE 156 ===
Around March 30, 1999, Mr. Kieval left Enron. Immediately prior to his departure, ECT
Strategic redeemed the 30 shares of preferred stock owned by Mr. Kieval for $30,000 (i.e., the
initial investment). The 30 shares were resold to Messrs. Bradford and Glisan, effective March
30, 1999, in the amount of $15,000 per each investor. According to current Enron management,
Enron included amounts equal to the purchase price of the additional 15 shares each of the ECT
Strategic preferred stock in Messrs. Bradford’s and Glisan’s 1999 bonuses (paid in February
2000).?”? Messrs. Bradford and Glisan apparently continue to hold their ECT Strategic preferred
stock.

The IRS is in the process of auditing Enron’s tax returns for years 1996 through 2001.

Discussion

In Projects Tanya and Valor, Enron sought to both duplicate and accelerate certain
deductions with respect to contingent liabilities assumed by the respective Enron subsidiaries.
Enron claimed a loss with respect to the contingent liabilities when Enron sold the preferred
stock, and a second deduction in subsequent years as the liabilities were paid.?”

A determination of whether Enron should be entitled to a capital loss on the sale of the
preferred stock and on the subsequent accrual of the contingent liabilities necessarily involves an
analysis regarding Enron’s satisfaction of the literal requirements of the corporate tax rules as
well as the rules and judicial doctrines (such as business purpose and economic substance) that
are often applied to evaluate claimed tax benefits in tax-motivated transactions. 279

277 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 15.

278 ‘The transfer of swap liabilities raises an issue that is unique to Project Valor. By
independent operation of the Treasury regulations concerning the tax treatment of notional
principal contracts with significant nonperiodic payments, Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-3(g)(4), the
manner in which the promissory notes and swap liabilities were transferred to ECT Strategic
could have caused the transfer (at least to the extent of the swap liabilities and a corresponding
amount of the promissory notes) to be recharacterized instead as a deemed contribution of on-
market swaps and a loan by Enron Capital Trade to ECT Strategic (with the amount of the
deemed loan being equal to the actual liabilities associated with the individual swaps). In such a
case, the basis in the ECT Strategic preferred stock received by Enron Capital Trade in the
exchange would be reduced by the amount of the deemed loan to ECT Strategic.

219 For detailed information of the present law rules and judicial doctrines applicable to
tax motivated transactions and related recommendations and developments, see, e.g., Joint
Committee on Taxation, Background and Present Law Relating to Tax Shelters (JCX-19-02),
March 19, 2002; Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest
Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998 (including provisions relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (JCS-3-99), July
22, 1999; Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9017) to section 6011 (October 22, 2002);
Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9018) to section 6012 (October 22, 2002); Joint

128

=== PAGE 157 ===
From a policy perspective, there is little question that, assuming Enron remains
responsible for the liabilities, Enron should be entitled to a deduction when the liabilities are paid
or accrued. Had Enron not engaged in Projects Tanya and Valor, it would have been entitled to a
deduction with respect to the liabilities when the liabilities are taken into account under Enron’s
method of accounting. By the same token, however, there is no policy justification for allowing
a single taxpayer multiple deductions with respect to the same liabilities.”®°

In Projects Tanya and Valor, Enron remained accountable for the liabilities both before
and after the transactions. Also in each project, the same employees remained responsible for
monitoring and managing the liabilities both before and after the transactions. Thus, apart from
the tax benefits, there appeared to be little justification for participating in Projects Tanya and
Valor. The purported rationale -- to provide an incentive for employees responsible for
managing these liabilities to share in the success of their efforts -- is dubious. The maximum
value of the preferred stock (whose value was dependent upon the successful management of the
liabilities) was capped and subject to a call option, which had the effect of limiting the employee
incentives. Enron could have provided similar incentives (without engaging in a complex and
costly restructuring of its liabilities) through employment contracts. Indeed, Arthur Andersen
noted that “the biggest issue to be resolved [is the] business purpose for [the subsidiary’s]
managing these items.”7*!

If the non-tax business purpose of a transaction is not self-evident -- or stated another
way, if a taxpayer and its tax advisor have to develop or devise a justification for the taxpayer’s
involvement in a particular transaction -- then the transaction in all likelihood lacks a non-tax

Committee on Taxation, Description of the "CARE Act of 2003," (JCX-04-03), February 3, 2003;
Symposium: Business Purpose, Economic Substance and Corporate Tax Shelters, 54 SMU L.
Rev. 1 (2001).

280 Cf. Rite Aid Corp. v. United States, 255 F.3d 1357 (Fed. Cir. 2001), reh’g denied,
2001 U.S. App. LEXIS 23207 (Oct. 3, 2001), where the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Federal
Circuit invalidated a provision in the consolidated return regulations that prevented the taxpayer
from claiming a loss on the sale of stock of a subsidiary to the extent the subsidiary had assets
that had a built-in loss, or had a net operating loss, that could be recognized or used by another
taxpayer. Subsequent to the Rite Aid decision, the IRS issued Notice 2002-18, 2002 LR.B. 644,
in which the Treasury Department reiterated its belief that “a consolidated group should not be
able to benefit more than once from one economic loss,” and indicated its intent to issue
regulations that will prevent a consolidated group from claiming multiple losses with respect to
one economic loss. In October 2002, the Treasury Department proposed regulations under
section 1502 that redetermine the basis of the stock of a subsidiary member of a consolidated
group immediately prior to dispositions and deconsolidations of the stock. The proposed

regulations also suspend certain losses recognized on the disposition of such stock. See REG-
131478-02, 67 FR 65060 (Oct. 23, 2002).

281 The Project Tanya materials in Appendix B contain a Memo from Robert P.

Palmquist of Arthur Andersen to Robert J. Hermann dated October 27, 1995, item #4, EC2
000037798.

129

=== PAGE 158 ===
business purpose and should be challenged accordingly. In Project Tanya, Enron and Arthur
Andersen shared the responsibility of developing a business purpose for the transaction.” The
fact that Enron’s tax advisor, who promoted the transaction and assisted in its implementation,
actually shared in the responsibility for developing the business purpose for Project Tanya
should be prima facie evidence that Enron lacked a non-tax business purpose for the transaction.

Related to the concept of a non-tax business purpose is section 269. This provision
grants the IRS the authority to disallow benefits if a taxpayer acquires control (defined as at least
50 percent of vote or value) of a corporation, and the principal purpose of the acquisition is the
evasion or avoidance of Federal income tax.*? In Projects Tanya and Valor, the Arthur
Andersen tax opinions concluded that section 269 was not implicated because Enron
Management, Inc. and ECT Strategic were preexisting entities (and the acquisition occurred
when Enron acquired the common stock, not the preferred stock, of these subsidiaries).
Furthermore, even if control were measured at the time the preferred stock was acquired, the
opinion letters rely on Enron’s representations regarding its business purpose to conclude that the
principal purpose was not the evasion or avoidance of income tax." Given that Arthur
Andersen shared in the responsibility for devising a business purpose for the transactions, its
reliance on Enron’s representations is difficult to justify. Similarly, if called upon, Enron should

have a difficult time asserting that its reliance on the tax opinion constitutes reasonable cause and
sp 285
good faith.

As to the economic substance of the transactions, even the most optimistic projections
regarding the expected additional savings resulting from the transaction would be miniscule

282 The Project Tanya materials in Appendix B contain a facsimile that Enron Corp.
received from Arthur Andersen of a “To Do List” dated November 9, 1995, EC2 000037845-
37847, which states (action step #7) that Arthur Andersen and Enron shared the responsibility of
developing a business purpose for Project Tanya.

283 Sec. 269(a)(1).

284A ppendix C, Part I to this Report contains the tax opinion Enron received in
connection with Project Tanya (with the section 269 analysis in appendix E of the tax opinion).
Appendix C, Part II to this Report contains the tax opinion Enron received in connection with
Project Valor (with the section 269 analysis in appendix E of the tax opinion).

285 An accuracy-related penalty is not imposed with respect to any portion of any
underpayment if the taxpayer can show that there was reasonable cause for, and the taxpayer
acted in good faith with respect to, such portion. Section 6664(c)(1). Reliance on a tax opinion
constitutes reasonable cause and good faith if, under all the circumstances, such reliance was
reasonable and the taxpayer acted in good faith. This standard is not satisfied if the advice or
opinion is based on unreasonable factual or legal assumptions. “For example, the advice must
not be based upon a representation or assumption which the taxpayer knows, or has reason to
know, is unlikely to be true, such as an inaccurate representation or assumption as to the
taxpayer’s purposes for entering into a transaction or for structuring a transaction in a particular
manner.” Treas. Reg. sec. 1.6664-4(c)(1)(ii).

130

=== PAGE 159 ===
when compared to the $423.8 million in additional tax deductions claimed by Enron (i.e., the
aggregate loss from the sale of the Enron Management preferred stock and ECT Strategic
preferred stock).

Another troubling aspect of Projects Tanya and Valor was Enron’s use of an
accommodation party -- its employees. While these shareholders were not “related” to Enron as
the term is generally used under the tax laws, their interests were aligned with Enron and they
shared the same objectives as Enron for purposes of the transactions. In these situations, the tax
rules oftentimes do not function as intended and may produce undesirable results.

Subsequent legislation

Congress enacted legislation in 2000 out of concern that taxpayers were accelerating and
potentially duplicating deductions involving contingent liabilities -- precisely what Projects
Tanya and Valor were designed to accomplish.”*° The provision applies if, after application of
the other transferor basis rules, the basis of property permitted to be received without the
recognition of gain or loss exceeds its fair market value. In such a case, the basis of the property
is reduced (but not below its fair market value) by the amount of any liability that is assumed in
exchange for such property if the liability was not treated as money received by the taxpayer in
the exchange.”®” Had section 358(h) been in effect at the time that Projects Tanya and Valor
were undertaken, the provision would have reduced Enron’s aggregate tax basis in its Enron
Management and ECT Strategic preferred stock from $423.8 million to $80,000.

Administrative guidance

The IRS also has made several administrative pronouncements with respect to contingent
liability transactions. On February 26, 2001, the IRS released a notice on the contingent liability
tax shelter.”®* The notice describes the transaction and states that the IRS was “not aware of any
case in which a taxpayer has shown a legitimate non-tax business reason to carry out the
combination of steps... .” In addition, “any business purposes taxpayers may assert for certain
aspects of these transactions are outweighed by the purposes to generate deductible losses... .”
The notice states that the IRS will disallow any loss from the sale of the stock.”®° The IRS also

286 The Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000, Pub. L. No. 106-554, sec. 1(a)(7)
(Dec. 21, 2000). See Joint Committee on Taxation, General Explanation of Tax Legislation
Enacted in the 106"" Congress (JCS-2-01), April 19, 2001, at 154.

287 Sec. 358(h)(1).

288 Notice 2001-17, 2001-09 LR.B. 730. The notice identifies the contingent liability tax
shelter (and transactions similar to it) as a “listed transaction.”

89 For transfers after October 18, 1999, the losses are disallowed by reason of section
358(h). For transfers on or before October 18, 1999 (and for transfers not subject to section
358(h)), the IRS stated that it would disallow such losses under several different legal theories,
including: (1) the purported section 351 exchange lacks a sufficient business purpose; (2) the
transfer of the asset to the transferee corporation is in substance an agency arrangement or a
payment to the transferee corporation for its assumption of a liability; (3) the purported section

131

=== PAGE 160 ===
noted that any deduction claimed by the transferee corporation for payments on the assumed
liability may be subject to disallowance on one or more of several possible grounds, including
that the payments are not for ordinary and necessary business expenses of the transferee
corporation.””° The IRS also has issued notices to assist Chief Counsel attorneys in advising
field personnel in the development of cases involving these (or similar) transactions.””!

Tax shelter resolution initiative program

On October 4, 2002, the government announced a tax shelter resolution initiative?” under
which it will agree to enter into settlement agreements with taxpayers involved in three abusive
tax-avoidance transactions (including the contingent liability transactions). With respect to the
contingent liability transaction, the settlement initiative provides for two resolution
methodologies that an eligible taxpayer can elect. 293 A taxpayer that wishes to participate in the
program must notify the IRS by a written application before March 5, 2003.74

351 exchange is disallowed under section 269(a); (4) the principal purpose of the transferee’s
assumption of the liability was to avoid federal income tax or was not a bona fide business
purpose under section 357(b)(1) and therefore the assumption of the liability should be treated as
money received by the transferor; (5) the purported loss on the sale of stock of the transferee
corporation is disallowed or limited by the loss disallowance rules of Treas. Reg. sec. 1.1502-20,
(6) the purported loss on the sale of stock of the transferee corporation is not a bona fide loss
under section 165; and (7) the transaction lacks sufficient economic substance.

290 The IRS distinguished Rev. Rul. 95-74 by noting that in the ruling, the transferee
corporation assumed the liabilities in connection with the transfer of substantially all the assets
associated with the operation of a manufacturing business.

291 See, CC-2001-033 (June 22, 2001) and CC-2001-033a (revised) (June 28, 2001). The
IRS has released a number of agency decisions in which it has cited Notice 2001-17. See, e.g.,
FSA 200121013 (February 12, 2001) (transaction involving nonqualified deferred compensation
liabilities in a consolidated return context); FSA 200122022 (February 23, 2001) (transaction
involving swap liabilities and credit reserves in a consolidated return context); CCA (chief
counsel advice) 200117039 (March 13, 2001) (transaction involving an obligation to pay rent
under a leasehold position following a lease stripping transaction); FSA 200134008 (May 15,
2001) (transaction involving employee benefits); and FSA 200146025 (August 2, 2001) (in
determining whether a loss is a bona fide loss in an equity stripping transaction).

22 TR-2002-105 (Oct. 4, 2002).

°3 Under one methodology -- the “fixed concession procedure” -- an eligible taxpayer is
permitted a capital loss deduction equal to 25 percent of the amount of the capital loss reported
for the sale of the transferee stock received in the contingent liability transaction. To prevent a
duplication of the tax benefits, the taxpayer must include an amount equal to the permitted
capital loss as income in equal annual amounts over a 15-year period. Under the second
methodology -- the “fast track dispute resolution procedure” -- the taxpayer must concede
between 50 and 90 percent of the amount of the capital loss reported for the sale of stock (with a

132

=== PAGE 161 ===
Recommendations

The legislation enacted in 2000 makes it more difficult for taxpayers to achieve the
duplication of losses sought by Enron in Projects Tanya and Valor. The IRS and Treasury
Department also have taken measures to address the specific transaction. Therefore, with respect
to the specific transaction, a recommendation is not necessary at this time.

The linchpin to the contingent liability transaction is the interactive effect of the
corporate tax-free transfer rules and the tax basis rules, 295 which results in a duplication of losses
for the transferor and transferee. Equally as important to the transaction is the use of a liability
that is not taken into account for Federal income tax purposes.” While section 358(h) was an
appropriate response to the transaction at issue, there are instances in which it falls short of
addressing other transactions that raise similar concerns. For example, the provision does not
apply to situations in which the duplication of loss is achieved via a transfer of built-in loss
assets without an assumption of liabilities.”

The duplication of gains and losses is one of the fundamental underpinnings of
subchapter C. Some commentators have said that duplication of gain and loss is the price a
transferor pays in order to achieve deferral of gain and loss.”"8 Such a rationale, however, does

binding arbitration procedure if the taxpayer and IRS cannot agree on the amount of the
disallowed loss). The details of the settlement offer in connection with the contingent liability
transaction are described in Rev. Proc. 2002-67, 2002-43 LR.B. 733 (Oct. 28, 2002).

294 tm Announcement 2002-110, 2002-50 I.R.B. 1, the IRS announced it was extending
the deadline for participating in the resolution program from January 2 to March 5.

295 Secs. 351, 358 and 362.

26 For a general discussion of the treatment of liabilities, see generally, Lee Sheppard,
What is a Liability, 89 Tax Notes 1513 (2000).

297 Bank of America used a similar section 351 loss duplication strategy in connection
with certain problem loans to increase its 2001 fourth-quarter earnings by $418 million (i.e.,
earnings through a permanent reduction in its income tax liability). See Bank of America News
Release dated January 22, 2002 (“During the year, the company realigned operations that
manage distressed assets to make them more effective. The establishment of this new unit and
the disposal of distressed assets generated a $418 million tax benefit which resulted in a 17
percent [effective] tax rate for the company.”). See also, Carry Mollenkamp, Rare Use of Tax
Law Helps Lift Bank of America to Hefty Profit, Wall St. Journal, p. A-2 (Jan. 24, 2002); Lee
Sheppard, Bank of America’s Tax Plan for Bad Loans, Tax Notes Today, 2002 TNT 38-5 (Feb.
26, 2002). See also, the following discussions of Projects Steele and Cochise in this Report.

28 See, e.g., Boris Bittker & James Eustice, Federal Income Taxation of Corporations
and Shareholders, par. 3.01 at 3-8 (7" ed. 2002) (“In short, the cost of deferral under sec. 351 is
that gain or loss accruing during the individual transferor’s ownership is escalated from the one-
tier tax treatment of individual to the two-tier corporate regime. This is one of the features

133

=== PAGE 162 ===
not justify permitting a transaction whose primary purpose is to duplicate losses, particularly in
light of the degree of tax planning flexibility that taxpayers enjoy with respect to tax-free
transfers.

A single economic loss should not be deducted more than once. If the loss duplication
issue is to be addressed, a question arises as to which party should be entitled to the deduction.
One theory is that the transferor bore the economic consequences of the loss and therefore should
be entitled to the deduction. If this theory is followed, the Joint Committee staff recommends
limiting a corporation’s basis in property acquired in a tax-free transfer (or reorganization) to its
fair market value.2” An alternative view is that the loss is a tax attribute that is inherent in the
property, and therefore it should remain with the property. The depreciation recapture rules
reflect this concept -- if depreciable property is transferred to a corporation in a tax-free
transaction, the recharacterized gain element remains with the asset (as opposed to tainting the
stock received in the exchange).°” If this theory is followed, the Joint Committee staff
recommends expanding the sec. 358(h) basis reduction rule.

In addition to the above specific recommendations, Projects Tanya and Valor highlight
the need for stronger measures to discourage transactions that lack a non-tax business purpose or
economic substance. Such measures, however designed, must significantly increase the
economic risk to taxpayers of entering into tax-motivated transactions. Under the present
system, the expected tax benefits from these transactions typically far outweigh the associated
costs. Taxpayers will continue to engage in tax-motivated transactions unless and until there is a
meaningful change in this cost-benefit analysis. At a minimum, taxpayers that engage in tax-
motivated transactions should be subject to substantial penalties. A number of recommendations
and proposals have been made in recent years to curtail the use of tax-motivated transactions
(including by the Joint Committee staff).°°!

making life in the subchapter C lobster pot confining, complicated, and costly, even though
entry, thanks to sec. 351, is usually simple and painless.”) (citations omitted).

299 For example, section 301 of H.R. 2520, the “Abusive Tax Shelter Shutdown Act of
2001,” would reduce a transferee corporation’s basis under section 362 with respect to loss
property the corporation receives from a foreign transferor in a tax-free transaction. Such a
proposal would raise several related issues, most notably whether the basis limitation rule should
apply to aggregate asset transfers or to individual assets.

30 Sec. 1245(b)(3).

301 For detailed information of the present law rules and judicial doctrines applicable to
tax motivated transactions and related recommendations and developments, see, e.g., Joint
Committee on Taxation, Background and Present Law Relating to Tax Shelters (JCX-19-02),
March 19, 2002; Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest
Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998 (including provisions relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (JCS-3-99), July
22, 1999; Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9017) to section 6011 (October 22, 2002);
Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9018) to section 6012 (October 22, 2002); Joint

134

=== PAGE 163 ===
The Joint Committee staff recommendations regarding Project Cochise*” include
recommendations to expand section 269. These recommendations also are appropriate for
consideration with respect to Projects Tanya and Valor.

3. Project Steele
Brief overview

Project Steele was structured to generate approximately $130 million of pre-tax financial
statement operating income*™? while, conversely, generating significant Federal income tax
deductions for Enron. Project Steele involved a tax-free transfer of (1) cash and leased assets by
Enron, and (2) cash and assets with tax basis significantly in excess of their fair market value
by Bankers Trust Company, a New York banking corporation (“Bankers Trust”),°™ to a newly
formed corporation in return for common and preferred stock. Because Enron received more
than 80 percent of the vote and value of the corporation, the corporation’s income and loss was
included in Enron’s consolidated tax return. Therefore, the ensuing tax losses from the built-in
loss assets contributed by Bankers Trust are generally available to offset taxable income of
Enron.

Additionally, because Bankers Trust’s tax basis in the stock received is determined by
reference to the built-in loss assets contributed, Bankers Trust’s tax basis in the stock
significantly exceeds its fair market value. Thus, the transaction effectively duplicates the built-
in loss in the contributed assets (i.e., Bankers Trust and Enron both seek to shelter taxable
income as a result of the built-in-loss on the contributed assets). In order to provide substance to
the transaction, Bankers Trust anticipated holding the stock received until at least 2002. In order
to compensate Bankers Trust for delaying the realization of its tax loss for a number of years,
Bankers Trust requested Enron pay Bankers Trust the present value cost of delaying such losses.

Committee on Taxation, Description of the "CARE Act of 2003," (JCX-04-03), February 3, 2003;

Symposium: Business Purpose, Economic Substance and Corporate Tax Shelters, 54 SMU L.
Rev. 1 (2001).

3 Project Cochise is discussed in this corporate section of the Report (following Project
Steele).

303 This amount was obtained from an Enron presentation material titled “Show Me the
Money! Project Steele Earnings Benefits.” The after-tax amount was anticipated to be

approximately $83.5 million. The Project Steele materials in Appendix B contain the document.
EC2 000038546.

304 The assets contributed by Bankers Trust entities were Real Estate Mortgage
Investment Conduit residual interests (hereinafter “REMIC residual interests”).

395 The assets were contributed by Bankers Trust (Delaware) and Bankers Trust. On or

about June 4, 1999, all of the outstanding stock of Bankers Trust Corp., a New York corporation
and the holding company parent of Bankers Trust, was acquired by Deutsche Bank.

135

=== PAGE 164 ===
This was described in correspondence between Bankers Trust and Enron that quantified the
present value cost to Bankers Trust of entering into Project Steele.>

Background”

Reported tax and financial statement effects

Project Steele generated approximately $112 million of net Federal income tax
deductions from 1997 through 2001.°° In addition, Project Steele generated approximately $65
million in net earnings for financial reporting purposes from 1997 through 2001 30

Development of Project Steele

Bankers Trust promoted the concept of Project Steele to Enron in April of 1997.° The
transaction was presented to Enron as a mechanism to generate financial statement income while
providing significant Federal income tax deductions. A memorandum prepared by Bankers
Trust provided an analysis of the financial accounting and Federal income tax treatment of three
alternative structures that could be used to undertake the proposed transaction.*!! The
memorandum states that in Bankers Trust’s professional opinion that it would not receive much,
if any, fee solely for the tax benefits (alternative structure one), but if the transaction were

3° Letter from Thomas Finley of Bankers Trust to Mr. Maxey dated August 11, 1997.
The Project Steele materials in Appendix B contain the letter. EC00003795-96.

307 The information regarding Project Steele was obtained from Joint Committee staff
interviews of Robert J. Hermann and R. Davis Maxey, as well as from documents and
information provided by Enron Corp. and the Internal Revenue Service.

308 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 31, 2003, answer 4.

309 Enron stated that no opinion or memoranda was obtained from Arthur Andersen
regarding the financial accounting treatment of Project Steele. However, Enron provided
documentation from Bankers Trust regarding the accounting treatment of Project Steele. The
Project Steele materials in Appendix B contain the letter. EC2 000037573 - EC2 000037592.
The financial statement net earnings source documentation is a letter from Enron’s counsel
(Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation, dated January 13 and January
31, 2003, answers 32 and 4, respectively.

310 Project Steele Overview contained in a document titled Enron Structured
Transactions Group Summaries of Project Earnings and Cash Flows dated November 2001. See
also letter from Mr. Finley of Bankers Trust to Mr. Maxey dated June 17, 1997. The Project
Steele materials in Appendix B contain the letter. EC2 00037571 - EC2 000037572.

311 J etter and attachment from William B. Boyle of Bankers Trust to William McKee of

King & Spalding, dated June 2, 1997. The Project Steele materials in Appendix B contain the
letter and attachment. EC2 000037574- EC2 000037592.

136

=== PAGE 165 ===
redesigned to provide for financial accounting benefits, as well, then corporate clients would be
extremely interested and would pay a substantial fee (alternative structures two and three).°!”

On June 17, 1997, Bankers Trust provided an engagement letter to Enron indicating that
Bankers Trust agreed to provide Enron with all information regarding the proposed transaction,
including all analyses and documents prepared by Bankers Trust or any of its advisors, and, in
consideration thereof, Enron agreed to employ Bankers Trust as its exclusive financial advisor in
connection with the consummation of one of the alternative structures.°!

During the summer and early fall of 1997, the alternatives were evaluated and various
details of the transaction were agreed to by Enron and Bankers Trust. On October 28, 1997,
Enron and Bankers Trust entered into an agreement: (1) providing that Enron would enter into
the proposed transaction with Bankers Trust; (2) providing that Enron would engage Bankers
Trust to act as its financial advisor in connection with such transaction; and (3) detailing the
compensation to be paid by Enron to Bankers Trust and to Akin, Gump, Stauss, Hauer & Feld,
LLP (hereinafter “Akin, Gump”) by Enron.?"* The transaction was subsequently completed on
October 31, 1997.

It is unclear from the documents which corporate officers, other than Mr. Causey,
approved the transaction prior to its completion. However, on March 4, 1998, Kenneth L. Lay,
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Enron Corp. thanked Mr. Hermann and Mr. Maxey for
their good job on the transaction.?!> In addition, Enron’s Board of Directors was made aware of
the completion of Project Steele at the December 9, 1997 meeting.°!°

312 Td. at EC2 0000375092. The letter also states that “other less expensive alternatives
exist to generate equivalent tax benefits.” EC2 000037592 and EC2 000037573.

313 Letter from Mr. Finley of Bankers Trust to Mr. Maxey, dated June 17, 1997.
Although the letter limits disclosure of the information, it does not explicitly require
confidentiality; however, it states “[i]f any law enacted after the date of this letter shall require
that the Transaction be registered as a ‘tax shelter’... then this letter shall be null and
void...including without limitation any payment obligations or any requirements of
confidentiality or exclusivity.” The Project Steele materials in Appendix B contain the letter.
EC2 00037571 - EC2 000037572.

314 Letter from Mr. Finley of Bankers Trust to Richard A. Causey, dated October 28,
1997. Although Akin, Gump was not a party to the agreement, the agreement specifically
references fees to be paid to Akin, Gump, an unrelated and otherwise unnamed third party.
Enron stated it was not aware why Akin, Gump was included in the agreement.

315 Mr. Lay relayed his comments to Mr. Hermann and Mr. Maxey by forwarding a letter
from Frank N. Newman, Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of Bankers Trust,
in which Mr. Newman congratulates Mr. Lay on the successful completion of Project Steele.

Mr. Newman wrote that Bankers Trust “ is extremely pleased to have worked with your
company as both financial advisor and principal on this transaction to collaboratively meet
Enron’s financial objectives. Moreover, we view this transaction as a solid platform for

137

=== PAGE 166 ===
Enron’s purported principal business purpose for the transaction was to generate financial
accounting income. Other business purposes stated were (1) that the transaction is expected to
reduce Federal income taxes owed by Enron, (2) that the transaction is expected to generate
investment profits, and (3) that the transaction provides access to Bankers Trust investment
expertise.!

Implementation of Project Steele

On October 27, 1997, Enron Corp., indirectly through three wholly owned subsidiaries
(“the Enron Subsidiaries”), formed ECT Investing Partners, LP (“ECT Partners”).°18 Although
legally a limited partnership, ECT Partners elected under the “check the box” regulations to be
treated as a corporation for Federal income tax purposes.*!?

On October 29, 1997, ECT Partners borrowed on a short-term basis $51.2 million from
Enron North America, Inc.*”” The next day, ECT Partners used the entire proceeds to purchase
corporate bonds from Bankers Trust.*”! The purchased bonds were high-grade corporate bonds

continuing to explore innovative solutions that are tailored to your needs.” It is unclear if Mr.
Newman's reference to "financial objectives" was to the stated business purpose of generating
financial accounting income. The Project Steele materials in Appendix B contain the letter. EC2
000037643. In addition, subsequent to the completion of Project Steele, Bankers Trust invited
Mr. Maxey to the Potomac Capital Investment Corporation Conference on Februrary 8, 1998
through February 11, 1998. The Project Steele materials in Appendix B contain the letter. EC2
000037639-EC2 000037642. ’

316 Enron 1998 - 2009 Operating & Strategic Plan for Enron mentioned that Project
Steele, a tax strategy, will contribute pre-tax earnings of about $20 million per year in 1998-
2000. EC 000046108 and EC 000046154.

317 Federal tax opinion letter from Akin, Gump to Mr. Maxey dated December 16, 1997
at EC2 000033872. Appendix C, Part III to this Report contains the tax opinion letter.

318 The Enron Subsidiaries received general and limited partnership interests in return for
their contributions. The contributing subsidiaries were ECT Investing Corp., ECT Investments
Holding Corp., and Enron Pipeline Company.

319 Treas. Reg. sec. 301.7701-3.

320 At the time of the loan, Enron North America, Inc. was known as Enron Capital &
Trade Resources Corp. Enron North America, Inc. (a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron) is an
parent corporation of two of the ECT Partners.

321 The bonds were subsequently transferred to ECT Diversified Investments, LLC, a

wholly owned subsidiary of ECT Partners. ECT Diversified Investments, LLC elected to be
treated as a disregarded entity for Federal income tax purposes.

138

=== PAGE 167 ===
of various energy companies.’ On October 30, 1997, and October 31, 1997, the three Enron
owners contributed approximately $48 million of cash, $93.5 million of preferred stock of Enron
Liquids Holding Corporation,” and a beneficial interest in certain leased aircraft with a fair
market value of $42.6 million and a tax basis of zero to ECT Partners. The leased aircraft
interest was contributed subject to $42.6 million of debt. In exchange for such property, Enron
received approximately 95 percent ownership in ECT Partners. Also on October 31, 1997, ECT
Partners repaid $50.5 million to Enron North America, Inc. in satisfaction of all but $700,000 of
ECT Partner’s borrowing from Enron North America, Inc.

On October 31, 1997, Bankers Trust, through two entities, contributed to ECT Partners
$4.4 million of cash and REMIC residual interests with an approximate fair market value of $7.6
million and a tax basis of $233.8 million. In return, the Bankers Trust entities received
approximately a five percent preferred ownership interest in ECT Partners and $4.5 million of
ECT Partners debt securities. Bankers Trust also purchased from Enron Corp. two puts for
$1,000 ($500 per option). The puts permits Bankers Trust to put its interest in ECT Partners to
Enron at specified times (2 years and 6 ¥% years after a recapitalization of ECT Partners).°4

As a result of these steps, the Enron Subsidiaries received common and preferred shares
in ECT Partners representing approximately 95 percent of the total vote and value of ECT
Partners’s shares. Bankers Trust’s received preferred shares representing approximately 5
percent of the total vote and value of ECT Partners and $4.5 million of ECT Partners debt
securities. After the contribution of property, ECT Partners owned REMIC residual interests
with a fair market value of approximately $7.5 million and a tax basis of $234 million. The
partnership also owned $51.2 million of corporate bonds, $2 million cash, and $42.6 million in
leased assets (with a zero tax basis) subject to debt in an equal amount, and 100 percent of the

322 The companies included Mobil Oil, Texaco Capital, Pacificorp, Alabama Power,
Florida Power and Light, Imperial Oil, and Northern States Power. Ecx000003222.

323 ECT Partners subsequently contributed the Enron Liquids Holding Corporation
preferred stock to Enron Equity Corporation in return for a preferred interest in such entity.
Enron North America contributed a $110 million intercompany note receivable from Enron
Reserve Acquisition Corporation for the common interest in Enron Equity Corporation. Enron
Equity Corporation immediately sold the Enron Liquids Holding Corporation preferred stock to
Enron Corp. in exchange for a $93.5 million intercompany note receivable from Houston
Pipeline Company, another wholly owned subsidiary of Enron Corp. Enron stated that it is not
aware of any non-tax business reasons for the issuance of the $110 million intercompany note
receivable from Enron Reserve Acquisition Corporation or the $93.5 million of Enron Liquids
Holding Corporation preferred stock.

34 At any time after five years, any equity owner of ECT Partners could cause a
recapitalization of ECT Partners pursuant to which preferred shares and debt securities held by
Bankers Trust would be exchanged for new debt securities of ECT Partners with a current cash
pay London Interbank Offering Rate based rate of return.

139

=== PAGE 168 ===
preferred stock of ECT Equity Corp. which owned $203.5 million of intercompany notes of
Enron affiliates.*”

The diagram on the next page depicts the Project Steele structure.

325 RCT Equity Corp. held a $93.5 million note receivable from Houston Pipeline
Company and a $110 million note receivable from Enron Acquisition Corporation. Enron North
America, Inc. owned 100 percent of the common shares of ECT Equity Corp.

140

=== PAGE 169 ===
(  aqqekeg 1q9q
\. vom ysrg of

’ ‘.

..
~

sek -

spuog

ayerodi0_) vo ON 8 ae [errr
{ : y; 310N . 210N
UOTT[M O¢$ if asian Loa } (bow onrosoy ow} i fueduoy aH .
wel eee ‘out L 8rS, \ von orig a ‘won ¢¢6¢
S| Atfep uo gzyg. jee

/ argon 19a 5 | f or satqns yesorry  //STeMPISON INA *,
\ WIM pg won 927g \. worms zg

S. 2

---7 na eee

[209§ “JON
UOT ¢E6$

3ged 1€S‘8S9'7$ (Z)
asaxonyy ‘d “I € SSID 69P‘08P'r$ (1)

a epee ------------------------------- + --

Yse- UONTM pp$ ‘sTenpIsoY OTAAY vorpiu cL

399 69¢‘608'I$ (2)

'

H ANIEA PUR 210A %9T'P6
H wOIOIU] “d “TA SSP 1ES‘6HO'ES (1)

H

'

'

sjsozajuy drysioupreg
powuiry pure perouan

W
C2 Sissy paseaT uri 9°7p$ (Z)
sec worm os$ (1)

sone,

siassy (>>

young >

uonesodioy [—]

a PL

Pareprfosuog dvvo uomg EEG

pusseT dvVOREL ST

Jenuspyuod

L66L ‘TE 19qG0790 Jo sB aANjJIN.YS
9]9998 pofoig

141

=== PAGE 170 ===
Role of outside advisors

As noted above, Bankers Trust promoted and was the exclusive financial advisor on the
transaction to Enron; in addition, Bankers Trust was the only legally unrelated counterparty to
the transaction. Enron’s outside counsel for Project Steele was Akin, Gump. In connection with
Project Steele, Akin, Gump provided two tax opinion letters. The first opinion analyzed the tax
implications of the transaction and concluded that (1) the contribution of property and assets by
the Enron Subsidiaries and Bankers Trust should constitute nontaxable transfers of property
under section 351; (2) the tax basis of the contributed property to the corporation should equal
the tax basis of such assets in the hands of the contributor; (3) the losses attributable to the
REMIC residual interests should not be disallowed, whether by the business purpose doctrine,
section 269, the step transaction doctrine, or Treas. Reg. sec. 1.1502-13(h); (4) losses attributable
to the REMIC residual interests recognized during the five-year period after the closing of the
transaction more likely than not will be subject to limitation under the SRLY rules of the
consolidated return regulations; and (5) ECT Partners should be eligible to join the consolidated
group of Enron.°° The second tax opinion analyzed the potential accuracy-related penalties
(under section 6662) and tax shelter disclosure requirements (under section 6111). The opinion
concluded that (1) the accuracy-related penalty should not apply in the event the deductions
attributable to the REMIC residual interests are disallowed, and (2) no person principally
responsible for, or participating in, the organization and management of ECT Partners should be
required to register ECT Partners as a tax-shelter.°”” In addition, Arthur Andersen was engaged
to do a tax basis study on the REMIC residual interests contributed by Bankers Trust.

Bankers Trust was paid $8.65 million for its services.°*> Akin, Gump was paid $1
million for the tax opinion letters and Arthur Andersen was paid $49,600 for its services.*”?

Discussion

Project Steele was designed to provide Enron with the tax benefits associated with built-
in losses in the REMIC residual assets at a cost significantly less than the amount of the tax
benefit. A determination of whether Enron should be entitled to deduct the built-in losses in the
REMIC residual assets necessarily involves an analysis regarding Enron’s satisfaction of the

326 Federal tax opinion letter from Akin, Gump to Mr. Maxey dated December 16, 1997.
Appendix C, Part III to this Report contains the tax opinion letter Enron received in connection
with Project Steele. EC 000033867-EC 000033903.

327 Akin, Gump tax opinion letter to Mr. Maxey dated December 16, 1997. EC
000033905-EC 000033916. Appendix C, Part III to this Report contains the tax opinion letter
Enron received in connection with Project Steele.

328 The contractual fee was $10 million. Enron is still obligated on the final three
installments of $450,000.

329 The General Background Materials in Appendix B contain the Estimated Project Fees

schedule (6/4/01). The fees were determined from a table summarizing fees paid on structured
transactions. EC2 000036379.

142

=== PAGE 171 ===
literal requirements of the applicable statutory requirements as well as the rules and judicial
doctrines (such as business purpose and economic substance) that are often applied to evaluate
the purported tax benefits in tax-avoidance transactions. 330

The Code and Treasury regulations recognize the potential for abusive activity and
contain provisions intended to limit the benefits of arrangements that, although satisfying the
literal requirements of a provision, are used to distort, pervert, and defeat the basic purpose of the
underlying statute.**! These provisions address such policy concerns by limiting the benefit of
the underlying statute through the use of general disallowance if (1) specific factual tests are met
or (2) if the principal purpose of the transaction is to evade or avoid income tax.

Acquisitions made to evade or avoid income tax

If a taxpayer acquires control (defined as at least 50 percent of vote or value) of a
corporation, and the principal purpose of the acquisition is the evasion or avoidance of Federal
income tax, the deductions or other tax benefits may be disallowed.*” In Project Steele, the
formation of ECT Partners by the Enron Subsidiaries and Bankers Trust was the acquisition of
control. Thus, in order to avoid the disallowance of the tax benefits from Project Steele, Enron
had to have a principal purpose other than the avoidance or evasion of Federal income tax.

In determining Enron’s motives for engaging in Project Steele, Akin, Gump relied
heavily upon Enron’s representation that its principal purpose for entering into the transaction

330 For detailed information of the present law rules and judicial doctrines applicabie to
tax avoidance transactions and related recommendations and developments, see, e.g., Joint
Committee on Taxation, Background and Present Law Relating to Tax Shelters (SCX-19-02),
March 19, 2002; Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest
Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998 (including provisions relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (JCS-3-99), July
22, 1999; Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9017) to section 6011 (October 22, 2002);
Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9018) to section 6012 (October 22, 2002); Joint
Committee on Taxation, Description of the "CARE Act of 2003," (JCX-04-03), February 3, 2003;
Symposium: Business Purpose, Economic Substance and Corporate Tax Shelters, 54 SMU L.
Rev. 1 (2001).

331 See, e.g., sec. 269 (acquisitions made to evade or avoid income tax), sec. 362(d)
(limitation on basis increase attributable to assumption of liability), sec. 358(h) (reduction to
basis of assets in connection with transfers of liabilities that give rise to a deduction), Treas. Reg.
sec. 1.701-2 (partnerships formed or availed of in connection with a transaction with a principal
purpose of reducing tax), and sec. 732(f) (adjustment to basis of assets of a distributed
corporation controlled by a corporate partner). See also proposed regulations to prevent a
consolidated group from obtaining more than one tax benefit from a single economic loss (IRS
Proposed Rules and Public Hearing Notice (Reg-131478-02) On Suspension of Losses on
Certain Stock Dispositions Federal Register October 23, 2002).

332 Sec, 269(a)(1).

143

=== PAGE 172 ===
was to generate financial accounting benefits and that it would not have entered into the
transaction in the absence of the accounting benefits. In addition, Akin, Gump relied on Enron’s
representation that it would have entered into the transaction even if no net cash benefit was
anticipated to arise as a result of an excess of net present value tax savings over the transaction
costs. Based on these representations, Akin, Gump concluded that section 269 would not
disallow the benefits obtained from Project Steele. 333

Akin, Gump’s conclusion is disturbing in two respects. First, concluding that a non-tax
business purpose exists based on the accounting benefits of Project Steele fails to consider the
origin of the accounting benefit (i.e., solely reduction of taxes). Such an analysis significantly
diminishes the purpose for having a substantial non-tax business purpose.*** Second, Akin,
Gump’s reliance on Enron’s representation that Enron would have engaged in the transaction
even if there were no present value tax benefits after transaction costs fails to recognize that
Project Steele under all circumstances, absent an extraordinary fee to the promoter, would have
significant present value tax benefits. Reliance on answers given to unimaginable hypothetical
transactions, especially when evaluating a taxpayer’s non-tax business purposes, may call into
question the reasonableness and objectivity of the advice given, especially for purposes of the
accuracy related penalty.**

Section 351

The Code and Treasury regulations also contain specific provisions intended to limit a
taxpayer’s ability to transfer tax attributes, such as net operating losses, built-in-losses, and

333, Appendix C, Part III to this Report contains the Akin, Gump tax opinion.

334 See, e.g., American Electric Power, Inc. v. U.S., 136 F. Supp. 2d 762, 791-92 (S.D.
Ohio, 2001) (““AEP’s intended use of the cash flows generated by the [corporate-owned life
insurance] plan is irrelevant to the subjective prong of the economic substance analysis. If a
legitimate business purpose for the use of the tax savings ‘were sufficient to breathe substance
into a transaction whose only purpose was to reduce taxes, [then] every sham tax-shelter device
might succeed,” citing Winn-Dixie v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. 254, 287 (1999)).

335 An accuracy-related penalty is not imposed with respect to any portion of any
underpayment if the taxpayer can show that there was reasonable cause for, and the taxpayer
acted in good faith with respect to, such portion. Sec. 6664(c)(1). Reliance on a tax opinion
constitutes reasonable cause and good faith if, under all the circumstances, such reliance was
reasonable and the taxpayer acted in good faith. This standard is not satisfied if the advice or
opinion is based on unreasonable factual or legal assumptions. “For example, the advice must
not be based upon a representation or assumption which the taxpayer knows, or has reason to
know, is unlikely to be true, such as an inaccurate representation or assumption as to the
taxpayer’s purposes for entering into a transaction or for structuring a transaction in a particular
manner.” Treas. Reg. sec. 1.6664-4(c)(1)(ii).

144

=== PAGE 173 ===
various credit items. *°° The general purpose of these provisions is to limit the ability of such tax
benefits by a taxpayer who did not suffer the economic loss that gave rise to the tax benefit.

Project Steele purported to use the tax-free incorporation rules and resulting carryover
basis rules to transfer losses and duplicate a single economic loss. The ability to transfer losses
and duplicate a single economic loss through : section 351 has been, and continues to be, a
concern in the administration of tax policy.* 7 In order for Project Steele to achieve the desired
tax results (and the corresponding financial accounting benefits), the transfer of the REMIC
residual interests by Bankers Trust had to occur in a tax-free incorporation such that the REMIC
residual interests tax basis would carry over to ECT Partners.

It may be argued that the application of section 351(a) is predicated upon a valid non-tax
business purpose and that the transfer by Bankers Trust did not have the requisite business
purpose.**® Documents exchanged between Bankers Trust and Enron clearly reflect that one of
the considerations in the transaction was the fee paid to Bankers Trust for the delay the structure
imposed on Bankers Trust’s ability to deduct the losses. Bankers Trust provided schedules to
Enron detailing the net present value cost of delaying their tax benefits until the recapitalization
was permitted.**” The documentation reviewed by the Joint Committee staff demonstrated no

336 See, e.g., sec. 382 (limitation on net operating loss carryforwards and certain built-in-
losses following ownership changes, sec. 383 (special limitations on certain excess credits, etc.),
and Treas. Reg. sec. 1.1502-15 (SRLY limitation on built-in-losses).

337 For example, in the year 2000, Congress enacted rules requiring a reduction in basis
of assets in connection with transfers of certain liabilities in order to stop transactions that
duplicated a single economic loss. See, the Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000, Pub.
L. No. 106-554, sec. 1(a)(7) (Dec. 21, 2000). See Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation,
General Explanation of Tax Enacted in the 106" Congress (JCS-2-01), April 19, 2001, at 154.
In addition, President Clinton’s Fiscal Year 2001 Budget Proposals contained a proposal that was
aimed at limiting the ability of taxpayers to transfer built-in losses into the U.S. tax system by
requiring marking to fair market value such assets when such assets become “relevant” for U.S.
tax purposes (See Office of Management and Budget, Budget of the United States Government,
Fiscal 2001: Analytical Perspectives (H.Doc. 106-162, Vol. III). See also Joint Committee on
Taxation, Description of Revenue Provisions Contained in the President’s Fiscal Year 2001
Budget Proposal (JCS-2-00), March 6, 2000.) Most recently, the Treasury Department issued
proposed regulations to prevent a consolidated group from obtaining more than one tax benefit
from a single economic loss (IRS Proposed Rules and Public Hearing Notice (Reg-131478-02)
On Suspension of Losses on Certain Stock Dispositions. Federal Register October 23, 2002).

338 An analysis of the non-tax business purpose is also relevant for the application of the
judicial doctrines referred to above.

339 1 etter from Mr. Finley of Bankers Trust to Mr. Maxey dated August 11, 1997. The

Project Steele materials in Appendix B contain the letter. EC2 000037595 - EC2 000037596.
King & Spalding was counsel to Bankers Trust on Project Steele.

145

=== PAGE 174 ===
purpose for the transaction other than to facilitate the transfer of Federal income tax benefits, and
the resulting financial accounting benefits to Enron.

Bankers Trust’s reason for engaging in the transaction can be gleaned from a letter to
King & Spalding.” Bankers Trust provided a detailed analysis of how the “base case”
duplication of losses from the REMIC residual interests could be enhanced by inserting a
recapitalization feature and having a corporation (in this case Enron) transfer additional unrelated
assets into the structure.“ By inserting these features, Bankers Trust concluded that significant
financial accounting benefits inure to a participant, including reflecting the tax benefits in
operating income rather than as reduction to tax expense.>” Most importantly to Bankers Trust,
though, was its conclusion that by inserting the recapitalization feature into the structure, it could
earn a modest fee, but with both features inserted, it could obtain a substantial fee from its
corporate clients.

Recommendations

The Joint Committee staff recommendations regarding Projects Tanya and Valor*?
include recommendations to limit the duplication of a single economic loss. These
recommendations also are appropriate for consideration with respect to Project Steele.

Irrespective of whether an overall change is made to limit the duplication of a single
economic loss under subchapter C generally, the Joint Committee staff believes it is appropriate
to limit the ability to transfer REMIC residual interests in a carryover basis transaction. Under
the statutory rules regarding the taxation of REMICS, phantom income is allocated to REMIC
residual interest holders. The phantom income allocation inevitably creates built-in losses to the
holders of the REMIC residual interests, thus making such interests a natural component for
transactions designed to duplicate a single economic loss. As such, the Joint Committee staff
recommends that either a corporation’s basis in REMIC residual interests acquired in a tax-free
transfer (or reorganization) be limited to its fair market value or that a transferor’s basis in the
stock received in exchange for REMIC residual interests be limited to the fair market value of
the REMIC residual interests.*™*

340 See letter and attachment from William B. Boyle of Bankers Trust to William McKee
of King & Spalding dated June 2, 1997. The Project Steele materials in Appendix B contain the
letter. EC2 000037574 - EC2 000037592.

341 Both of these features were included in Project Steele.
32 short explanation of why operating earnings are considered more beneficial than a
reduction in income tax expense is contained in Background and Rationale of this Part of the

Report.

343 Projects Tanya and Valor are discussed in this section of the Report immediately
preceding Project Steele.

344 See recommendations for Projects Tanya and Valor for a discussion of general issues
with respect to this type of proposal.

146

=== PAGE 175 ===
4. Project Cochise
Brief overview

Project Cochise was a variation on Project Steele and, like Project Steele, was designed to
produce operating income on Enron’s financial statements, while also providing Enron with
significant Federal income tax deductions. Thus, the prearranged transaction was intended to
yield Enron a combination of both income for financial statement purposes and deductions for
Federal income tax purposes.

In general, Project Cochise involved tax-free transfers by Enron of assets with a steady
income stream (i.e., REMIC regular interests)--along with tax-free transfers by the London
branch of Bankers Trust of assets with a tax basis significantly in excess of fair market value
(i.e., residual interests in the same portfolio of REMICs)--to an existing wholly-owned
subsidiary of Enron. The subsidiary subsequently elected to be treated as a real estate investment
trust (“REIT”) for Federal income tax purposes. Based upon the differences between the
financial accounting and Federal income tax treatment of the REMIC residual interests that were
transferred to the subsidiary by Bankers Trust, Project Cochise produced for Enron a substantial
amount of financial accounting income through the immediate creation of a deferred but
undiscounted tax asset.**°

Because the subsidiary would no longer be part of Enron’s consolidated group (as a result
of its REIT status election) and Bankers Trust would own all of the common stock of the
subsidiary following the transfers, all of the remaining so-called “phantom” (i.e., non-cash)
income from the REMIC residual interests would be distributed to Bankers Trust through the
declaration of consent dividends on the common stock in the subsidiary held by Bankers Trust.
Furthermore, it was anticipated that Enron would recognize in later years the tax deductions
resulting from the reversal of the earlier REMIC non-cash “phantom” income, after the
subsidiary was recapitalized and rejoined the Enron consolidated group in 2004. Based upon the
special deconsolidated treatment of the subsidiary as a REIT and the anticipated future
reconsolidation of the subsidiary with the Enron consolidated group, Project Cochise was
intended to redirect the REMIC non-cash “phantom” income and the subsequent offsetting
deductions so that Enron could claim the deductions on its Federal income tax return after 2003
without having recognized the associated income in earlier tax years.

As with Project Steele, Project Cochise also produced a duplication of the loss that was
built into the REMIC residual interests transferred by Bankers Trust to the subsidiary.
Specifically, the tax basis of the subsidiary stock received by Bankers Trust in exchange for the
REMIC residual interests significantly exceeded its fair market value because the tax basis in the
stock was determined by reference to the built-in loss assets (i-e., the REMIC residual interests)
contributed by Bankers Trust to the subsidiary. Consequently, Project Cochise enabled both
Enron and Bankers Trust to shelter other taxable income with the losses that were built into the

345 The financial accounting benefits of Project Cochise also were facilitated by the
acquisition by Enron from Bankers Trust of two leased aircraft and the associated leases.

147

=== PAGE 176 ===
REMIC residual interests, either directly with future deductions generated by the REMIC
residual interests (in the case of Enron) or indirectly through the disposition of stock in the
subsidiary that mirrored the built-in loss in the interests (in the case of Bankers Trust).

Background*”

Reported tax and financial statement effects

Although Project Cochise did not (and was not intended to) generate any material net tax
deductions during the period 1999 through 2001 (out of a projected total of approximately $388
million beginning after 2004), it did generate approximately $100 million (out of a projected
total of approximately $140 million) in reported net earnings for financial reporting purposes
through the third quarter of 2001.37

Development of Project Cochise

The development of Project Cochise began as early as July of 1998 and, on December 18,
1998, the executive committee of Enron’s Board of Directors approved for recommendation to
the full Board a resolution authorizing Enron to undertake the transactions involved in Project
Cochise.

On January 28, 1999, Bankers Trust provided an engagement letter to Enron indicating
that Bankers Trust agreed to act as the exclusive financial advisor to Enron in connection with
assisting in the implementation of Project Cochise. The engagement letter provided that Enron
would pay Bankers Trust $15 million in consideration of the services provided by Bankers Trust
pursuant to the engagement letter, with an initial payment of $5,250,000 on September 1, 1999

and quarterly installments of $750,000 beginning on December 1, 1999 and ending on December
1, 2002.8

346 The information regarding Project Cochise was obtained from Joint Committee staff
interviews of Robert J. Hermann, Robert Davis Maxey, David Williams, and Alicia Goodrow, as
well as from documents and information provided by Enron Corp. and the IRS.

347 The General Background materials in Appendix B contain the Structured
Transactions Group Summary of Project Earnings & Cash Flows (Nov. 2001). In response to
questions from the Joint Committee staff, Enron has indicated that it recorded financial statement
benefits from Project Cochise as follows: (1) $27.7 million in 1999; (2) $50.3 million in 2000;
and (3) $23.2 million in 2001. However, Enron also has indicated that it recorded a financial
statement valuation reserve in December 2001 with regard to Project Cochise in the amount of
$73.5 million. Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee
on Taxation, dated January 13, 2003.

348 Bankers Trust letter from Brian J. McGuire to Richard A. Causey, dated January 28,
1999. EC2 000037417 through EC2 000037421. The Project Cochise materials in Appendix B
contain this letter. Although the contractual fee was $15 million, it appears that Enron has not
paid the final five installments of $750,000. Thus, the fees paid to date by Enron to Bankers

148

=== PAGE 177 ===
On January 28, 1999, the primary initial transactions involved in Project Cochise (e.g.,
transfers of assets to Enron subsidiary) were executed, as described below.

On January 28, 1999, Potter Anderson & Corroon LLP provided an opinion to Enron
relating to the application of Delaware law to the transactions involved in Project Cochise.

On February 8, 1999, the Enron Board of Directors approved the board resolution
relating to Project Cochise.”

On May 26, 1999, Arthur Andersen provided a SAS 50 opinion to Bankers Trust relating
to the appropriate financial accounting treatment of the transactions involved in Project
Cochise.**°

On March 21, 2001, McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young LLP provided an opinion to Enron

relating to the Federal income tax consequences of the transactions involved in Project
Cochise.**!

On May 14, 2001, King & Spalding provided an opinion to Enron relating to the REIT
qualification of the Enron subsidiary involved in Project Cochise for Federal income tax

purposes.*>*

The principal tax personnel involved in executing the transaction for Enron were Mr.
Hermann and Mr. Maxey.

Enron’s purported principal business purposes for the transaction were to: (1) invest in
REMIC regular and residual interests; (2) invest in leased aircraft; and (3) increase the pre-tax
financial accounting income and net earnings of Enron?

Trust with regard to Project Cochise equal $11,250,000. The General Background materials in
Appendix B contain the Estimated Project Fees schedule (June 4, 2001).

3 The Project Cochise materials in Appendix B contain the minutes of the February 8,
1999 meeting of the Enron Board of Directors at which the Board discussed and approved
Project Cochise and the associated resolution.

350 Arthur Andersen letter to Bankers Trust Company, dated May 26, 1999. EC2
000037349 through EC2 000037367. The Project Cochise materials in Appendix B contain this
letter.

351 McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young LLP letter from William S. McKee and James D.
Bridgeman to R. Davis Maxey, dated March 21, 2001. EC2 000033988 through EC2
000034072. Appendix C, Part IV of this Report contains the tax opinion letter Enron received
from McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young LLP in connection with Project Cochise.

352 King & Spalding letter to Enron, dated May 14, 2001. EC2 000033980 through EC2

000033983. Appendix C, Part IV of this Report contains the tax opinion letter Enron received
from King & Spalding in connection with Project Cochise.

149

=== PAGE 178 ===
Implementation of Project Cochise

Prior to the execution of Project Cochise, Enron owned all of the outstanding stock
(1,000 shares of common stock) of Maliseet Properties, Inc. (“Maliseet”), a Delaware
corporation that was formed on April 16, 1985.4

On January 28, 1999, the following events occurred contemporaneously and as part of a
prearranged plan in the implementation of Project Cochise:*°°

(1) BT Green, Inc., a New York corporation and member of the Bankers Trust
consolidated group (“BT Green”), sold undivided interests in REMIC regular
interests to Bankers Trust for approximately $2.7 million;

(2) BT Green sold to Enron its remaining undivided interests in the REMIC regular
interests for $24.8 million;

(3) Enron contributed the REMIC regular interests that it purchased from BT Green
to Maliseet in exchange for 39,000 shares of Maliseet Series A preferred stock
and 572 shares of Maliseet Series B preferred stock;?°°

(4) Enron sold all of its Maliseet common stock to Bankers Trust for $100;

353 “Representations and Assumptions” described in the McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young
LLP Federal income tax opinion letter from William S. McKee and James D. Bridgeman to R.
Davis Maxey, dated March 21, 2001, at 12-13. EC2 000033999.

354 Maliseet was the result of the recapitalization and renaming of Enron Interstate
Pipeline Company by Enron in January 1999. “Structured Transactions Group: Business
Review”, dated October 2001. EC2 000038350. The Project Cochise materials in Appendix B
contain this document.

355 “Statement of Facts” described in the McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young LLP Federal
income tax opinion letter from William S. McKee and James D. Bridgeman to R. Davis Maxey,
dated March 21, 2001, at 4-12. EC2 000033991 through EC2 000033999.

356 Tn general, the Series A preferred stock were junior to the Series B preferred stock
and provided for cumulative quarterly dividends to be accrued at an initial annual rate of 5.06788
percent of the stated liquidation preference with respect to the stock. The Series B preferred
stock were senior to the Series A preferred stock and provided for cumulative quarterly
dividends to be accrued at an annual rate of 15 percent of the stated liquidation preference with
respect to the stock. The Series A preferred stock provided voting rights, but the Series B stock
did not. The Series A and Series B preferred stock each were immediately redeemable upon an
affirmative vote of at least 80 percent of both the holders of the preferred stock to be redeemed
and the common stockholders. In addition, the Maliseet Board of Directors could compel a
redemption of the Series B preferred stock at any time on or after January 28, 2004 upon an
affirmative vote of at least 80 percent of both the holders of the Series A preferred stock and the
common stockholders.

150

=== PAGE 179 ===
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Bankers Trust contributed the REMIC regular interests that it purchased from BT
Green and REMIC residual interests to Maliseet in exchange for 1,000 shares of
the common stock of Maliseet worth approximately $1.25 million and a 20-year
zero coupon debt instrument issued by Maliseet with a stated principal amount of

approximately $5.4 million and a stipulated fair market value of approximately
$1.6 million;*”

Enron and Bankers Trust executed a shareholders agreement whereby (a) either
Enron or Bankers Trust could compel the recapitalization of Maliseet, which
would redeem all of the Series B preferred stock on or after January 28, 2004,
exchange the common stock and the debt instrument issued by Maliseet to
Bankers Trust for 10-year notes of equal value that pay current interest, and
exchange the Series A preferred stock issued by Maliseet to Enron for common
stock of Maliseet, (b) Enron would ensure that Maliseet elected REIT status and
qualified as a REIT at all times from January 1, 1999 to January 1, 2004, and (c)
Bankers Trust agreed to treat Maliseet as having paid to Bankers Trust “consent
dividends” (as defined in section 565) and to be treated for Federal income tax
purposes as having received an actual cash dividend from Maliseet at the end of
each taxable year in an amount equal to the consent dividend for such year,

Bankers Trust purchased from Enron for $1,000 two put options that permitted
Bankers Trust to require Enron to purchase from Bankers Trust any of the 10-year
notes received by Bankers Trust in a recapitalization of Maliseet at any time on or
after two years (in the case of one put option) or 78 months (in the case of the
other put option) following such recapitalization;

Enron and Bankers Trust entered into put and call options that permitted Bankers
Trust to purchase (in the case of the call option) or Enron to require Bankers Trust
to purchase (in the case of the put option) at a stipulated fair market value the
Maliseet preferred stock held by Enron upon a change in law that prevented
Maliseet from qualifying as a REIT, holding REMIC residual interests, or
declaring consent dividends; and

BT Ever, Inc., a New York corporation and member of the Bankers Trust
consolidated group (“BT Ever”), sold two aircraft, and leases to which they

357 The Bankers Trust London branch previously had purchased the REMIC residual

interests in two packages--one package in September 1997 and the other package in December
1997. The REMIC residual interests currently generate phantom income and are not expected to
generate phantom deductions until after January 1, 2004.

358 Bankers Trust, as well as three of its affiliates and an affiliate of Potomac Capital

Investment Corp. (a taxable subsidiary of Potomac Electric Power Co. and also a minority
investor in Project Teresa), own non-voting participating preferred stock in BT Ever. EC2
000037412.

151

=== PAGE 180 ===
were subject, to an Enron subsidiary (ECT Investments Holding Corp., a
Delaware Corporation) for $44,046,885.85.

On or before February 15, 1999, six directors of Maliseet each contributed $1,000 to
Maliseet in exchange for one share of Series B preferred stock,*°* and 98 other investors each
contributed $1,000 to Maliseet in exchange for one share of Series B preferred stock.>©

After the contributions to Maliseet, Enron owned approximately 95 percent of the total
combined voting power of all classes of stock of Maliseet that were entitled to vote and
approximately 95 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of Maliseet. Bankers
Trust owned approximately five percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of
stock of Maliseet that were entitled to vote and approximately five percent of the total value of
shares of all classes of stock of Maliseet.

Because of the creation of non-cash phantom income on REMIC residual interests for
Federal income tax purposes, the REMIC residual interests that Bankers Trust contributed to
Maliseet had an aggregate adjusted tax basis ($120 million) significantly in excess of their
aggregate fair market value ($165,000). Furthermore, the adjusted basis in the REMIC residual
interests was expected to increase by approximately $268 million over the life of these interests
because of such treatment.

In June 2000, ECT Investments Holding Corp. sold the aircraft and associated leases that
it had acquired from BT Ever for approximately $36 million.

The diagram on the next page depicts the structure of Project Cochise at formation.

359 ‘The Maliseet directors who received shares were Jeffrey McMahon, James V.
Derrick, Jr., Richard A. Causey, Robert H. Butts, Mr. Hermann, and Andrew S. Fastow. The
stock subscription agreements with these directors were executed on behalf of Maliseet by Mr.
Maxey as vice president of Maliseet. Maliseet stock subscription agreements dated February 12,
1999. EC2 000036853 through EC2 000036908.

36° According to interviews with Enron tax department personnel, Enron utilized the
services of a firm called REIT Funding, Inc. to assist in placing the Maliseet shares with the
other 98 investors. Joint Committee staff interview with Alicia Lynn Lockheed Goodrow,
September 23, 2002. Most of these investors were residents of the Atlanta, Georgia,
metropolitan area, and all of the investors were residents of Georgia, Tennessee, North Carolina,
or Florida. Maliseet stock subscription agreements, EC2 000054439 through EC2 000054738.
At some point during the development of Project Cochise, consideration apparently was given to
using partners of the law firm Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld as the outside investors in
Maliseet. The Project Cochise materials in Appendix B contain a preliminary diagram of Project
Cochise indicating that Series B preferred stock would be transferred to at least 99 partners of
Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld “in satisfaction of legal services provided on matters
unrelated to [Maliseet].”

152

=== PAGE 181 ===
777 yoru
( ro)
{ qeynooy,

\. OINEa |

=

N

777 yoraquy ~~s -
( penpisoy yf
\. OINTE YS

~ -

, of Jodeg \

+ \ [epraww0op | 1 pouediry 4

1

sysozoquy
yenpisoy
OIWa (2)
sysozoqUy
Jepnsoy
ONES
wor} 8°7$ (1)

yenueplyuod

a sysouatuy |
wor 9°1$ (2) senday |
(anyea pue 930A %¢) OINaa |
yoo1g UOWWIOD, WOrTTMU CZ$ |
'
wort Z1$ (1) i ES
H 4 ae jooes
YyI0Ig peLajold YOOIg Posjosd ' SSL
Sunos-u0oN, BunoA-UON 4901S 4 vor or SS
pourayorg H
SurjoA-uou 4
28 '
(210A [e101 '
JO %S6) !
yoo i
pollojold |
SunoA H
wor ¢7$  UOHTMU S7$ \

sysazoquy zeyndaq~~~~_
OINAA VOU S7g

6661 Atenuel jo sv sANnjoN.I}g
astyo0Z pofoig

Lad

sjossy

ysna], popresaisiqsyoursg
uonerodio3,

sone PAUL

pareprjosuoD qyV5 uoiuq

153

=== PAGE 182 ===
Following the implementation of Project Cochise, it was intended that Maliseet would
distribute current cash dividend payments on the Series A and Series B preferred stock, and
would distribute any remaining taxable income through cash and consent dividends to Bankers
Trust as holder of the Maliseet common stock.

Pursuant to the terms of the shareholders agreement between Enron and Bankers Trust, it
was anticipated that either Enron or Bankers Trust would prompt the recapitalization of Maliseet
after five years (i.e., on or after January 28, 2004), which would redeem all of the Series B
preferred stock, exchange the common stock and the debt instrument issued by Maliseet to
Bankers Trust for 10-year notes of equal value that pay current interest, and exchange the Series
A preferred stock issued by Maliseet to Enron for common stock of Maliseet.**! By then (or
shortly thereafter), the REMIC residual interests would begin to generate tax deductions to
reverse the previous REMIC non-cash phantom income that was distributed exclusively to
Bankers Trust (primarily through consent dividends) as holder of the Maliseet common stock.
Accordingly, it was expected that Maliseet would intentionally lose its REIT status (either
through a revocation of its REIT election or by failing to qualify as a REIT) and would rejoin the
Enron consolidated group, which would then take into account the tax deductions generated by
the REMIC residual interests held by Maliseet.

Role of outside advisors

According to interviews with Enron tax department personnel, Bankers Trust promoted
Project Cochise to Enron.* As noted above, Bankers Trust also was the exclusive financial
advisor to Enron with respect to Project Cochise. Bankers Trust was the sole financial advisor
for Enron irrespective that Bankers Trust was the only unrelated counterparty to the transaction
(other than the handful of individual investors in Maliseet).

The documentation for Project Cochise indicates that William S. McKee and James D.
Bridgeman of McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young LLP were the primary counsel responsible for the
development and implementation of Project Cochise, with King & Spalding providing counsel
on the more limited issue of REIT status qualification for Maliseet.°* In connection with Project
Cochise, McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young LLP provided a tax opinion letter that analyzed the tax
implications of the transaction and concluded that:

361 The tax deductions included in Enron’s projections with respect to Project Cochise
would become available to Enron only upon the recapitalization of Maliseet. The Project
Cochise materials in Appendix B contain projections and diagrams in connection with Project
Cochise indicating that the recapitalization of Maliseet was a prearranged step in the
implementation of Project Cochise.

362 Interview with Mr. Maxey, August 6, 2002.
= Appendix C, Part IV of this Report contains the tax opinion letters Enron received

from McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young LLP and King & Spalding in connection with Project
Cochise.

154

=== PAGE 183 ===
(65) the contributions to Maliseet of REMIC regular interests by Enron and REMIC
regular and residual interests by Bankers Trust “should” constitute non-taxable
transfers of property under section 351;°04

(2) the tax basis of the REMIC residual interests contributed to Maliseet by Bankers
Trust “should” equal the tax basis of such interests in the hands of Bankers Trust
immediately before the contributions;

(3) Enron “will” be treated as the owner of the Series A and Series B preferred stock
received from Maliseet,*° and “will” be treated as the owner of the two aircraft
and leases to which they were subject;*°

(4) section 269 “should not” apply to disallow any tax deductions generated by the
reversal of earlier non-cash phantom income on the REMIC residual interests in
the hands of Maliseet;*©”

(5) Maliseet’s use of any tax deductions generated by the reversal of earlier non-cash
phantom income on the REMIC residual interests “should not” be subject to
limitation under section 382 solely as a result of either the contributions of the
REMIC residual interests by Bankers Trust to Maliseet or the acquisition of
Bankers Trust Corp. by Deutsche Bank;

(6) “Gt is more likely than not” that neither Maliseet, the REMIC residual interests,
nor the transactions involved in Project Cochise are required to be registered as a
tax shelter under section 6111;

364 Included in this opinion was the conclusion that Enron and the Bankers Trust London
Branch were in “control” of Maliseet (within the meaning of section 368(c)) immediately after
the exchange notwithstanding the 2004 recapitalization provisions in the shareholders agreement
between Enron and Bankers Trust.

365 Employing an economic substance analysis, this opinion was based upon
representations from Enron that it would earn annual pre-tax profits of at least five percent with
regard to its investment in the Series A preferred stock and 15 percent with regard to its
investment in the Series B preferred stock, exclusive of finance costs and the time value of
money.

36° Employing an economic substance analysis, this opinion was based upon
representations from Enron that it would earn an annual pre-tax profit of at least 4.12 percent
with regard to its investment in the aircraft and leases, exclusive of finance costs and the time
value of money.

367 Included in this opinion was the conclusion that neither Enron nor the Bankers Trust
London Branch “acquired” control of Maliseet in the transaction because Enron owned 100
percent of the vote and value of Maliseet before the transaction and owned 95 percent of the vote
and value of Maliseet after the transaction.

155

=== PAGE 184 ===
(7) Enron “should not” be subject to penalties under section 6707 for failing to
register Maliseet, the REMIC residual interests, or the transactions involved in
Project Cochise as a tax shelter under 6111 prior to January 28, 1999;

(8) Maliseet “should” be entitled to a deduction for dividends paid under section
857(b)(2)(B), provided (a) Bankers Trust (the sole owner of the Maliseet common
stock) properly consents to be treated as having received the consent dividends,
(b) Maliseet timely files such consent with it Federal income tax returns, and (c)
there are no arrearages of any accrued dividends on the Series A and Series B
preferred stock as of December 31 of each taxable year; and

(9) for purposes of sections 6662 and 6664, there is “substantial authority” for the tax
treatment of the transactions involved in Project Cochise and there is a “greater
than 50 percent likelihood” that the tax treatment of such transactions will be
upheld in litigation if challenged by the IRS.

To date, Enron has paid $1,022,774 in fees to McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young LLP in
connection with Project Cochise.*°8

In addition, King & Spalding provided a tax opinion letter that analyzed the tax
implications of the transaction and concluded that Maliseet “should” qualify as a REIT for
Federal income tax purposes for its taxable year ended December 31, 1999, and that the
organization and proposed method of operation of Maliseet “should” enable it to continue to
satisfy the requirements for qualification and Federal income taxation as a REIT for its taxable
year ended December 31, 2000 and subsequent taxable years.

As indicated above, Arthur Andersen provided a hypothetical accounting opinion letter to
Bankers Trust that analyzed the financial accounting treatment of a hypothetical transaction that
was substantially identical to Project Cochise. Based upon the Arthur Andersen opinion, Enron
took various favorable financial accounting positions. For purposes of producing accounting
income on its financial statements, Enron took the position that Project Cochise generated a
deferred tax asset that was not discounted to take into account the time value of money.*” In

368 The General Background materials in Appendix B contain the Estimated Project Fees
schedule (June 4, 2001). Enron was unable to provide to the Joint Committee staff a copy of any
engagement letter between Enron and McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young LLP with respect to
Project Cochise, and was unable to provide information concerning the entire fee arrangement
between Enron and McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young LLP with regard to Project Cochise. Letter
from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation, dated
January 13, 2003. It is unclear from a review of documents provided by Enron whether these
fees actually were paid to McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young LLP (Mr. McKee’s current firm) or
King & Spalding (Mr. McKee’s previous firm).

36 According to internal Enron documents, the transaction would enable Enron “to
record deferred tax assets at gross amounts well in excess of their present value.” The Project
Cochise materials in Appendix B contain an executive summary describing the accounting
benefits of Project Cochise. EC2 000037381.

156

=== PAGE 185 ===
essence, this deferred tax asset purportedly arose because of the prearranged confluence of
several factors, including:

(1) the treatment of the contribution of the REMIC residual interests to Maliseet as a
purchase of the interests by Maliseet for financial accounting purposes (in
contrast to the treatment of the contribution as a tax-free, carryover basis
transaction for Federal income tax purposes);

(2) the disparity between the $120 million aggregate adjusted tax basis in the REMIC
residual interests (which carried over to Maliseet for Federal income tax
purposes) and the $165,000 aggregate fair market value of the assets;

(3) the fact that the taxable non-cash phantom income generated by the REMIC
residual interests would be distributed to Bankers Trust through consent dividends
on the Maliseet common stock held by Bankers Trust;

(4) the fact that such phantom income would reverse in later years and generate
deductions for Enron after Maliseet relinquishes its REIT status and becomes
reconsolidated with Enron for Federal income tax purposes; and

(5) the fact that FAS 109 provides for the recording of an undiscounted deferred tax
asset that does not take into account the time value of money.

Apparently, no tax basis study was performed for Enron with regard to the REMIC
residual interests that were transferred to Maliseet. However, Deutsche Bank and Morgan
Stanley & Co., Inc. provided historical basis information concerning the REMIC regular and
residual interests transferred to Maliseet.°””

Subsequent developments

Project Cochise remains in place pursuant to the original plan and, with the assistance of
PricewaterhouseCoopers, Enron continues to monitor Maliseet to ensure that it maintains its

status as a REIT for Federal income tax purposes. Maliseet is not a debtor in the Enron
bankruptcy.

IRS examination of Project Cochise

As with Project Steele, the IRS examination team undertook an expedited review of
Project Cochise that was limited to examining whether Maliseet satisfied the REIT qualification
requirements. Having determined that Maliseet was properly formed as a REIT, and did
properly operate as a REIT, for the tax years under review, the IRS examination team stated that
they would not review Project Cochise any further and would propose no tax liability
adjustments relating to Project Cochise.*”"

370 BC2 000054739 through EC2 000054743.

371 Interview with IRS examination team, August 8, 2002.

157

=== PAGE 186 ===
Discussion

In general

Like Project Steele, Project Cochise was designed to provide Enron financial accounting
benefits from the acquisition of future tax deductions through REMIC residual interests, and at a
cost that was significantly less than the acquired tax benefits. Determining whether Enron
should be entitled to deduct the future tax deductions inherent in the REMIC residual interests
necessarily involves an analysis regarding Enron’s satisfaction of the literal requirements of the
applicable statutory requirements as well as the rules and judicial doctrines (such as business
purpose and economic substance) that are often applied to evaluate the purported tax benefits in
tax-motivated transactions.*””

A number of Code provisions are specifically designed to remove tax impediments from
bona fide business transactions. In developing these provisions, the basic policies contemplate
the bona fide conduct of business in the ordinary course. However, these provisions potentially
can be utilized to effectuate unintended tax benefits. The Code and Treasury regulations
recognize the potential for abusive activity and contain provisions intended to limit the benefits
of arrangements that, although satisfying the literal requirements of a provision, are used to
distort or defeat the basic purpose of the underlying statute.*”? These provisions address such
policy concerns by limiting the benefit of the underlying statute through the use of general
disallowance if specific factual tests are met, or if the principal purpose of the transaction is to
evade or avoid income tax.

372 For detailed information concerning the present law rules and judicial doctrines
applicable to tax motivated transactions and related recommendations and developments, see
e.g., Joint Committee on Taxation, Background and Present Law Relating to Tax Shelters (JCX-
19-02), March 19, 2002; Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and
Interest Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring
and Reform Act of 1998 (including provisions relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (JCS-3-99),
July 22, 1999; Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9017) to section 6011 (October 22, 2002);
Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9018) to section 6012 (October 22, 2002); Joint
Committee on Taxation, Description of the "CARE Act of 2003,” (JCX-04-03), February 3, 2003;
Symposium: Business Purpose, Economic Substance and Corporate Tax Shelters, 54 SMU L.
Rev. 1 (2001).

373 See, e.g., sec. 269 (acquisitions made to evade or avoid income tax), sec. 362(d)
(limitation on basis increase attributable to assumption of liability), sec. 358(h) (reduction to
basis of assets in connection with transfers of liabilities that give rise to a deduction), Treas. Reg.
sec. 1.701-2 (partnerships formed or availed of in connection with a transaction with a principal
purpose of reducing tax), and sec. 732(f) (adjustment to basis of assets of a distributed
corporation controlled by a corporate partner). See also proposed regulations to prevent a
consolidated group from obtaining more than one tax benefit from a single economic loss (IRS
Proposed Rules and Public Hearing Notice (Reg-131478-02) On Suspension of Losses on
Certain Stock Dispositions Federal Register October 23, 2002).

158

=== PAGE 187 ===
Carryover basis of REMIC residual interests transferred to Maliseet

The Code and Treasury regulations also contain specific provisions intended to limit a
taxpayer’s ability to transfer tax attributes, such as net operating losses, built-in-losses, and
various credit items.°”* The general purpose of these provisions is to limit the ability of such tax
benefits by a taxpayer who did not suffer the economic loss that gave rise to the tax benefit.

Project Cochise purported to use the tax-free incorporation rules and resulting carryover
basis rules to transfer losses and duplicate a single economic loss. The ability to transfer losses
and duplicate a single economic loss through section 351 has been, and continues to be, a
concern in the administration of tax policy.*”° In order for Project Cochise to achieve the desired
tax result (and the corresponding financial accounting benefits), the transfer of the REMIC
residual interests by Bankers Trust had to occur in a tax-free manner such that the REMIC
residual interests tax basis would carry over to Maliseet.

It may be argued that the application of section 351(a) is predicated upon a valid non-tax
business purpose and that the transfer by Bankers Trust to Maliseet did not have the requisite
business purpose. Although it is unclear under present law whether section 351(a) does require a
valid business purpose and, if so, how it is to be applied in the specific context of purported
transfers under section 351(a), the tax opinion letter provided to Enron by McKee Nelson, Ernst
& Young LLP includes no discussion of this issue in its analysis of the application of section 351
to Project Cochise. Moreover, the documentation of Project Cochise reviewed by the Joint
Committee staff demonstrated no purpose for the transaction other than facilitating the
generation of financial statement and tax benefits to Enron, as well as the duplication of losses
built into the REMIC residual interests that Bankers Trust transferred to Maliseet.

34 See, e.g., sec. 382 (limitation on net operating loss carryforwards and certain built-in-
losses following ownership changes, sec. 383 (special limitations on certain excess credits, etc.),
and Treas. Reg. sec. 1.1502-15 (SRLY limitation on built-in-losses).

375 For example, in the year 2000, Congress enacted rules requiring a reduction in basis
of assets in connection with transfers of certain liabilities in order to stop transactions that
duplicated a single economic loss. See, the Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000, Pub.
L. No. 106-554, sec. 1(a)(7) (Dec. 21, 2000). See Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation,
General Explanation of Tax Enacted in the 1 06"" Congress (JCS-2-01), April 19, 2001, at 154.
In addition, President Clinton’s Fiscal Year 2001 Budget Proposals contained a proposal that was
aimed at limiting the ability of taxpayers to transfer built-in losses into the U.S. tax system by
requiring marking to fair market value such assets when such assets become “relevant” for U.S.
tax purposes (See Office of Management and Budget, Budget of the United States Government,
Fiscal 2001: Analytical Perspectives (H. Doc. 106-162, Vol. III). See also Joint Committee on
Taxation, Description of Revenue Provisions Contained in the President’s Fiscal Year 2001
Budget Proposal (JCS-2-00), March 6, 2000.) Most recently, the Treasury Department issued
proposed regulations to prevent a consolidated group from obtaining more than one tax benefit
from a single economic loss (IRS Proposed Rules and Public Hearing Notice (Reg-131478-02)
On Suspension of Losses on Certain Stock Dispositions Federal Register October 23, 2002).

159

=== PAGE 188 ===
In analyzing whether Project Cochise had a non-tax business purpose, McKee Nelson,
Ernst & Young LLP placed significant weight in its tax opinion letter on the fact that the
financial accounting benefits overshadowed the Federal income tax benefits of Project Cochise.
As in Project Steele, a conclusion that a non-tax business purpose exists based on the accounting
benefits of Project Cochise fails to consider the origin of the accounting benefit (.e., solely
reduction of taxes) and significantly diminishes the purpose for having a substantial non-tax
purpose requirement.°”°

Application of section 269 to transfer

The tax opinion letter provided to Enron by McKee Nelson, Ernst & Young LLP
concerning Project Cochise contains a lengthy discussion and analysis of section 269, and
concludes that the provision “should not” apply to disallow any tax deductions generated by the
reversal of earlier non-cash phantom income on the REMIC residual interests in the hands of
Maliseet. The tax opinion letter points out that Enron did not relinquish, and Bankers Trust did
not acquire, control of Maliseet as a result of the transfers to Maliseet. Even if Enron had
obtained control of Maliseet in the transaction, the tax opinion letter argues further that the
application of section 269 to acquisitions of control*” is limited to transactions securing the
types of tax benefits that can be obtained only through the acquisition of control. In addition, the
tax opinion letter argues that, although Maliseet acquired the REMIC regular and residual
interests in a purported carryover basis transaction to which section 269 also could apply,*”8
Project Cochise was not motivated by the tax avoidance or evasion purposes contemplated by
section 269.

Acquisition of control.—With regard to acquisitions of control, the tax opinion letter
concludes that section 269 applies only to the types of tax benefits that can be secured only
through the acquisition of control by relying upon case law for the proposition that “‘section 269
does not apply to a case where the taxpayer would have obtained the tax benefit regardless of
whether the taxpayer acquired control in the acquisition in question.” Specifically, the tax
opinion letter cites Commodores Point Terminal Corp. v. Commissioner,” in which the Tax
Court interpreted the phrase in section 269 “which such person [or corporation] would not

376 See, e.g., American Electric Power, Inc. v. U.S., 136 F. Supp. 2d 762, 791-92 (S.D.
Ohio, 2001) (“AEP’s intended use of the cash flows generated by the [corporate-owned life
insurance] plan is irrelevant to the subjective prong of the economic substance analysis. If a
legitimate business purpose for the use of the tax savings ‘were sufficient to breathe substance
into a transaction whose only purpose was to reduce taxes, [then] every sham tax-shelter device
might succeed,” citing Winn-Dixie v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. 254, 287 (1999)).

377 Sec. 269(a)(1).
378 Sec. 269(a)(2).

379 11 T.C. 411 (1948), acq. 1949-1 C.B. 1.

160

=== PAGE 189 ===
otherwise enjoy” as conditional language that limits the denial of tax benefits under section 269

to those benefits that can be obtained only through the acquisition of control.?®°

The tax opinion letter also cites subsequent decisions in Coastal Oil Storage Co. v.
Commissioner®®! and Cromwell Corp. v. Commissioner, in which the Tax Court appeared to
follow its earlier interpretation of section 269 in the Commodores Point case. In Coastal Oil
Storage, the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the Tax Court, in part based upon its
apparent conclusion that section 269 can disallow tax benefits without regard to whether such
benefits can be obtained only through the acquisition of control. However, the tax opinion letter
discounts the Fourth Circuit decision in Coastal Oil Storage as deficient because, in contrast to
the Tax Court decisions upon which the tax opinion letter does rely, the Fourth Circuit did not
sufficiently take into account legislative history supporting the analysis adopted by the Tax
Court.3%? Finally, the tax opinion letter cites several administrative rulings issued during the
1990s by the IRS National Office in which the National Office interpreted the scope of section
269 consistent with the interpretation adopted by the Tax Court.

Proscribed tax evasion or avoidance purpose.—The tax opinion letter concludes that
Project Cochise was not imbued with the Federal income tax evasion or avoidance purpose
proscribed by section 269 primarily on the basis that Maliseet would have obtained most of the
future phantom deductions from the REMIC residual interests without regard to whether
Maliseet received the interests with a high carryover basis (as opposed to a nominal fair market
value basis). In particular, the tax opinion letter argues that the remaining future phantom
income inclusions from the interests would increase Maliseet’s basis in the interests by a greater
amount than the initial carryover basis in the interests. Therefore, according to the tax opinion
letter, the tax motivation for transferring the REMIC residual interests to Maliseet in a carryover
basis transaction was quantitatively outweighed by the basis increases from the phantom income
inclusions that would occur without regard to whether the transfer of the interests occurred in a
manner that carried over the basis of the interests.

In addition, the tax opinion letter contends that the transfer of future phantom deductions
imbedded in the REMIC residual interests by the taxpayer that has already recognized the
associated initial phantom income inclusions does not distort the tax liabilities associated with a
REMIC residual interest over the life of the interest. The tax opinion letter recognizes several

380 See 11 T.C. at 415-417 (stating that “[t]he word ‘otherwise’ can only be interpreted to
mean that the deduction, credit, or allowance, if it is to be disallowed, must stem from the
acquisition of control”).

381 95 T.C. 1304 (1956), aff'd in part and rev'd in part, 242 F.2d 396 (4th Cir. 1957).
382 43 T.C. 313 (1964).

383 The tax opinion letter also notes that the Fourth Circuit decision in Coastal Oil
Storage would not be binding upon the Tax Court if it were to consider the application of section
269 to Project Cochise because an appeal of a Tax Court decision with regard to Project Cochise
would lie in the Fifth Circuit.

161

=== PAGE 190 ===
unique tax rules associated with REMIC residual interests that are intended to ensure that the
initial phantom income inclusions are taxed in light of the subsequent offsetting phantom
deductions, but argues that none of these or the other tax rules relating to REMIC residual
interests evidence a legislative plan or intent that the same taxpayer should recognize both the
phantom income inclusions and the subsequent phantom deductions.

In its only acknowledgement that Project Cochise results in a duplication of the future
phantom deductions to be produced by the REMIC residual interests transferred to Maliseet, the
tax opinion letter states in a brief footnote that the transfer of the interests in a carryover basis
transaction duplicates the future deductions through a difference between the low value and high
basis of the common stock received by Bankers Trust from Maliseet in exchange for the REMIC
residual interests. However, the tax opinion letter concludes that this duplication should not be
taken into account for purposes of determining whether the requisite tax evasion or avoidance
purpose under section 269 is present with regard to Project Cochise because section 269 only
takes into account the tax motivation of Maliseet as the actual acquirer of the interests.
According to the tax opinion letter, the potential benefits to Bankers Trust of duplicating the
future phantom deductions is not pertinent in evaluating the tax motivation of Project Cochise
under section 269.

Even if such duplication should be considered in examining the application of section
269 to Project Cochise, the tax opinion letter suggests that Bankers Trust would not have had a
principal tax motivation for its participation in the transaction, as measured by the likelihood that
Bankers Trust would trigger its recognition of the duplicated losses through a compelled
recapitalization of Maliseet, followed by an exercise of the put option that it purchased from
Enron as part of the transaction. In discussing the application of the section 351(a) control
requirement to the transfers of REMIC regular and residual interests by Bankers Trust to
Maliseet, the tax opinion letter states the following:

[At the time of the transfers by Enron and Bankers Trust to Maliseet], the London
Branch had no plan or intention of transferring, disposing of, or exchanging any
of the Common Stock, other than possibly pursuant to a Recapitalization. In any
event, however, a Recapitalization will not occur before January 1, 2004.
Accordingly, because Enron and the London Branch together owned 100 percent
of the outstanding stock of Maliseet immediately after the transfers of the
[REMIC regular and residual interests] to Maliseet and had no plan or intention of
disposing of such stock until possibly on or after January 1, 2004, Enron and the
London Branch should be treated as satisfying the Control Requirement in
connection with such transfers.

This statement may not be patently false but, at minimum, it understates the clear
intention of Bankers Trust to activate the recapitalization provisions of the shareholders
agreement and exercise its option to sell to Enron the notes that Bankers Trust would receive in
the recapitalization. Internal company documents describing Project Cochise and quantifying the
overall tax consequences of the transactions unambiguously demonstrate that the parties
structured the transaction with every intention that Maliseet would be recapitalized at the earliest
possible opportunity and Bankers Trust would exercise its put option, thus recognizing the
duplicated loss. Taking into account the duplicated loss and the inevitability of its recognition in

162

=== PAGE 191 ===
2004 would cast substantial doubt as to whether Project Cochise was undertaken for the principal
purpose of evading or avoiding Federal income tax under section 269 through the duplication of
the loss that was built into the REMIC residual interests transferred to Maliseet.

Recommendations

Carryover basis of REMIC residual interests transferred to Maliseet

The Joint Committee staff recommendations regarding Projects Tanya and Valor include
recommendations to limit the duplication of a single economic loss. These recommendations
also are appropriate for consideration with respect to Project Cochise.***

Irrespective of whether an overall change is made to limit the duplication of a single
economic loss under subchapter C generally, the Joint Committee staff believes it is appropriate
to limit the ability to transfer REMIC residual interests in a carryover basis transaction. Under
the statutory rules regarding the taxation of REMICS, phantom income is allocated to REMIC
residual interest holders. The phantom income allocation inevitably creates built-in losses to the
holders of the REMIC residual interests, thus making such interests a natural component for
transactions designed to duplicate a single economic loss. As such, the Joint Committee staff
recommends that either a corporation’s basis in REMIC residual interests acquired in a tax-free
transfer (or reorganization) be limited to its fair market value or that a transferor’s basis in the
stock received in exchange for REMIC residual interests be limited to the fair market value of
the REMIC residual interests.°*°

Acquisitions made to evade or avoid Federal income tax

Project Cochise highlights the limited reach of section 269 as it applies to acquisitions of
corporate equity interests for the principal purpose of obtaining tax benefits. Tax avoidance
transactions involving the acquisition of a non-controlling interest in a corporation are no less
pernicious (and actually may be more prevalent) than similarly motivated transactions involving
the acquisition of a controlling interest in a corporation. Therefore, the Joint Committee staff
recommends that Congress expand section 269 to apply to acquisitions of equity interests in a
corporation, without regard to whether such interests provide to the acquirer control of the
corporation, if the principal purpose of the acquisition is the evasion or avoidance of Federal
income tax.

384 Projects Tanya and Valor are discussed elsewhere in this section of the Report.

385 See recommendations for Projects Tanya and Valor for a discussion of general issues
with respect to this type of proposal.

386 This recommendation is not limited to acquisitions in which the ownership
percentage of a pre-existing interest in a corporation is increased. Accordingly, this
recommendation also includes acquisitions involving a change to the capital structure of a pre-
existing corporation (e.g., an existing shareholder relinquishes common stock and obtains
preferred stock in the transaction), without regard to whether the change results in an increase in
the percentage (by vote or value) of a pre-existing ownership interest.

163

=== PAGE 192 ===
With regard to acquisitions of corporate interests, present-law section 269 also is
circumscribed by the judicial interpretation that the provision applies only to the types of tax
benefits that can be obtained only through the acquisition of control of a corporation. Project
Cochise demonstrates that tax motivated transactions can generate significant tax benefits that
can be obtained through a non-controlling interest in a corporation. Regardless of whether the
application of section 269 is limited to acquisitions of controlling interests in a corporation, the
tax policy rationale is unclear for insulating from the application of section 269 tax benefits that
can be obtained through either controlling or non-controlling corporate interests. Therefore, the
Joint Committee staff also recommends that Congress expand section 269 to disallow tax
benefits that can be obtained through either controlling or non-controlling interests in a
corporation, if the principal purpose of the transaction in which the benefits are acquired is the
evasion or avoidance of Federal income tax.

Because the application of section 269 to a particular transaction is conditioned upon the
tax evasion or avoidance purpose for the transaction, the Joint Committee staff acknowledges
that implementation of these recommendations would not necessarily eradicate transactions such
as Project Cochise. Nevertheless, the Joint Committee staff believes that these recommendations
would make section 269 generally more effective in deterring tax motivated transactions that
involve the acquisition of an equity interest in a corporation.

164

=== PAGE 193 ===
5. Project Teresa

Brief overview

Project Teresa®*” was a synthetic lease arrangement designed to result in an increase in
tax basis in depreciable assets (the most significant asset being the Enron North office building)
with minimal economic outlay. This was accomplished in the following manner: Enron,
through a deconsolidated entity, contributed depreciable assets and preferred stock of an affiliate
to a partnership. Bankers Trust (the promoter of the transaction) contributed cash to the
partnership. Enron affiliates would periodically acquire (or redeem) the preferred stock from the
partnership, with the acquisition/redemption being treated as a taxable dividend eligible for an 80
percent dividends received deduction. Enron’s basis in its partnership interest was increased by
the total amount of the dividend (without regard to the dividends received deduction).
Ultimately, the partnership was to be liquidated in a manner that would result in Enron receiving
the depreciable assets with the increased basis. Enron would recover this increased tax basis
through higher future depreciation deductions on the Enron North office building and the other
depreciable assets.

Background**

Reported tax and financial statement effects

Project Teresa involved the reporting of dividend income in the early years, followed by
increased depreciation deductions in later years. The transaction was projected to result in Enron
reporting additional tax liability of $75.525 million for years 1997 through 2001.5 During the
entire life of the project, however, it was projected that Enron would report aggregate tax savings
(though greater depreciation deductions on the Enron North office building) of $261.6 million.

The amount of the dividend income that was deducted by virtue of the dividends received
deduction (but resulted in an increased partnership basis) gave rise to a permanent book-tax
difference. In connection with Project Teresa, Enron recorded financial statement earnings (i.e.,
earnings through a reduction in the provision for income tax expense) of $226.0 million during
the period 1997-2001.°”°

387 As in Project Tanya, Mr. Hermann named this transaction after a hurricane.

388 The information regarding Project Teresa was obtained from Joint Committee staff
interviews of Robert J. Hermann, Robert D. Maxey, Greek L. Rice, and Jordan H. Mintz, as well
as from documents and information provided by Enron and the IRS.

38 According to Enron, the deconsolidated entity paid approximately $107 million of
Federal income tax from years 1997 through 2000.

39 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 24. Current Enron management stated that Enron
recorded a valuation reserve in December 2001 of approximately $269.8 million in connection
with Project Teresa. The $43.8 million excess of the valuation reserve over the Project Teresa

165

=== PAGE 194 ===
Development of Project Teresa

Bankers Trust brought the idea for Project Teresa to Enron. The original contact appears
to have been a “cold call” made by someone in the Bankers Trust marketing group to Mr. Rice,
though the contact might have been established through Enron’s finance group. Ina letter dated
May 16, 1996, Bankers Trust provided Mr. Hermann with certain discussion materials regarding
a proposed joint venture arrangement developed by Bankers Trust. The discussion materials
(modified in subsequent presentations) described the benefits of the transaction as follows:

(1) Accounting earnings -- recognize deferred tax assets over the five [year] life of
the project.

(2) High basis tax asset -- create an asset(s) with a tax basis much higher than its
FMV; the differential can be either recognized over time through depreciation or
triggered sooner by a sale of the asset.

(3) Low tax risk — under current law, if modeled properly, the transaction will be
revenue neutral to the IRS; thus, there is little motivation for the Service to
challenge this structure upon audit”!

The transaction was designed to provide an after-tax accounting benefit of $230 million, and a
net cash flow to Enron of $30.142 million.”

After the initial contact, Messrs. Hermann, Maxey and Rice met with representatives of
Bankers Trust and the law firm of King & Spalding (that was representing Bankers Trust in
connection with the transaction).°”? Following these discussions, Enron tax personnel began
searching for assets that could be utilized in the transaction.

In February 1997, Messrs. Hermann, Maxey and Rice met in Washington, D.C., with
representatives of Bankers Trust and King & Spalding to work through the details of the
transaction. At the meeting, the Enron representatives indicated that they required a “should”
level tax opinion for the transaction. There was some discussion as to who would provide the tax
opinion. According to one participant, an attorney from King & Spalding indicated that it would

financial benefits relates to the GAAP tax accounting for the taxable portion of the dividends.
Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation,
dated January 31, 2003, answer 2. It is unclear why Enron used a valuation reserve (as opposed
to a reversal of the financial income benefit).

%! The Project Teresa materials in Appendix B contain the “Description of Partnership
Leasing Proposal” in discussion materials from Bankers Trust dated March 27, 1997, EC2
000037929.

3°2 Td, at EC2 000037931 -37932.

33 ‘The law firm of Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld acted as special counsel to the
Bankers Trust entity that was involved in Project Teresa.

166

=== PAGE 195 ===
receive a $1 million fee for the transaction regardless of whether King & Spalding provided the
tax opinion. Ultimately, it was decided that King & Spalding would provide the tax opinion to
Enron. There was also some discussion regarding the timing of the transaction. Of particular
concern was the fact that Congress was considering legislation that would affect the transaction
structure. Timing also was critical because the lease on the Enron North office building (the
primary asset being considered for Project Teresa) was up for renewal. After a few days of
meetings, Mr. Rice returned to Houston to apprise Richard A. Causey, Chief Accounting Officer
of Enron Corp., of the developments in anticipation of a meeting of the Enron Corp. Board of
Directors.

On March 25, 1997, the Executive Committee of the Enron Corp. Board of Directors met
to discuss (among other items) Project Teresa. Edmund P. Segner presented an overview of the
transaction, and Mr. Causey described the details of the transaction. Mr. Causey stated that the
net effect of the transaction would be to create book earnings of $242.6 million during, years
1997 through 2002 by virtue of the deemed dividends paid to the leasing partnership. 4 The
Executive Committee adopted a resolution authorizing the transaction, including the contribution
of the lessee rights in the Enron North office building to the leasing partnership and a schedule of
fees.°°> The Enron Board of Directors heard a report regarding the Executive Committee action

at its meeting on May 6, 1997.

The business purpose given for the transaction was i) ales third party capital and manage
a portfolio of leased assets with enhanced earnings potential.*” 7 The tax opinion prepared by
King & Spalding states “the predominant purpose of Enron and its Affiliates for participating in
[the redemption transaction in Project Teresa] was to generate income for financial accounting

purposes.” 98

oa Project Teresa estimated earnings benefit, EC2 000037959. According to minutes
from the meeting, “[a] thorough discussion ensued during which Messrs. Causey, Rice, and
Skilling responded to questions by the Committee.”

395 Minutes of the Meeting of the Executive Committee of the Board of Directors of
Enron Corp., March 25, 1997, EC2 000037952-55.

396 Minutes of the Meeting of the Board of Directors of Enron Corp., May 6, 1997, ENE
0000000199-200. The Board of Directors had been made aware of the transaction at its previous
meeting on February 11, 1997. At that meeting, the Board of Directors reviewed a presentation
regarding Enron’s 1997 strategic goals, which contained a projection of future earnings that
included a $280 million benefit during the years 1997 through 2001 attributable to the “building
lease tax structure.” Enron Board of Directors Meeting, February 11, 1997, EC 000044834.

397 Project Teresa Tax Overview, EC2 000037866.

3°8 King & Spalding opinion letter, by Abraham N.M. Shashy, Jr. for himself and
William S. McKee, to R. Davis Maxey, dated July 29, 1997, Appendix C, Part V, at 4.

167

=== PAGE 196 ===
Implementation of Project Teresa

The initial step in the implementation of Project Teresa was the organization and
financing of the various participating entities. On March 21, 1997, Enron Corp., together with
Potomac Capital Investment Corp. (“Potomac Capital,” a subsidiary of Potomac Electric Power
Co.) and EN-BT Delaware, Inc. (“EN-BT Delaware”) (a subsidiary of Bankers Trust)
contributed property to Organizational Partner, Inc. (“Organizational Partner” or “OPI”) in
exchange for OPI common stock and OPI preferred stock. The property that Enron contributed
included: (1) its lessee interest in the Enron North office building,” ° (2) certain interests in
aircraft operated by Enron Corp., (3) a note receivable from Houston Pipe Line Co. in the
amount of $1.097 billion and (4) $10,250 in cash, in exchange for OPI common stock that
represented 98 percent of the equity but only 75 percent of its voting rights.“°° Potomac Capital
and EN-BT Delaware collectively contributed $22.4 million in cash in exchange for 20,000
shares of OPI preferred stock that represented two percent of the equity and 25 percent of the
voting rights in Organizational Partner.

The second step involved the issuance of the preferred stock that would be used in the
redemption transactions. On March 21, 1997, Enron Corp. contributed all of the common stock
of Enron Operations Corp. and its subsidiaries to Enron Liquids Holding Corp. (“Enron
Liquids”) in exchange for 80 percent of the Enron Liquids common stock. Organizational
Partner contributed the note receivable from Houston Pipe Line Co. and $10,250 in exchange for
20 percent of the Enron Liquids common stock (with a value of $97.5 million) and 10,000 shares
(i.e., 100 percent of the issued and outstanding class) of Enron Liquids preferred stock (with a
value of $1 billion).

The next step was the organization and funding of the partnership that was to hold the
Enron Liquids preferred stock through the tax-deconsolidated entity. To accomplish this, on
March 27, 1997, Enron Leasing Partners, LP (“Enron Leasing”) was formed. Organizational
Partner contributed to Enron Leasing: (1) the lessee interest in the Enron North office building,
(2) $22.4 million in cash, and (3) the Enron Liquids preferred stock (worth $1 billion), in
exchange for a 98 percent limited partner interest. Enron Property Management Co. contributed
cash and U.S. Treasury obligations with a value of $10.433 million in exchange for a one percent
general partner interest, and EN-BT Delaware contributed $10.433 million in cash in exchange
for a one percent limited partner interest.

399 A contribution agreement between Enron Corp. and Organizational Partner dated
March 21, 1997, states that, with respect to the lessee interest, Enron Corp. agrees to designate
Organizational Partner as the lessee under the lease (and have the necessary documentation to
effectuate the assignment) no later than April 30, 1997. Ecx000006707. The actual transfer
occurred on April 14, 1997.

400 Enron Corp. owned less than 80 percent of the vote of Organizational Partner, and, as
a result, Organizational Partner was not a member of the Enron affiliated group (i.e., it was a tax
deconsolidated entity). However, Organizational Partner was consolidated with Enron Corp. for
financial statement purposes.

168

=== PAGE 197 ===
Once the entities were organized and funded, the next step was to generate dividend
income. As originally contemplated, an Enron affiliate was to make periodic purchases of Enron
Liquids preferred stock from Enron Leasing over a five-year period (with the purchase being
treated as a dividend from a related corporation under the tax laws). Thus, on May 14, 1997,
Enron Pipeline Company (“Enron Pipeline”), a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron Corp.,
purchased 1,980 shares of Enron Liquids preferred stock from Enron Leasing in exchange for an
intercompany promissory note in the principal amount of $198 million creating dividend income
to the partnership. However, a change to the tax laws that became effective in June 1997
eliminated the advantage associated with this structure.**’ Consequently, beginning in March
1998,*” Enron Liquids implemented a plan of quarterly pro-rata redemptions of its preferred and
common stock designed to achieve a similar tax result (i.e., redemptions treated as dividends
under the tax laws). Thus, on March 31, 1998, Enron Liquids redeemed (on a pro-rata basis) 40
shares of its common stock in exchange for promissory notes with a principal amount of $16.979
million and 325 shares of its preferred stock in exchange for promissory notes with a principal
amount of $32.5 million“ This amount represented 3.25 percent of each class of stock held by
each shareholder. The predominant purpose of Enron Corp. and its affiliates for participating in
the redemption was to generate income for financial accounting purposes.“

In 1999, Enron Liquids paid dividends on its preferred stock, and engaged in redemptions
of its common and preferred stock, in the amount of approximately $170.7 million.“ In
November 1999, Enron Pipeline sold its remaining 1,045 shares of Enron Liquids preferred: stock
to Enron Corp. Subsequent to the sale, Enron contributed all of the stock in Enron Pipeline to
Enron Operations Corp. (a subsidiary of Enron Liquids) in exchange for preferred stock. In 2000
and 2001, Enron Liquids paid dividends on its preferred stock and engaged in stock redemption
transactions in the aggregate amount of approximately $686.2 million and $49.5 million,
respectively.“ In total, during the period 1997 through 2001, the amount of dividends on the
Enron Liquids preferred stock and the stock sales and redemptions that Enron treated as
dividends with respect to the Enron Liquids preferred stock, exceeded $1 billion.

‘ol Congress amended the extraordinary dividend rules of section 1059, which is
discussed in greater detail below.

402 At some time between May 14, 1997 and March 31, 1998, Enron Pipeline transferred
935 shares of Enron Liquids preferred stock to Enron Corp.

43 Tn a letter to King & Spalding dated September 27, 2000, Mr. Maxey represented that
Enron Liquid’s current and accumulated earnings and profits for taxable year ended December
31, 1998, exceeded the aggregate amount of the promissory notes and cash transferred by Enron
Liquids in connection with the March 31, 1998 redemption.

404 Td., at EC2 000033830.

405 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 25.

406 Td., at answer 26.

169

=== PAGE 198 ===
Although the precise exit strategy with respect to Project Teresa is uncertain, it would
have involved a reconsolidation of Organizational Partner in the Enron consolidated group.*”
Thereafter, Enron Leasing would be liquidated, with Organizational Partner receiving the Enron
North office building in a liquidating distribution (and a tax basis that reflects the gross amount
of Enron Leasing’s dividend income). This was projected to occur in 2003. At such time,

Organizational Partner would begin to recover the increased tax basis via higher depreciation
deductions.

The diagram on the next page depicts the general structure of Project Teresa as of
December 2001.

407 ‘At any time after April 30, 2002, Organizational Partner had the option to redeem all
the OPI preferred stock from Bankers Trust and Potomac Capital. Similarly, at any time after
December 31, 2003, Bankers Trust and Potomac Capital had the right to force Organizational
Partner to redeem the OPI preferred stock.

170

=== PAGE 199 ===
Jouyed [eraueH

podlojatd %8'61
UOUIUIOD %08

jenueplyuod

Touyed pour

YON JojuaD vol
ul ysazaquy AWLINDEg

pouajald %Z'08

sooy juoWIaIsy
juowaseuryy Auedorg

quay aseaiqns

poniojard
BU9g %O0T

panajaid V
Soueg %001

1002 Joquiaseq Jo se oIM}ON.S
esalay yolo1g

sjassy
diysiouyreg

youeig

uonesodio3

sored PANLL
PajeprjosuoD dVVO worug
pusseT IVVOPEL ST

V
°S
Oo
=

YUON JojuaD uolUg
ur ysazaquy Aruindag

quON3q]U2D,
uojuq asealgt

171

=== PAGE 200 ===
Role of outside advisors

Bankers Trust promoted the transaction to Enron. A schedule of fees presented at the
March 25, 1997, Board of Directors Executive Committee meeting shows that Bankers Trust was
to receive a fee of $11 million in connection with Project Teresa -- an amount representing
approximately one percent of the increased basis in the partnership as a result of the deemed
dividends. In 1998, the fee was reduced by $1.375 million to compensate Enron for its role as an
accommodation party to Bankers Trust in connection with Project Renegade.*® The fee to
Bankers Trust was to be paid over time as follows: $6.2 million in 1997; $1.1 million in 1998;
$1.2 million in 1999; $1.2 million in 2000 and $1.2 million in 2001 Ba According to Enron
records, as of June 2001, Bankers Trust had received fees of $8.839 million in connection with
Project Teresa.”

Enron relied on King & Spalding for its legal representation in connection with Project
Teresa. The schedule of fees presented at the March 25, 1997, Executive Committee meeting
shows that King & Spalding was to receive a fee of $1 million in connection with Project Teresa,
which was to be paid after the close of the deal when the tax opinion was rendered.4”!

In the tax opinion, King & Spalding concluded that (1) the payment by Enron Pipeline to
Enron Leasing for the purchase of the Enron Liquids preferred stock “should” be treated as a
distribution in redemption of the stock of Enron Pipeline; (2) the distribution “should” be treated
as a dividend distribution; (3) the adjusted basis of the Enron Liquids preferred stock retained by
Enron Leasing “should” be increased by an amount equal to Enron Leasing’s adjusted basis in
the Enron Liquids preferred stock sold to Enron Pipeline; (4) the adjusted basis of Organizational
Partner’s interest in Enron Leasing “should” be increased by its distributive share of the
dividend; (5) for purposes of the dividends received deduction, Organizational Partner “should”
be treated as having received its distributive share of the dividend from Enron Pipeline; (6) it is
“more likely than not” that Organizational Partner will be treated as owning 20 percent or more
of the stock of Enron Pipeline for purposes of the dividends received deduction; and (7) the
extraordinary dividend rules “should” not apply to the redemption transaction.“!* According to

mu Project Renegade is discussed in detail in the section of the Report that describes
transactions in which Enron acted as an accommodation party.

409 Executive Board Meeting -- Project Teresa, March 25, 1997, schedule of fees, EC2
000037962.

410 ‘The General Background Materials in Appendix B contain the Estimated Project Fees
schedule (6/4/2001), EC2 000036379. According to current Enron management, no subsequent
payments have been made. Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint
Committee on Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 30.

41 Executive Board Meeting -- Project Teresa, March 25, 1997, schedule of fees, EC2
000037962.

4!2 Appendix C, Part V, contains the King & Spalding opinion letter to R. Davis Maxey,
by Abraham N.M. Shashy, Jr. for himself and William S. McKee, dated July 29, 1997.

172

=== PAGE 201 ===
Enron records, as of June 2001, King & Spalding had received fees of $1.046 million in
connection with Project Teresa. 413

The accounting firm of Ernst & Young provided an opinion letter regarding the effects on
Enron Liquids earnings and profits resulting from Enron’s contribution of the Enron Pipeline
stock to Enron Operations Corp.

In addition to the fees paid to Bankers Trust and King & Spalding, Enron records reflect
that it paid $250,000 of fees to others, bringing the total amount of fees paid with respect to
Project Teresa to $10.135 million.

Appendix C, Part V, to this Report contains the tax opinion letters Enron received in
connection with Project Teresa.

Subsequent developments

Organizational Partner defaulted on its dividend payments to Potomac Capital and EN-
BT Delaware in connection with the OPI preferred stock. Enron Corp. is in default under its
sublease agreement with Organizational Partner with respect to the Enron North office building,
though a standstill agreement has prevented the lenders from foreclosing on the building. The
intercompany receivables were partially written off in December 2001. Potomac Capital and
EN-BT Delaware continue to hold their OPI preferred stock. No steps have been taken to
unwind the structure.*"*

The IRS is in the process of auditing Enron’s tax returns for years 1996 through 2001.
Enron received a tax shelter registration number in connection with Project Teresa.

Discussion*®

Project Teresa was an elaborate structure designed to achieve a financial statement
benefit that results from a shift of $1 billion in tax basis from a nondepreciable asset (i.e., the
Enron Liquids preferred stock) to depreciable assets (the most significant asset being the Enron
North office building) via the use of a partnership that Enron controlled. Project Teresa used the
related party redemption rules and the dividends received deduction to generate additional tax
basis (in excess of book basis). The partnership structure was necessary to accomplish the basis
shift. In essence, Enron was willing to incur income tax on 20 cents of each dollar of dividend

413 The General Background Materials in Appendix B contain the Estimated Project Fees
schedule (6/4/2001), EC2 000036379.

414 The Project Teresa materials in Appendix B contain the Project Teresa deal basics,
EC2 000037870; Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint
Committee on Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answers 27, 31.

415 Enron’s bankruptcy effectively prevents Enron from realizing the tax benefits that

were contemplated in Project Teresa. Nevertheless, this section discusses the tax benefits that
Enron sought to achieve from the transaction (without regard to the bankruptcy).

173

=== PAGE 202 ===
income (borne by Organizational Partner, a deconsolidated subsidiary of Enron) in exchange for
one dollar of future depreciation deductions.

Under the strategy devised in Projects Teresa, the benefits of the increased tax basis (in
the form of greater depreciation deductions on the Enron North office building) would inure over
a 39-year period and was not expected to be reflected in Enron’s consolidated tax return until
2003. However, and potentially more important to Enron, the strategy permitted Enron to begin
recording the benefits immediately for financial accounting purposes.”

Key to the success of Project Teresa was Organizational Partner’s ability to receive a
basis increase for the gross amount of the dividends received notwithstanding that 80 percent of
such dividends were exempt from tax by virtue of the dividends received deduction. To
accomplish this result, the redemption transactions had to be structured in a manner that would
(1) generate dividend income (thus making them eligible for a dividends received deduction) and
(2) avoid the application of the extraordinary dividend rules (which would require a basis
reduction equal to the amount of the dividends received deduction). In addition, the redeeming
corporation needed to have sufficient earnings and profits (so that the distributions are treated as
dividends).

Also critical to Project Teresa was the use of a partnership. The partnership structure
provided the mechanism to achieve the basis shift from the Enron Liquids preferred stock to the
Enron North office building. The basis shift would have occurred on a liquidating distribution of
the Enron North office building to Organizational Partner.*”” .

Redemption transactions

As an initial matter, the redemption transactions had to involve a corporation that was not
included in Enron’s consolidated return because the consolidated return regulations generally
reduce basis for untaxed dividends within a consolidated group. This explains why
Organizational Partner was capitalized with stock with voting rights that differed from its value.
By owning stock that represented 98 percent of Organizational Partner’s value but only 75
percent of its voting power, Enron was able to exercise de facto control over the entity without
causing it to be a member of Enron’s consolidated group. Some might question Enron’s non-tax
business reason for allowing purported third parties to purchase a 25-percent voting interest in a

416 See the Background and Rationale section to this part of the Report which contains a
general explanation of relevant aspects of Financial Accounting Standard No. 109, Accounting
for Income Taxes.

417 Section 732(b), which is discussed in greater detail in the next section of this Report
(in connection with the partnership transactions), provides that the basis of property (other than
money) distributed by a partnership to a partner in liquidation of the partner’s interest is equal to
the partner’s adjusted basis in the partnership interest reduced by any money distributed in the
same transaction.

174

=== PAGE 203 ===
company that was valued at over $1 billion for only $22.4 million, and whether Bankers Trust
and Potomac Capital were truly independent third parties.“"8

The stock redemptions had to be structured in a way that would generate dividend income
to Enron Leasing (the partnership that was 98 percent owned by Organizational Partner). The
1997 related party redemption (Enron Pipeline’s purchase of 1,980 shares of Enron Liquids
preferred stock from Enron Leasing) was structured as a redemption between related
corporations.*!® By virtue of the applicable constructive ownership rules, Enron Leasing
arguably was in control of both Enron Pipeline and Enron Liquids, and the redemption did not
result in a diminution of Enron Leasing’s stock interest in Enron Liquids.*”° Therefore, the
parties characterized the transaction as a distribution in redemption of Enron Pipeline stock, with
the result that the redemption was treated as a dividend. In the years subsequent to 1997, the
redemptions took the form of pro-rata redemptions by Enron Liquids. A change to the
extraordinary dividend rules in 1997 (discussed below) necessitated the change to a pro-rata
redemption. ‘

Also critical to the transaction is that any resulting dividend must qualify for the
dividends received deduction. In a partnership structure, each partner takes into account
separately its distributive share of certain partnership items, including dividends with respect to
which a dividends received deduction is applicable. 2 Tn Project Teresa, Organizational Partner
claimed an 80 percent dividends received deduction.’””

418 As previously noted, after April 30, 2002, Organizational Partner had the option to
redeem all the OPI preferred stock from Bankers Trust and Potomac Capital. Similarly, at any
time after December 31, 2003, Bankers Trust and Potomac Capital had the right to force
Organizational Partner to redeem the OPI preferred stock.

419 See sec. 304(a)(1).

420 Th determining whether the acquisition is treated by reason of section 302(b) as a
distribution in part or full payment in exchange for the stock, reference is made to Enron
Leasing’s ownership of the Enron Liquids stock. Sec. 304(b)(1).

421 Sec. 702(a)(5). A partner will increase its basis in its partnership interest by that
partner’s distributive share of partnership income, including dividend income. Sec. 705(a).

422 The issue is whether Organizational Partner qualifies for the 80 percent dividends
received deduction (as opposed to a 70 percent deduction) by virtue of stock ownership through
a partnership. As noted in the discussion of the relevant corporate tax laws, the Treasury
Department has permitted stock ownership thresholds to be met by virtue of stock ownership
through a partnership. See, Rev. Rul. 71-141, 1971-1 C.B. 211; see also, T.D. 8708, 62 Fed.
Reg. 923, 924 (January 7, 1997) (for purposes of section 902, domestic shareholder includes a
domestic corporation that "owns" the requisite voting stock in a foreign corporation rather than
one that "owns directly” the voting stock; IRS is still considering under what other circumstances
Rev. Rul. 71-141 should apply).

175

=== PAGE 204 ===
Extraordinary dividend rules

In addition to generating dividend income that qualifies for a dividends received
deduction, Project Teresa had to be structured in a manner so as not to implicate the
extraordinary dividend rules. If the dividend that Organizational Partner received as part of its
distributive share of Enron Leasing income were treated as an extraordinary dividend, then
Organizational Partner would be forced to reduce its basis in its partnership interest by the

untaxed portion of the dividend, thereby eliminating an important aspect of the transaction.’

Congress enacted the extraordinary dividend rules in 1984 in response to a tax-motivated
transaction (known as a “dividend strip” transaction) in which a corporation would acquire
dividend-paying stock shortly before the stock’s ex-dividend date, receive a dividend that is
eligible for a dividends received deduction, and then sell the stock for a short-term capital loss.424
The extraordinary dividend rules provide that if a corporation receives an extraordinary dividend
with respect to stock and the corporation has not held the stock for more than two years after the
dividend announcement date, then the corporation’s basis in the stock is reduced (but not below
zero) by the non-taxed portion of the dividends.*”> The non-taxed portion of the dividend
generally is the amount of the dividends received deduction with respect to the dividend.*7

While the original purpose of the extraordinary dividend rules was to prevent dividend
strip transactions, Congress in recent years has expanded the scope of the extraordinary dividend
rules to address other tax-motivated transactions that exploit the dividends received deduction.
Of particular relevance to Project Teresa was the change made in 1997, in which the
extraordinary dividend rules were expanded to treat certain dividends resulting from a related
party redemption as an extraordinary dividend (thus resulting in a basis reduction equal to the
amount of the dividends received deduction). #7 The law change was necessary because

“Section 304 is directed primarily at preventing a controlling shareholder from
claiming basis recovery and capital gain treatment on transactions that result in a

423 Tn addition, Enron Leasing would have to adjust its basis in the Enron Liquids
preferred stock.

424 Joint Committee on Taxation, General Explanation of the Revenue Provisions of The
Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 (JCS-41-84), December 31, 1984, at 138-39.

425 Sec, 1059(a)(1). If the non-taxed portion of the dividends exceeds the corporation’s
basis in the stock, then the excess is treated as gain for the taxable year in which the
extraordinary dividend is received. Sec. 1059(a)(2).

46 Sec, 1059(b).

“7 Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-34, section 1013(b) (August 5, 1997)
(effective for distributions and acquisitions after June 8, 1997). Specifically, section
1059(e)(1)(A)(ii)(ID provides that if a redemption of stock would not have been treated (in
whole or in part) as a dividend absent section 304, then any amount treated as a dividend with
respect to such redemption is treated as an extraordinary dividend.

176

=== PAGE 205 ===
withdrawal of earnings from corporate solution. . . . Different concerns may be
present if the shareholder is a corporation, due in part to the availability of the
dividends received deduction.”

Enron Pipeline’s 1997 purchase of 1,980 shares of Enron Liquids preferred stock from Enron
Leasing raised a number of issues regarding the potential application of the extraordinary
dividend rules to the related party redemption.” These issues were rendered moot by the 1997
expansion of the extraordinary dividend rules. However, by modifying the transaction to make it
a pro-rata redemption (and thus avoiding the related party redemption rules), Enron avoided the
effects of the 1997 law change and continued to claim the desired benefits from Project Teresa.

Earnings and profits in a consolidated group

A distribution with respect to stock (including certain redemptions) is treated as a
dividend only to the extent that the distribution is from the corporation’s current or accumulated
earnings and profits.47° Enron contributed stock in Enron Pipeline to Enron Operations Corp. (a

subsidiary of Enron Liquids) apparently in an effort to bolster the earnings and profits of Enron
Liquids.**!

There is little guidance regarding the tiering up of earnings and profits when the location
of a member within a consolidated group changes. Two examples in the consolidated return
regulations provide that “appropriate adjustments must be made to the members to prevent
earnings and profits from being eliminated.”*”” The regulations also provide an anti-avoidance

#28 Joint Committee on Taxation, General Explanation of Tax Legislation Enacted in
1997 (JCS-23-97), December 17, 1997, at 207.

#29 For a detailed discussion of these issues, see the King & Spalding opinion letter to R.
Davis Maxey, by Abraham N.M. Shashy, Jr. for himself and William S. McKee, dated July 29,
1997, Appendix C, Part V, at 28-36.

430 Sec. 316(a).

431 See, tax opinion by Kevin A. Duvall of Ernst & Young to R. Davis Maxey, dated
November 16, 1999, Appendix C, Part V. The sole issue raised in this tax opinion was the extent
to which Enron Corp.’s contribution of Enron Pipeline stock will result in Enron Pipeline’s
earnings and profits being replicated in the earnings and profits of Enron Operations Corp. and
Enron Liquids. The opinion letter concludes that, “more likely than not,” Enron Pipeline’s
earnings and profits will be replicated, and therefore, Enron Liquids should have sufficient
earnings and profits to treat $237 million of distributions and stock redemptions in 1999 as
dividends for purposes of section 301.

432 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.1502-33(f)(2). The regulations appear to focus on the elimination

of earnings and profits through changing the location of a member within a group rather than the
replication of earnings and profits.

177

=== PAGE 206 ===
rule warning that adjustments must be made as necessary to carry out the purpose of the
«433
section.

Partnership issues

As previously noted, the partnership structure was essential in order to achieve the basis
shift. Although the precise exit strategy with respect to Project Teresa is uncertain, it
presumably involved Organizational Partner exercising its option to redeem all the OPI preferred
stock from Bankers Trust and Potomac Capital (resulting in a reconsolidation of Organizational
Partner in the Enron consolidated group). Thereafter, Enron Leasing would be liquidated, with
Organizational Partner receiving the Enron North office building in a liquidating distribution
with a tax basis that reflects the gross amount (not the taxed amount) of Enron Leasing’s
dividend income. Organizational Partner would recover the increased tax basis via higher
depreciation deductions. If a section 754 election were not in effect, then any remaining asset
owned by Enron Leasing would retain its basis (when the Enron North office building is
distributed to Organizational Partner).***

The Treasury Department has issued regulations that apply the extraordinary dividend
tules to partnerships.” > Known as the partnership anti-abuse regulations, **° the regulations state
that if a partnership is formed or availed of in connection with a transaction a principal purpose
of which is to reduce substantially the present value of the partners’ aggregate Federal tax
liability in a manner that is inconsistent with the intent of subchapter K, the Commissioner can
recast the transaction for Federal tax purposes to achieve tax results that are consistent with the
intent of subchapter K.7 Under this theory, Enron Leasing should be viewed as inconsistent
with the intent of subchapter K, considering that (1) the predominant purpose for the formation
of Enron Leasing was to generate income for financial accounting purposes,”? 8 (2) the financial
accounting income was attributable solely to the shifting of tax basis to depreciable assets (in

433 ‘Treas. Reg. sec. 1.1502-33(g).

434 5 discussed in greater detail in the next section of this Report (in connection with
the partnership tax laws), a section 754 election may have required a downward basis adjustment
with respect to the assets owned by Enron Leasing following the liquidating distribution.

35 Sec. 1059(g); Treas. Reg. sec. 1.701-2(f) example 2 (a partnership comprised of two
corporate partners that receives an extraordinary dividend has to make appropriate basis
adjustments).

436 The partnership anti-abuse regulations are discussed in greater detail in connection
with transactions that raise partnership tax issues.

437 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.701-2(b). For a discussion of why the partnership anti-abuse rules
should not apply to Enron Leasing, see the King & Spalding opinion letter to R. Davis Maxey,
by Abraham N.M. Shashy, Jr. for himself and William S. McKee, dated July 29, 1997, Appendix
C, Part V, at 38-44.

438 Tq., at 37-38.

178

=== PAGE 207 ===
excess of book basis),*? and (3) the accounting benefits of the transaction could not be
accomplished without the partnership.” Such a conclusion is further supported by recent court
decisions that have rejected the existence of an otherwise valid partnership because of the lack of
a non-tax business purpose.“*!

Recommendations

In order to achieve the desired tax results from Project Teresa, Enron needed the
assistance of an unrelated accommodation party. Bankers Trust, which was the promoter and
(along with Potomac Capital) an investor in Project Teresa, facilitated the planned temporary
deconsolidation of Organizational Partner (which gave rise to the dividends received deduction).
Bankers Trust also participated in the partnership structure (through which the basis shift was
accomplished). The following specific recommendations are perhaps appropriate to address
specific issues raised by Project Teresa. However, specific tax rules cannot adequately address
the broader concerns that arise when an accommodation party acts in concert with a taxpayer to
achieve a desired tax result. Implicit in the income tax system is an assumption that unrelated
parties have adverse economic interests. When this paradigm breaks down, it is not surprising
that the tax laws generate unwarranted results. Transactions with accommodation parties must
be addressed by a rigorous application of the various common-law doctrines applicable to tax
motivated transactions.“

3° The argument that a financial accounting benefit constitutes a substantial non-tax
business purpose fails to consider the origin of the accounting benefit (.e., reduction of taxes)
and significantly diminishes the purpose for having a non-tax business purpose requirement.
See, e.g., American Electric Power, Inc. v. U.S., 136 F. Supp. 2d 762, 791-92 (S.D. Ohio, 2001)
(“AEP’s intended use of the cash flows generated by the [corporate-owned life insurance] plan is
irrelevant to the subjective prong of the economic substance analysis. If a legitimate business
purpose for the use of the tax savings “were sufficient to breathe substance into a transaction
whose only purpose was to reduce taxes, [then] every sham tax-shelter device might succeed,””
citing Winn-Dixie v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. 254, 287 (1999)).

440 See, the King & Spalding opinion letter to R. Davis Maxey, by Abraham N.M.
Shashy, Jr. for himself and William S. McKee, dated July 29, 1997, Appendix C, Part V, at 40.

“41 See, e.g., Boca Investerings Partnership v. U.S., 2003 U.S. App. LEXIS 429 at *12
(D.C. Cir. Jan. 10, 2003) (“As we noted in Saba Partnership, ‘ASA makes clear that the absence
of a nontax business purpose is fatal to the argument that the Commissioner should respect an
entity for federal tax purposes,”’ citing Saba Partnership, 273 F.3d at 1141 (quoting ASA
Investerings, 201 F.3d at 512).

442 For detailed information of the present law rules and judicial doctrines applicable to
tax motivated transactions and related recommendations and developments, see, e.g., Joint
Committee on Taxation, Background and Present Law Relating to Tax Shelters (JCX-19-02),
March 19, 2002; Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest
Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998 (including provisions relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (JCS-3-99), July

179

=== PAGE 208 ===
Similarly, the partnership anti-abuse rules were promulgated to deter partnership
arrangements in which the principal purpose is to reduce taxes in a manner that is inconsistent
with the intent of the partnership tax rules. In Project Teresa, the principal purpose for Enron
Leasing appears to have been to facilitate the shifting of tax basis from a nondepreciable asset to
depreciable assets (in excess of book basis). If this conclusion is correct, then the partnership
anti-abuse regulations should be available to recast the transaction as appropriate. If the
partnership anti-abuse regulations do not apply to a transaction such as Project Teresa, then the
regulations need to be reevaluated.

In terms of specific recommendations, the extraordinary dividend rules were amended in
1997 to prevent a controlling corporate shareholder from structuring a redemption transaction
with a related party to take advantage of the dividends received deduction. Enron concluded that
it could circumvent the 1997 law change and continue to claim the desired benefits from Project
Teresa. The Joint Committee staff recommends that the extraordinary dividend rules should be
further strengthened.

In addition, while guidance exists to prevent the inappropriate elimination of earnings
and profits, the Joint Committee staff believes that additional guidance is needed to address
situations in which a consolidated group is attempting to create or replicate earnings and profits
in a manner inconsistent with the purpose of the consolidated return rules.

22, 1999; Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9017) to section 6011 (October 22, 2002);
Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9018) to section 6012 (October 22, 2002); Joint
Committee on Taxation, Description of the "CARE Act of 2003," (JCX-04-03), February 3, 2003;
Symposium: Business Purpose, Economic Substance and Corporate Tax Shelters, 54 SMU L.
Rev. 1 (2001).

180

=== PAGE 209 ===
C. Transactions That Raise Partnership Tax Issues

Several of Enron's structured transactions relied on partnership tax rules to shift basis to
assets that would be depreciated or sold, in order to maximize depreciation deductions or
minimize taxable gain on sale. The reported tax benefits (and corresponding financial statement
benefits) depended on the application of partnership tax rules, including rules that require
allocation of tax attributes associated with contributed assets, and rules that permit basis to be
shifted to partnership assets when the partnership makes distributions. For example, Project
Tomas (done in 1998) relied on some of these rules in order to dispose of a portfolio of low-basis
leased assets without gain recognition. Projects Condor (done in 1999) and Tammy Land II
(done in 2000 and 2001) also relied on these rules to shift basis to depreciable assets. The
"unwind" strategies of Projects Condor, Tammy I and Tammy II also relied on rules protecting a
corporation from recognition of gain on the sale or exchange of its stock.“

This section of the Report begins with a brief discussion of relevant partnership tax rules
and then describes in detail Projects Tomas, Condor, Tammy I and Tammy II.

1. Discussion of relevant partnership tax law rules

In general

In general, partnerships are not treated as separate taxpayers for Federal income tax
purposes. The income of the partnership is taxed to the partners. Items of income, gain, loss,
deduction and credit generally are allocated to the partners in accordance with the partnership
agreement. Partnership income, unlike corporate income, is thus subject to one level of Federal
income tax, which is imposed at the partner level. As a result of the different tax rules applying
to partnerships and corporations, taxpayers have structured transactions attempting to combine
the benefits contained in each set of rules.“*

The four structured transactions undertaken by Enron that are described in this section of
the Report (Projects Tomas, Condor, and Tammy I and IT) utilize the partnership tax rules, and
their interaction with corporate tax rules, to attempt to achieve favorable tax treatment.

443 Sec. 1032. This rule of present law is described above in Part III.A.1., Discussion of
relevant corporate tax laws.

444 For an example of taxpayers attempting to take advantage of the benefits of both the
corporate and partnership rules, see Prop. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.337(d)-3 (gain recognition upon
certain partnership transactions involving a corporate partner’s stock), Notice 89-37, 1989-1 C.B.
679, and Notice 93-2, 1993-2 C.B. 292.

181

=== PAGE 210 ===
Contributions to partnerships generally tax-free

Generally, a partner does not recognize any gain or loss on a contribution of property to a
partnership. 445 The partnership also does not recognize gain or loss when property is
contributed.

Liquidation of a partner’s interest
Tax-free distributions of partnership property

Generally, a partner and the partnership do not recognize gain or loss on the distribution
of partnership property. ““° This includes distributions in liquidation of a partner’s interest.
There are, however, a number of exceptions to this general rule of non-recognition on a
distribution of partnership property.

Taxable partnership distributions

One such exception is that a partner must recognize gain to the extent that any money
distributed exceeds the partner’s basis in its partnership interest immediately before the
distribution.*4”

Two additional exceptions, enacted in 1989 and 1992, provide that gain or loss is
recognized on a distribution of partnership property, if a partner contributed property with built-
in gain or built-in loss, and either (1) the property is distributed to another partner within seven
years of its contribution, or (2) the contributing partner receives a distribution of other property
within seven years of the contribution.**

In general, this gain recognition rule does not apply to a distribution of property that the
distributee partner contributed to the partnership.“ However, if the property distributed is an
interest in an entity (e.g., corporate stock), the exception from gain recognition does not apply to
the extent the value of the interest is attributable to property contributed to the entity after the
entity was contributed to the partnership.

“ Sec. 721(a).

“4 Sec. 731(a) and (b).

447 Sec. 731(a)(1). The term “money” includes marketable securities; however,
marketable securities are excluded from the definition of money for purposes of gain recognition
on the distribution if the distributee partner contributed the security to the partnership. Sec.
731(c).

“48 Secs. 704(c)(1)(B) and 737.

44 Secs. 704(c)(1)(B) and 737(d).

182

=== PAGE 211 ===
Tax basis of distributed property received in liquidation of partnership interest

The basis of property distributed in liquidation of a partner’s interest is equal to the
partner’s adjusted basis in its partnership interest (reduced by any money distributed in the same
transaction).*°°

Election to adjust basis of partnership property

When a partnership distributes partnership property, generally, the basis of partnership
property is not adjusted to reflect the effects of the distribution or transfer. The partnership is
permitted, however, to make an election (referred to as a 754 election) to adjust the basis of
partnership property in the case of a distribution of partnership property.*° | The effect of the
754 election is that the partnership adjusts the basis of its remaining property to reflect any
change in basis of the distributed property in the hands of the distributee partner resulting from
the distribution transaction. Such a change could be a basis increase due to gain recognition, or a
basis decrease due to the application of a limitation, for example. If the 754 election is made, it

applies to the taxable year with respect to which such election was filed and all subsequent
taxable years.

In the case of a distribution of partnership property to a partner with respect to which the
754 election is in effect, the partnership increases the basis of partnership property by (1) any
gain recognized by the distributee partner (2) the excess of the adjusted basis of the distributed
property to the partnership immediately before its distribution over the basis of the property to
the distributee partner, and decreases the basis of partnership property by (1) any loss recognized
by the distributee partner and (2) the'excess of the basis of the property to the distributee partner
over the adjusted basis of the distributed property to the partnership immediately before the
distribution. The allocation of the increase or decrease in basis of partnership property is made
in a manner which has the effect of reducing the difference between the fair market value and the
adjusted basis of partnership properties.” 2

Disguised sales of property through partnerships

In 1984, Congress enacted a rule providing that if there is a transfer of money or other
property by a partner to a partnership and there is a related transfer of money or other property
by the partnership to such partner, the two transfers (when viewed together) may be properly
characterized as a taxable sale or exchange of property.“

“°° Sec, 732(b).

“! Sec. 754.

“2 Sec. 755.

453 Sec. 707(a)(2)(B). Treasury, in regulations issued in 1956, had recognized the
possibility that a contribution of property coupled with a distribution of money or other

consideration may, in substance, be a sale or exchange of property. See Treas. Reg. secs. 1.721-
1(a) and 1.731-1(c)(3).

183

=== PAGE 212 ===
The regulations provide that a transfer of property (excluding money or an obligation to
contribute money) by a partner to a partnership and a transfer of money or other consideration
(including the assumption of or the taking subject to a liability) by the partnership to the partner
constitute a sale of property, in whole or in part, by the partner to the partnership only if based on
all the facts and circumstances (1) the transfer of money or other consideration would not have
been made but for the transfer of property and (2) in cases in which the transfers are not made
simultaneously, the subsequent transfer is not dependent on the entrepreneurial risks of
partnership operations.” * The regulations then provide ten factors that may tend to prove the
existence of a sale.**

If the two transfers are made within a two-year period (without regard to the order of the
transfers), then the transfers are presumed to be a sale of the property unless the facts and
circumstances clearly establish otherwise.*°° If, however, the two transfers are more than two
years apart, then the transfers are presumed not to be a sale of the property unless the facts and
circumstances clearly establish otherwise.**”

Adjustment to basis of assets of a distributed corporation controlled by a corporate partner

In December 1999, Congress enacted a rule requiring a reduction in the basis of stock
distributed by a partnership to a corporate partner, in certain circumstances. The provision was
enacted in response to the perceived abuse of the interaction of the tax-favored treatment of
partnership distributions and the tax-free treatment of certain corporate liquidations.*** The
Congress was concerned that the downward adjustment to the basis of property distributed by a
partnership to a low-basis partner may be nullified if the distributed property is corporate stock.
The corporate partner could then liquidate the distributed corporation, eliminating the stock and
owning assets directly, so that the stock basis reduction would have no effect.**”

454 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.707-3(b)(1).
455 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.707-3(b)(2).
456 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.707-3(c)(1).
457 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.707-3(d).

458 Sec. 732(f) was enacted in the Ticket to Work and Work Incentives Improvement Act
of 1999, Pub. L. No. 106-170, section 538(a) (December 17, 1999). Section 732(f) is effective
for distributions made after July 14, 1999. However, in the case of a corporation that is a partner
in a partnership as of July 14, 1999, section 732(f) is effective for distributions made to that

partner from that partnership after June 30, 2001 (approximately a two-year deferred effective
date).

45° Generally, section 332 provides that no gain or loss is recognized on the receipt by a

corporation of property distributed in complete liquidation of another corporation in which it
holds 80 percent of the stock (by vote and value).

184

=== PAGE 213 ===
The provision provides for a basis reduction to assets of a corporation, if stock in that
corporation is distributed by a partnership to a corporate partner, and after the distribution the
corporate partner controls the distributed corporation.“ The amount of the reduction in basis of
property of the distributed corporation generally equals the amount of the excess of (1) the
partnership’s adjusted basis in the stock of the distributed corporation immediately before the
distribution over (2) the corporate partner’s basis in that stock immediately after the
distribution.“

Partnership allocations with respect to contributed property

Allocations to contributing and non-contributing partners to reflect pre-contribution
gain or loss

The partnership rules generally provide that a partner’s distributive share of partnership
income, gain, loss, or deduction is allocated to the partner in accordance with the partner’s
interest in the partnership.“ However, a special rule requires that income, gain, loss, and
deduction with respect to contributed property must be shared among the partners so as to take
account of the variation between the basis of the property to the partnership and its fair market
value at the time of contribution to the partnership.” The purpose of this rule is to prevent the
shifting of tax consequences among partners with respect to pre-contribution gain or loss. Under
regulations promulgated by the Treasury Department, three different allocation methods are
generally reasonable in carrying out the purpose of this rule.“ However, an allocation method
(or combination of methods) is not reasonable if the contribution of property and the
corresponding allocation of tax items with respect to the property are made with a view to
shifting the tax consequences of built-in gain or loss among the partners in a manner that
substantially reduces the present value of the partners’ aggregate tax liability.“

469 For this purpose, the term “control” means ownership of stock meeting the
requirements of section 1504(a)(2) (generally, an 80-percent vote and value requirement).

461 Sec, 732(f)(1). The provision limits the amount of the basis reduction in two
respects. First, the amount of the basis reduction may not exceed the amount by which (1) the
sum of the aggregate adjusted bases of the property and the amount of money of the distributed
corporation exceeds (2) the corporate partner’s adjusted basis in the stock of the distributed
corporation. Second, the amount of the basis reduction may not exceed the adjusted basis of the
property of the distributed corporation. Sec. 732(f)(3).

462 Sec. 704(b).
463 Sec. 704(c).

464 The methods are the traditional method, the traditional method with curative
allocations, and the remedial method. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.704-3.

46 Treas, Reg. sec. 1.704-3(a)(10).

185

=== PAGE 214 ===
Sale of partnership interest with pre-contribution gain or loss

If a contributing partner transfers a partnership interest, pre-contribution built-in gain or
loss must be allocated to the transferee partner as it would have been allocated to the transferor
partner.“ If the contributing partner transfers a portion of the partnership interest, the share of
built-in gain or loss proportionate to the interest transferred must be allocated to the transferee
partner.

Basis of a partner’s interest in a partnership

In general, a partner’s basis in its partnership interest is increased by that partner’s
distributive share of partnership income and is decreased by that partner’s distributive share of
partnership losses.*°* Increasing the partner’s basis in this manner ensures that a partner is taxed
only once on its distributive share of partnership income, and deducts its share of partnership loss
only once. In addition, a partner’s basis is increased by the partner’s distributive share of non-
taxable income so that the partner does not lose the benefit of that type of income.

Sale of stock contributed to a partnership

In Rev. Rul. 99-57,/° the IRS addressed the tax treatment of gain on the sale of a
corporate partner’s stock that it had previously contributed to the partnership. In the ruling, the
IRS concluded that the corporate partner’s share of the gain resulting from the partnership’s sale
of the stock was not subject to tax. Effectively, the IRS treated the corporate partner as owning
an undivided interest in its own corporate stock, and that as such it does not recognize gain or
loss on the receipt of money or other property in exchange for the its own stock.*”° In addition,
the corporate partner increased its basis in its partnership interest thereby preserving the non-
recognition result of the transaction in accordance with the policy underlying section 1032
(preventing a corporation from recognizing gain or loss when dealing in its own stock). A
similar analysis would apply to a transaction in which a corporate partner is allocated a loss from
a transaction involving the disposition of stock of the corporate partner held by the partnership.

In Notice 99-57,"”' the IRS stated its intent to promulgate regulations under section 705
to address certain situations in which gain or loss may be improperly created by adjusting the

466 Treas, Reg. sec. 1.704-3(a)(7).

467 Ig.

488 Sec. 705(a).

469 1999-2 C.B. 678 (Dec. 20, 1999). For an example of an earlier agency decision
applying partnership aggregate principles to section 1032, see Priv. Ltr. Rul. 9822002 (Oct. 23,
1997).

“7 Section 1032.

471 1999-2 C.B. 693 (Dec. 20, 1999).

186

=== PAGE 215 ===
basis of a partnership interest for partnership income that is not subject to tax, or for partnership
losses or deductions that are permanently denied, with respect to a partner. The regulations will
apply to situations in which a corporation acquires an interest in a partnership that holds stock in
that corporation, and a section 754 election is not in effect. In those situations, a corporate
partner may increase the basis in its partnership interest under section 705 only by the amount of
its portion of the section 1032 gain that the partner would have realized had a section 754
election been made. The IRS also stated that the regulations will apply to situations in which the
price paid for a partnership interest reflects built-in gain or accrued income items that will not be
subject to income tax, or built-in loss or accrued deductions that will be permanently denied,
when allocated to the transferee partner, and the partnership has not made a section 754 election.
The IRS also warned that it may challenge any transaction within the scope of the Notice under
the anti-abuse provisions of Treas. Reg. sec. 1.701-2.47

Proposed regulations on partnership distributions of corporate stock

Similarly, under Notice 89-37, 473 Which was issued in response to a well-known
transaction engaged in by the May Company,’ the IRS addressed certain situations in which
gain may be avoided through the use of a partnership and stock of a corporate partner. The
notice states that if a partnership distributes to a corporate partner the stock of such corporation
or the stock of an affiliate of such corporation after March 9, 1989, the distribution is
characterized as a redemption of the corporate partner's stock with "property consisting of its
partnership interest.” In other words, gain recognition will apply instead of the general
partnership non-recognition provisions on distributions of property. in addition, the Notice also
states that if a partnership acquires stock of a corporate partner after March 9, 1989, the IRS
intends to treat the acquisition as resulting in a "deemed redemption" of the corporate partner's
stock.47> In such case, the deemed redemption rule will apply so that "gain will be recognized at
the time of, and to the extent that, the acquisition has the economic effect of an exchange by a
corporate partner of its interest in appreciated property for an interest in its stock [or stock of an
affiliate] owned or acquired by the partnership."

42 On January 3, 2001, the Treasury and the IRS published a notice of proposed
rulemaking under section 705 (REG-106702-00, 2001-4 I-R.B. 424). On March 28, 2002, the
Treasury and the IRS issued final regulations under section 705 (T.D. 8986, 67 Fed. Reg. 15112
(March 29, 2002)). On March 28, 2002, the Treasury Department and the IRS issued a notice of
proposed rulemaking under section 705, addressing remaining issues that Treasury and the IRS
considered during the development of the final regulations (REG-16748-01, 67 Fed. Reg. 15132
(March 29, 2002)).

43 1989-1 C.B. 679.

474 Tn this transaction, a corporate partner contributed property with a built-in gain to a
partnership. The partnership made a distribution of corporate stock.

475 Tn the Notice, the IRS stated that the deemed redemption rule would apply to other

transactions, including partnership purchases of a corporate partner's stock, disproportionate
distributions, and amendments to the partnership agreement.

187

=== PAGE 216 ===
In December 1992, Treasury issued proposed regulations interpreting the Notice.“”° The
proposed regulations, which have not been finalized, describe the tax consequences of a
distribution of a partner's stock after the application of the deemed redemption rule.

The IRS has stated "further study is appropriate for cases in which affiliation did not exist
prior to a distribution of stock by a partnership to a corporate partner, but rather results from such
distribution."*”” As a result, the proposed regulations will be amended to limit their application
to cases in which affiliation exists immediately before the deemed redemption or distribution.

Partnership anti-abuse regulations

In late 1994, the Treasury Department issued regulations containing two anti-abuse rules
relating to subchapter K. The first rule focuses on the intent of subchapter K, which is to permit
taxpayers to conduct joint business (including investment) activities through a flexible economic
arrangement without incurring an entity-level tax. Implicit in the intent of subchapter K are the
following requirernents: (1) the partnership must be bona fide and each partnership transaction or
series of related transactions must be entered into for a substantial business purpose; (2) the form
of each partnership transaction must be respected under substance over form principles; and (3)
the tax consequences under subchapter K to each partner of partnership operations and of
transactions between the partner and the partnership must accurately reflect the partner’s
economic agreement and clearly reflect the partner’s income.** If a partnership is formed or
availed of in connection with a transaction a principal purpose of which is to reduce substantially
the present value of the partners’ aggregate Federal tax liability in a manner that is inconsistent
with the intent of subchapter K, the Commissioner can recast the transaction for Federal tax
purposes, as appropriate to achieve tax results that are consistent with the intent of subchapter K,
in light of the applicable statutory and regulatory provisions and the pertinent facts and
circumstances.

The second rule permits the Commissioner to treat a partnership as an aggregate of its
partners in whole or in part as appropriate to carry out the purpose of any provision of the Code
or regulations.“®° However, this second rule does not apply to the extent that a provision of the
Code (or regulations) prescribes the treatment of a partnership as an entity, in whole or in part,
and that treatment and the ultimate tax results, taking into account all the relevant facts and
circumstances, are clearly contemplated by that provision.”*!

476 ps_.91-90, 1993-2 LR.B. 29; 57 Fed. Reg. 59324 (December 15, 1992).

477 Notice 93-2, 1993-2 C.B. 292.

478 Treas, Reg. sec. 1.701-2(a).

479

Treas. Reg. sec. 1.701-2(b).
480 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.701-2(e).

481 Id.

188

=== PAGE 217 ===
Summary

The present-law rules discussed above were integral to effectuating the beneficial tax
results sought by Enron in Projects Tomas, Condor, Tammy I, and Tammy II. Project Tomas
uses the partnership distribution rules in connection with the corporate tax-free liquidation
provisions to generate tax deductions without an economic outlay. Projects Condor, Tammy I,
and Tammy II use the partnership allocation rules and the non-recognition treatment accorded to
dealings in one’s own stock to purportedly enable Enron to generate tax deductions without an
economic outlay.

2. Project Tomas
Brief overview

Project Tomas was structured to increase the tax basis of a portfolio of leased assets that
Enron liquidated. The increased basis of the assets eliminated approximately $270 million of
taxable gain for Enron on the disposition of the property. The transaction involved the
assumption, and repayment, of debt to increase the basis of the assets without an economic
outlay. At the same time, Enron took the position that tax savings from the transaction generated
financial accounting earnings of $18.1 million for 1998, and $18.4 million for 2000.

The transaction involved the formation of a partnership between an existing Enron
subsidiary holding low-basis leased assets, and two subsidiaries of Bankers Trust. By
contributions to the partnership, and later liquidation of the Enron subsidiary's interest in the
partnership, the Bankers Trust subsidiaries acquired the leased assets. Later, through the
partnership, they would start to sell them off.

When the partnership was formed, the Enron subsidiary, PGH, contributed both the
portfolio of depreciable assets that had high value but a low tax basis, and all the stock of another
corporation, Oneida. The Bankers Trust partners contributed cash for small partnership interests.
The partnership assumed a large amount of debt. Oneida, the corporation whose stock the
partnership held, received valuable assets in the form of notes receivable from a Bankers Trust
affiliate. After a period of time, the partnership distributed the stock of Oneida back to the Enron
affiliate, PGH, in redemption of its partnership interest. The basis of the Oneida stock was
reduced, under the tax law, to equal the amount of PGH's low basis in its partnership interest.

At the same time, the partnership made a 754 election to increase the basis of the
depreciable assets it retained. The basis increase was equal to the amount of the reduction in
basis of the distributed Oneida stock. No corresponding reduction in the basis of Oneida's assets,
however, was required under the law in effect at the time of the transaction. Thus, the basis of
those assets was unaffected by the distribution of corporate stock, while the amount of the
reduction in stock basis resulting from the distribution was added to the basis of the partnership's
remaining assets. In effect, this amount of basis was duplicated in the transaction, and this
duplicated amount of basis was shifted from the corporate stock to the partnership's other assets,
that is, the portfolio of leased assets. Gain on their later sale would be reduced by this increase
in basis.

189

=== PAGE 218 ===
Background*”

Reported tax and financial statement effects

Enron reported that it was not subject to tax on approximately $270 million of built-in
gain.’ This tax benefit is attributable to the step-up in the basis and subsequent disposition of
the leased assets without Federal income tax on the built-in gain.“** Since the transaction was
put in place in 1998, subsequent tax legislation has changed some of the tax results of this type

of transaction.**°

Enron reported annual financial statement benefits from the Tomas transaction of $18.1
million for 1998, and $18.4 million for 2000. 485 Tt is represented that current management is not
aware of any reversals of these financial statement benefits. 487

482 The information regarding Project Tomas was obtained from Joint Committee staff
interviews of Mr. Hermann and Mr. Maxey, as well as from documents and information
provided by Enron and the IRS.

483 Enron Corp. Presentation to Joint Committee on Taxation staff, Washington, D.C.,
June 7, 2002, at 26. Appendix B, Part I contains this document.

484 The Structured Transactions Group, Summaries of Project Earnings and Cash Flows,
November 2001 (which is contained in Appendix B, Part I) showed that the estimated current tax
benefit attributable to Project Tomas was $109 million as of the end of 2001.

485 Sec. 538 of Pub. L. No. 106-170, the "Ticket to Work and Work Incentives
Improvement Act of 1999," provided for a corresponding reduction in the basis of assets of a
distributed corporation controlled by a corporate partner.

486 1 etter from Enron's counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, January 13, 2003, answer 101.

487 Tq. Another Enron calculation of the financial statement benefits of Project Tomas
differed. The Structured Transactions Group, Summaries of Project Earnings and Cash Flows,
November 2001 (which is contained in Appendix B, Part I) showed that the net income for
financial reporting purposes from Project Tomas totalled approximately $113 million through
2001. The yearly financial statement income or loss shown was $55.99 million in 1998, $9.85
million in 1999, and $51.29 million in 2000, with losses of under $10 million estimated or

projected for 2001 through 2004, and smaller amounts of income projected annually through
2010.

190

=== PAGE 219 ===
Development of Project Tomas*®®

Portland General Holdings ("PGH"), a wholly-owned Enron subsidiary acquired in 1997,
held "burned-out" leases of depreciable property. These leased assets were held through
subsidiaries of PGH. The leased assets consisted of property such as commercial aircraft,
containers for containerized shipping, and rail cars, as well as other types of assets such as an
acid-recovery plant used in making pickles. The leases were "burned out" in the sense that the
tax basis of the leased property had been reduced to approximately $8 million, a small fraction of
the property's value, by depreciation deductions. Nevertheless, the property had substantial
economic value of approximately $280 million (not taking into account nonrecourse debt of
approximately $170 million).

In December of 1997, Enron received a letter from Arthur Andersen regarding a
technique for "permanent gain deferral.''*®° The letter described "a technique through which a
corporate partner may redeem its partnership interest while minimizing any potential tax
consequences on the redemption."*”” The letter urged, "[b]ecause of the substantial benefits that
the product provides, and the possibility of legislative action, you should be advised to utilize the
technique now, as its shelf life may be limited."“7"

At Enron, Project Tomas was approved by the Enron Board of Directors Executive
Committee at a meeting on March 2, 1998.7 At a meeting of the Board of Directors of Enron
Corp. on May 4-5, 1998, Mr. John Duncan reported to the Board that the Executive Committee
had approved Project Tomas.”

Although $250 million of debt used in the transaction was incurred in July of 1998, the
Enron tax department was still considering modifications to the series of transactions involved in
Project Tomas during August of 1998.44

488 1 ike several other transactions in which Enron affiliates engaged, Project Tomas was
named after a recent hurricane beginning with the letter "T."

489 1 etter from Robert P. Palmquist of Arthur Andersen to Mr. David Maxey of Enron
dated Dec. 11, 1997, EC2 000038050 - EC2 000038052.

490 Id.
491 Id.

492 Minutes, Meeting of the Executive Committee of the Board of Directors, Enron
Corp., March 2, 1998, EC2 000037991 - BC2 000037994.

493 Minutes, Meeting of the board of Directors, Enron Corp., May 4-5, 1998, EC2
000037995 - EC2 000037996.

494 Project Tomas, August 4, 1998, EC2 000038005 - EC2 000038018; Project Tomas,
August 14, 1998, EC2 000038019 - EC2 000038032.

191

=== PAGE 220 ===
Project Tomas' tax goal was to increase the tax basis of the "burned-out" leased property
without incurring tax, permitting elimination or reduction of gain (or increase of loss) on the later
sale of the depreciable property (or greater depreciation deductions in the future). The transaction
was designed to result in the liquidation of these assets for Enron. At the same time, the
financial accounting goal was to increase earnings. The financial accounting treatment (to
increase earnings) was the opposite of the tax treatment (to eliminate or reduce gains).

Implementation of Project Tomas

PGH, a wholly-owned Enron affiliate acquired in 1997, owned a portfolio of leased
assets through subsidiaries. 4°5 Tn total, the leased assets had a fair market value of
approximately $280 million and were encumbered by non-recourse debt totaling approximately
$170 million. The tax basis of the leased assets was approximately $8 million.

PGH also owned all the stock of Oneida Leasing, Inc. (“Oneida”). Oneida had no
significant assets at the beginning of the transaction.

On July 17, 1998, PGH borrowed approximately $250 million on a recourse basis from
Toronto Dominion, an unrelated Texas bank.””° This recourse debt was not secured by any
property, although Enron guaranteed the debt. On the same date, PGH contributed the $250
million cash proceeds to its subsidiary, Oneida. Oneida in turn loaned $250 million to Enron in
exchange for Enron's demand promissory note, also dated July 17, 1998." Thus, the $250
million cash proceeds were cycled from PGH through its subsidiary, Oneida, and then back to
Enron, the guarantor of the Toronto Dominion debt. PGH was still liable on its $250 million
recourse debt to the Toronto Dominion bank.

On September 9, 1998, PGH formed a partnership with two affiliates of Bankers Trust.
PGH's two partners were BT Leasing and EN-BT Delaware. The partnership was named Seneca
Leasing Partners, L.P. ("Seneca"). The three partners of Seneca contributed assets to the
partnership in exchange for their interests in the partnership.

495 One of the subsidiaries was Columbia Willamette Leasing, Inc. (“CWL”). CWL in
turn owned all the stock of Rail Leasing, Inc. (“Rail Leasing”). CWL held 16 groups of leased
assets (the aircraft, containers for shipping, and similar large assets), and Rail Leasing held one
lot of leased rail cars. On September 4 and September 10, 1998, CWL and Rail Leasing merged
into their parent corporation, PGH. As a result of these two mergers, PGH owned all of the
assets formerly held by CWL and Rail Leasing, which consisted of the 17 groups of leased
assets.

496 The loan was due on or before October 30, 1998.

497 The terms of the demand note were that Enron agreed to pay the principal amount
upon the earlier of demand or July 31, 2003.

192

=== PAGE 221 ===
On September 15 and 30, 1998, PGH transferred the leased assets to the Seneca
partnership.” PGH also transferred all of the Oneida stock to Seneca on September 15, 1998.
In exchange for the assets and stock it contributed, PGH received a 95-percent limited
partnership interest.

PGH's limited partnership interest in Seneca provided for a floating preferred return on
approximately $68 million of its capital in the partnership. This limited partnership interest also
included a retirement right, permitting PGH to withdraw from the partnership after two years.”
On September 16, 1998, PGH transferred its limited partnership interest to PGH LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company formed two days before that was disregarded (treated as part
of PGH) for Federal income tax purposes.

BT Leasing, one of the two Bankers Trust affiliates that were partners in Seneca,
contributed approximately $9 million cash to Seneca in exchange for a four-percent general
partnership interest. The other partner, EN-BT Delaware, contributed approximately $2 million
cash to Seneca in exchange for a one-percent general partnership interest.”

On September 15, 1998, the partnership, Seneca, assumed the $250 million recourse debt
from PGH to Toronto Dominion. As a result, BT Leasing and EN-BT Delaware, as general
partners of Seneca, became primarily liable on the debt. Enron remained as guarantor of this
$250 million debt for two more days until the debt was repaid.

On September 15, 1998, the $250 million PGH had borrowed in July from Toronto
Dominion changed hands several times. On that date, but prior to the contribution of Oneida
stock to the partnership, Enron transferred approximately $250 million cash to Oneida in
satisfaction of Enron’s July 17 demand promissory note to Oneida. Oneida loaned
approximately $250 million on a recourse basis to Bankers Trust in exchange for Bankers Trust’s

498 The fair market value of the 17 leased assets remained at approximately $280 million
on PGH’s transfer to the partnership and the non-recourse debt encumbering the assets remained
at approximately $170 million. As of September 15, PGH transferred 16 of the 17 groups of
assets, and was obligated to transfer the 17" leased asset (a Mack Truck facility) or its cash

equivalent value to Seneca, and did transfer the 17" leased asset to Seneca on September 30,
1998.

499 Under the retirement right associated with this partnership interest, at any time after
two years from September 30, 1998, PGH LLC, as the transferee of PGH’s 95 percent limited
partnership interest in Seneca, could exercise its right to compel the partnership to liquidate its
interest in exchange for assets of the partnership. PGH LLC was to receive distributions in an
amount equal to the positive balance in its capital account (adjusted to account for revaluation of
partnership assets), plus the amount of nonrecourse debt assumed by it.

5° BT Leasing and EN-BT Delaware were to pay all ordinary and necessary expenses of
Seneca in exchange for a management fee of $300,000 per year. Pursuant to a service agreement
dated September 15, 1998, Oneida was required to pay BT Leasing $300,000 per year to act as
its agent to engage in the business of owning and operating a portfolio of leased equipment.

193

=== PAGE 222 ===
demand promissory note. In turn, Bankers Trust loaned approximately $250 million on a
recourse basis to Seneca in exchange for Seneca’s note. Seneca repaid $250 million to Toronto
Dominion on September 17, 1998.

The end result of the borrowings and repayments on September 15 and 17 among Enron,
PGH, Oneida, Seneca, and Bankers Trust was that Oneida held a note receivable from Bankers
Trust for approximately $250 million.

The following diagram depicts the structure of Project Tomas after the formation of and
contributions to the partnership in September, 1998.

194

=== PAGE 223 ===
sjesse pesee| ‘\ ‘a aiqenieoey ‘
'

peBeseng] jo H iN 19 /

soyopodeL SS

jenuepyuod

d1%S6

8661 ‘OE Joquiaidag Jo sve sIMONNS
seuloT, l01g

iy
1

sassy

DB

1
\

young

diyssoueg

uonesodiod

quUoUNSOAUT
pompay Anby

sonred Pay
Pareptfosuod dvvo wog
PISITTIVVOPEL S 1

feeo<o

195

=== PAGE 224 ===
Less than two years later, in June 2000, PGH LLC (the wholly-owned company to which
PGH had transferred its partnership interest in Seneca) gave notice of its intent to withdraw from
the Seneca partnership. Pursuant to the retirement right under PGH LLC's 95-percent limited
partnership interest, this notice triggered a public bid valuation process to determine the
retirement price. The actual distribution of Oneida stock did not take place until just over two

years after the last contribution of property by PGH to the Seneca partnership on September 30,
1998.

On October 2, 2000 (two years and two days after the last contribution to the partnership
on Sepptember 30, 1998), PGH LLC's interest in the partnership was liquidated. Seneca
distributed the Oneida stock to PGH LLC, the Enron subsidiary, in liquidation of its partnership
interest. Because the value of Oneida stock was greater than PGH LLC’s capital account in the
partnership, PGH LLC also assumed debt of Seneca.°! The amount of debt assumed was
approximately equal to the excess of the value of Oneida stock over PGH LLC’s capital account.

Under the tax rules, PGH LLC's basis in the distributed Oneida stock was equal to PGH
LLC’s basis in its partnership interest (adjusted for the debt assumed in liquidation). As a result,
the basis of the Oneida stock was required to be reduced in the hands of PGH LLC.

Seneca made a section 754 election and increased the basis of its remaining property, the
leased assets.°°? PGH’s low basis in its stock of Oneida would become irrelevant on a
liquidation of Oneida into PGH, under the partnership tax rules then in effect, because at that
time, the basis of the property inside Oneida was not required to be reduced corresponding to the
reduction in the basis of Oneida stock.

Role of outside advisors
Bankers Trust signed an engagement letter dated September 15, 1998, agreeing to serve

as Enron's exclusive financial advisor for the transaction.*”’ The letter provides that a
partnership would be structured between Enron representatives and Bankers Trust

501 Oneida issued a demand promissory note to Bankers Trust for $156 million on
October 2, 2000 (the date PGH LLC's interest in the Seneca partnership was liquidated). On that
same date, Bankers Trust demanded payment of the $156 million, and the note was cancelled.
Meanwhile, Bankers Trust agreed to pay Oneida $21 million, in a demand promissory note also
dated October 2, 2000. Demand Promissory Note, $156,005,946, October 2, 2000
(ECx000007853 - ECx000007855); Letter of Bankers Trust to PGH Leasing, LLC, Attention:
Mr. R. Davis Maxey (October 2, 2000), ECx000007871; Cancelled - Demand Promissory Note,
$156,005,946, October 2, 2000, ECx000007872 - ECx000007874; Demand Promissory Note,
$21,661,889.67, October 2, 2000, ECx000007876 - ECx000007878.

5° In April 1999, two of the leased assets were sold to the lessees and a third lease was
renegotiated and renewed.

5 Letter of Brian J. McGuire of Bankers Trust to Mr. Richard A. Causey of Enron,

dated September 15, 1998, EC2 000038045 - EC2 000038049. Appendix B, Part VI contains
this document.

196

=== PAGE 225 ===
representatives for purposes of the transaction. Bankers Trust agreed to advise and assist in
designing an appropriate structure for the transaction and to perform other services. Bankers
Trust would be paid fees of $10 million. This amount did not include fees for additional services
such as leased asset management and disposition fees, swaps, bridge financing, valuation
services and other services. As of June 4, 2001, Bankers Trust was paid an estimated $11.875
million in project fees in connection with Project Tomas.

The opinion letter regarding the Federal tax issues in the transaction®” was provided by
Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, L-P. ("Akin, Gump"), and was dated November 23, 1998
(after the formation of and contributions to the partnership in September, 1998). In its opinion
letter, Akin, Gump concluded that (1) mergers of PGH subsidiaries holding the leased assets
should be treated as corporate liquidations, (2) Seneca should be treated as a partnership for
Federal tax purposes, (3) PGH's transfers of the leased assets and the stock of Oneida to Seneca
should be tax-free contributions to a partnership, (4) neither the Seneca's receipt of the leased
assets subject to $170 million nonrecourse debt, nor Seneca's assumption of the $250 million
recourse debt, should be treated as a disguised sale taxable to PGH, (5) the nonrecourse debt
should be allocated to PGH first to the extent of the partnership's minimum gain, second to the
extent of PGH's precontribution gain, and third, in accordance with its 95-percent profit share,
(6) PGH LLC will disregarded for Federal tax purposes, (7) no gain should be recognized in the
event PGH LLC exercises its retirement right and receives distributions of cash, the leased assets
and stock of Oneida, no gain should be recognized to PGH LLC (except to the extent cash
distributed exceeds its basis), because the exceptions for distributions of property the partner
contributed should apply, and (8) the foregoing opinions should not be subject to change under
the business purpose doctrine, section 269 (relating to acquisitions made to evade or avoid
income tax), the substance-over-form doctrine, or the section 701 partnership anti-abuse
regulations. Akin, Gump was paid fees of $813,694 in connection with Project Tomas. 506

In addition, the firm of Andrews & Kurth provided legal counsel with respect to aircraft
sales that were Raures to take place following operation of the partnership Cena in the Project
Tomas transactions. °°’ Accounting support was provided by Arthur Andersen.”

As of June 4, 2001, project fees had been paid to several parties in connection with
Project Tomas, in addition to Bankers Trust and Akin, Gump. Arthur Andersen, Enron's auditor,

5% Estimated Project Fees Paid to Date, 6/4/2001, EC2 000036379. Appendix B, Part I,
contains this document.

55 Appendix C, Part VI to this Report contains the Akin, Gump tax opinion letter Enron
received in connection with Project Tomas (EC2 000033917 - EC2 000033979).

5% Estimated Project Fees Paid to Date, 6/4/2001, EC2 000036379. Appendix B, Part I,
contains this document.

507 Project Tomas, Advisory History, EC2000037987.

508 Id.

197

=== PAGE 226 ===
was paid fees of $252,593 in connection with Project Tomas. In addition, another $600,000 in
fees was paid to “others” in connection with the transaction.>”

Subsequent developments

PGH LLC’s interest in the Seneca partnership was liquidated on October 2, 2000, just
over two years after the assets had been contributed to the partnership in September, 1998. After
the liquidation of PGH's LLC interest, the leased assets remained in the partnership. The
partnership was owned by the remaining two partners, the two Bankers Trust affiliates (BT
Leasing and EN-BT Delaware). Thus, Enron no longer had an interest in the leased assets held
by the partnership.

The following diagram depicts the structure of Project Tomas after the liquidation of the
partnership interest of the Enron affiliate, PGH LLC, on October 2, 2000.

50° Estimated Project Fees Paid to Date, 6/4/2001, EC2 000036379. Appendix B, Part I,
contains this document.

198

=== PAGE 227 ===
or ~

,

’ sjesse peseaj =. sassy =

? S.__[P}osaW0d we pomayy A Ante

sanied PIL
paieprosuod qyVO uomq

ee

om
{ pebesens| \ young CD
S. Jo soljojyiod gE} , peenee pect ttt tae pocorn nn ne
or — a - 7S. diyssouneg
" seiqenieoey (uous NY” eat - V
( . Nii pesee)) yesoure Vi Hun OF ‘ uonwodiog }©=9]
‘. aN y 1 paseal) yesoure 1 B }
Ne uowu3 wi 9ye10dJ09 | oN : ,
. 7 a
{esc

ROOT ROOT

1007 ‘TE A9quisseq Jo sv ainjon.4g

for
renuepyuod SBUOT, IlOIg

199

=== PAGE 228 ===
After PGH LLC's interest in Seneca was liquidated in October, 2000, the Seneca
partnership sold 18 of its assets on three dates in December, 2000.°"° The sale price for 11 of
these assets was reported to be equal to the tax basis, due to the basis increase claimed pursuant
to the Tomas transaction. Thus, the Seneca partners (the Bankers Trust affiliates) would have
had no taxable gain to report with respect to these 11 sales. In addition to the sales in 2000, the
Seneca partnership had sold four assets during 1999, at least one at a loss.*!!

Later, in December 2001, Oneida collected on a “large Deutsche Bank receivable.”>!?
Bankers Trust had been acquired by Deutsche Bank, so this receivable may have been the note
receivable from Bankers Trust for $250 million that Oneida entered into in 1998, in the course of
Project Tomas.>!

One of the representations made by PGH described in the Akin, Gump opinion letter was
that PGH intended “that Oneida acquire a substantial portfolio of lease equipment that will
further diversify the Partnership’s portfolio of equipment.”® '4 Tn July 2000, Oneida had acquired
two leased assets.!> These two assets were aircraft, one a Boeing 747 leased to United Airlines,
and the other a McDonnell-Douglas DC-9 leased to Continental Airlines. This acquisition
preceded by a few months the October, 2000, distribution of Oneida’s stock by the Seneca
partnership in liquidation of the partnership interest of Enron's subsidiary, PGH LLC. Towards
the end of 2001, after Oneida had been distributed to PGH, Enron contacted 13 potential
counterparties in connection with disposing of the aircraft. In June, 2002, the sale of the two
commercial aircraft by Oneida for $10.3 million (reduced by approximately $4 million of back

510 December 11, 20 and 21, 2000, as provided in Exhibit XX -- Sales of Leased Assets
by Seneca Leasing Partners, L.P., EC2 000054818. Appendix B, Part VI, contains this
document.

511 The assets sold in by Seneca in 1999 were: Acid Recovery Plant, sold 4/1/99 for
$4,649,500 (though the tax basis was $1,278,230, giving rise to a tax loss); Rail Cars (CSX
1998-1), sold 1/4/99 for $8,908,000; Rail Cars (SOO Line 1989), sold 8/2/99 for $32,198; and
Tank Cars (GATC 86-1), sold 2/12/99 for $13,871. The tax basis for the latter three items was
not stated on Exhibit XX -- Sales of Leased Assets by Seneca Leasing Partners, L.P., EC2
000054818. Appendix B, Part VI, contains this document.

512 Structured Transactions Group, Summaries of Project Earnings and Cash Flows,
November 2001. Appendix B, Part I contains this document.

513 Oneida also held a demand promissory note of Bankers Trust for $21 million, dated
October 2, 2000 (the date PGH LLC's interest in the Seneca partnership was redeemed).
Demand Promissory Note, $21,661,889.67, October 2, 2000, ECx000007876 - ECx000007878.

514 Akin, Gump opinion letter at 10. Appendix C, Part VI, contains this document.

515 Structured Transactions Group, Summaries of Project Earnings and Cash Flows,
November 2001. Appendix B, Part I contains this document.

200

=== PAGE 229 ===
rent and interest due) was approved by Enron.*!® Oneida also acquired a corporate aircraft that
was leased to Enron.*””

Discussion

The result of the series of transactions comprising Project Tomas was that Enron had
disposed tax-free of a portfolio of leased assets that had a built-in gain of $270 million, while the
tax basis of assets that Enron received in exchange (i.e., assets held by Oneida) was not reduced.
Further, the $270 million built-in gain ultimately was not taxed to the Bankers Trust affiliates
that (through the partnership) commenced selling off the portfolio of leased assets.

This permanent tax saving associated with Project Tomas resulted in a significant
financial accounting benefit to Enron. Enron could not immediately utilize some types of tax
benefits, such as increased deductions or losses, as it was already in a loss position with NOL
carryovers. Rather, the permanent tax saving that led to the financial statement benefits from
Project Tomas arose from the fact that the Enron received Oneida’s underlying assets with a high
tax basis without incurring an economic cost (i.e., the recognition of gain on disposed leased
assets).

Sale of the leased assets

Central to the structure of Project Tomas was the use of a partnership as a means of
exchange between Enron and Bankers Trust of the leased assets that Enron disposed of. Several
provisions of present law, designed to prevent the characterization of an otherwise taxable sale as
a tax-free partnership contribution and distribution, are implicated in the transaction.

Receipt of property that the Enron affiliate had contributed to the partnership —Seneca's
distribution of the Oneida stock raises the issue of the potential for gain recognition under the
"seven-year" rule of present law. Under this rule, gain or loss is recognized on a distribution of
partnership property, if a partner contributed property with built-in gain or built-in loss (ie., the
leased assets), and that partner receives a distribution of other property (i.e., stock of a
corporation, Oneida, holding a large note) within seven years of the contribution.”!* If this gain
recognition rule applied in Project Tomas, PGH LLC would be required to include in income the
pre-contribution gain of approximately $270 million on the leased assets when Seneca
distributed the Oneida stock.

The transaction is structured so as to rely on the exception providing that this gain
recognition rule does not apply to a distribution of property that the distributee partner

516 Enron Risk Assessment and Control - Deal Approval Sheet, dated June 26, 2002.
EC2 000038061 - EC2 000038065. Appendix B, Part VI contains this document.

517 Enron Corp. Presentation to Joint Committee on Taxation staff, Washington, D.C.,
June 7, 2002, Appendix at A-8. Appendix B, Part I contains this document.

518 Sec, 737.

201

=== PAGE 230 ===
contributed to the partnership.° 19 However, the present-law exception goes on to provide if the
property distributed is an interest in an entity (e.g., corporate stock), the exception from gain
recognition does not apply to the extent the value of the interest is attributable to property
contributed to the entity after the entity was contributed to the partnership. Although the Akin,
Gump opinion letter refers to several examples in the regulations in which partnership
distributions of stock were taxed to the extent of the value added to a corporation after its stock is
contributed to the partnership, the opinion letter does not apply this notion to Seneca's
distribution of the Oneida stock. The Akin, Gump opinion letter does not address the point that
the $250 million in value was contributed by PGH to Oneida less than two months before the
Oneida stock was contributed to the partnership, nor that Enron paid $250 million to Oneida in
satisfaction of its note on the same day, September 15, that the Oneida stock was contributed to
the partnership. Whether there should be a link between these events as part of an overall
planned transaction is not addressed.

Disguised sale treatment.—The tax opinion letter does not discuss whether the
contribution of leased assets and the distribution of Oneida stock, taken together, should be
characterized as a disguised sale.”° The Akin, Gump opinion letter refers to the distribution of
the Oneida stock hypothetically, "in the event that PGH exercises the retirement right."
Nevertheless, it could be inferred that the transaction was deliberately structured to attempt to
avoid the disguised sale rules, by ensuring that the partnership distribution does not take place
until two years and two days after the last contribution.

Treasury regulations provide a presumption that a transaction does not amount to a
disguised sale if the transfer of property and the related contribution of property to the
partnership take place more than two years apart.> 22 Under these regulations, such transfers are
presumed not to be a sale "unless the facts and circumstances clearly establish that the transfers
constitute a sale."°~? The two-year presumption in the regulations has two aspects. First, if the
contributing and distributing transfers are made within two years, there is presumed to be a sale,
unless the facts and circumstances clearly establish there is not a sale. Disclosure to the IRS is
required.” Second, if the contributing and distributing transfers are made more than two years

519 Sec, 737(d). Akin, Gump opinion letter at 33-34. Appendix C, Part VI contains this
document.

520 The tax opinion does discuss whether the partnership's taking the leased assets subject
to $170 million of nonrecourse debt, and the partnership's assumption of $250 million of
recourse debt, constitute disguised sales of all or part of the leased assets or the Oneida stock
PGH contributed to the partnership. Based on a technical analysis applying debt proceeds
tracing rules, the opinion concludes that neither constitutes a disguised sale. Akin, Gump opinion
letter at 26. Appendix C, Part VI contains this document.

521 Akin, Gump opinion letter at 31. Appendix C, Part VI contains this document.
522 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.707-3(d).

523 Id.

202

=== PAGE 231 ===
apart, the transfers are presumed not to be a sale, unless the facts and circumstances clearly
establish that the transfers constitute a sale.*”* No disclosure is required.

Structuring a transaction so that the partnership contribution and distribution are two
years and two days apart, as in the case of Project Tomas, may be a fact indicating that a sale
should be presumed. Further, the fact that PHG LLC had a "retirement right" under the
partnership agreement, permitting it to compel the partnership to liquidate its interest in the
partnership after two years, may be a fact indicating that PGH LLC bore very little risk during
the two-year period and that it effectively was disposing of the leased assets despite its retention
of a 95-percent interest in the partnership during the two-year period. For the IRS to administer
this determination based facts and circumstances may be difficult, however, without any
requirement of disclosure in the case of transfers more than two years apart.

Partnership anti-abuse rules.The partnership anti-abuse regulations state that if a
partnership is formed or availed of in connection with a transaction a principal purpose of which
is to reduce substantially the present value of the partners’ aggregate Federal tax liability in a
manner that is inconsistent with the intent of subchapter K (the tax rules governing partnerships),
the Commissioner can recast the transaction for Federal tax purposes to achieve tax results that
are consistent with the intent of subchapter K.” The opinion letter concludes that this rule
should not result in recasting the transaction to provide that the Oneida stock was never
contributed to the partnership, because PGH LLC has a low basis in the Oneida stock upon its
distribution. However, the fact that PGH LLC had easy access to the high-basis, high-value
assets Oneida held through the simple expedient of liquidating Oneida®”’ cannot be dismissed as
irrelevant to the rules of partnership taxation, -”® as it was available to achieve the tax savings that
were central to Project Tomas. The use of a partnership to achieve the tax-free disposition of
built-in gain assets should be considered inconsistent with the intent of subchapter K, within the
meaning of these regulations.

Tax legislation over the past two decades has included several provisions intended to
prevent the use of partnerships as a vehicle to disguise sales of assets as tax-free transactions. In
1984, Congress enacted the rule providing that if there is a transfer of money or other property

54 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.707-3(c).
35 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.707-3(d).
526 Treas, Reg. sec. 1.701-2(b).

527 Sec, 332, discussed in the Akin, Gump opinion letter at 48. Appendix C, Part VI
contains this document.

528 This argument is made in the Akin, Gump opinion letter at 48. Appendix C, Part VI
contains this document. Partnership tax legislation enacted in 1999, before the distribution of
Oneida stock was consummated, would have applied to this transaction and required that the
basis of Oneida's assets be reduced, except for a transition rule providing a two-year window for
distributions from existing partnerships. See Pub. L. No. 106-170, section 538(a) (December 17,
1999), enacting section 732(f).

203

=== PAGE 232 ===
by a partner to a partnership and there is a related transfer of money or other property by the
partnership to such partner, the two transfers (when viewed together) may be properly
characterized as a sale or exchange of property and will therefore be treated as such. In 1989 and
1992, Congress added rules requiring gain recognition with respect to appreciated property
contributed to a partnership in the event that distributions (either of the contributed property to a
noncontributing partner, or of other property to the contributing partner) are made within seven
years of the contribution.” Though it postdates the initiation of Project Tomas, in 1999,
Congress enacted rules providing that the basis of a corporation's assets is reduced to parallel the
reduction in the basis of the Cae stock when it is distributed to a partner with a low
basis in its partnership interest. 3° The enactment of these rules indicates a concern over the use
of partnerships to transfer property among persons in a manner that avoids tax that would be due
on sale of the property. Project Tomas' use of partnership rules for a tax-free disposition of the
leased assets owned by Enron affiliates to the Bankers Trust affiliates, who remained as partners

after the Enron affiliate retired from the partnership, contravenes the intent of this legislation in
subchapter K.

Use of debt

In the Project Tomas transaction, the basis increase to the leased assets arose from recent
debt incurred by an Enron affiliate and guaranteed by Enron. Whether this debt had real
economic substance apart from its use to facilitate tax benefits in the transaction could be
questioned. This debt was cycled through Oneida, assumed by the partnexship and was paid off
by the partnership within two months of when the debt was incurred. As the proceeds of the debt
were passed from one party to the transaction to another, a debt obligation of Bankers Trust to
Oneida was created that later may have served as Bankers Trust's "payment" to Enron in the
"sale" of the leased assets. The purpose, function, and economic substance of debt whose
proceeds are rapidly cycled through parties to a complex transaction warrant close. examination.

Business purpose

Scrutiny of Project Tomas as a whole, rather than as numerous separate pieces of a
complex series of transactions, gives a different picture of the goal of the transaction. While the
tax opinion concluded that utilizing the lease management expertise of Bankers Trust was an
appropriate business purpose for the transaction, it also concluded that the expectation of
financial accounting benefits constituted a business purpose. 31 The tax benefits with respect to a
transaction that satisfies the literal requirements of a particular tax provision may not be
respected if the transaction fails the statutory rules and judicial doctrines (such as business
purpose and economic substance) that are often applied to evaluate the purported tax benefits in

529 Secs. 704(c)(1)(B) and 737.
530 Sec. 732(f).

531 Akin, Gump opinion letter at 7. Appendix C, Part VI contains this document.

204

=== PAGE 233 ===
tax-motivated transactions. Therefore, any analysis of whether the tax benefits in Project Tomas
would be respected must take into account the applicability of these doctrines.°?

Duplication of tax basis of assets

The opinion letter for Project Tomas did not address the issue of whether the basis of
Oneida’s assets should be reduced to parallel the reduction in the basis of the Oneida stock when
it was distributed to a partner with a low basis in its partnership interest. The provision that
would require such a reduction in the basis of Oneida’s assets was not enacted until 1999.34
This provision was designed to prevent taxpayers from nullifying the downward basis adjustment
to property distributed by a partnership to a corporate partner with a low basis in its partnership
interest. If the property distributed to a corporate partner is corporate stock, then a subsequent
liquidation of the corporation so distributed could nullify the required adjustment to the stock
basis, if the basis of the distributed corporation’s assets is not also reduced.

Enron was made aware of the likelihood of legislative change in this area as Project
Tomas was being planned. The December 11, 1997, letter from Arthur Andersen to Enron
setting forth an early version of the Project Tomas transaction describes this technique, and notes
that among the possible risks of doing such a transaction would be the risk that Congress would
change the rule, identifying it as “‘a possible target for legislative change.”® 35 The letter
concluded, “[bJecause of the substantial benefits this product provides, and the possibility of
legislative action, you should be advised to utilize the technique now, as its shelf life may be

532 Ror detailed information on the present law rules and judicial doctrines applicable to
tax motivated transactions and related recommendations and developments, see e.g., Joint
Committee on Taxation, Background and Present Law Relating to Tax Shelters (JCX-19-02),
March 19, 2002; Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest
Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998 (including provisions relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (JCS-3-99), July
22, 1999; Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9017) to section 6011 (October 22, 2002);
Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9018) to section 6012 (October 22, 2002); Joint
Committee on Taxation, Description of the "CARE Act of 2003," (JCX-04-03), February 3, 2003;
Symposium: Business Purpose, Economic Substance and Corporate Tax Shelters, 54 SMU L.
Rev. 1 (2001).

533 The opinion letter did refer to possible legislation, but concludes that Congress "has
chosen not to revise the Code in such a fashion." Akin, Gump opinion letter at 48. The
provision was enacted on December 17, 1999 (Pub. L. No. 106-170).

534 Sec. 732(f). In the case of a partnership already in existence on July 14, 1999, the
rule applied to distributions after June 30, 2001. The distribution of the Oneida stock by the
Seneca partnership took place on October 2, 2000.

535 Letter from Robert P. Palmquist of Arthur Andersen to David Maxey of Enron Corp.,

dated December, 11, 1997, EC2 000038050 — EC2 000038052. Appendix B, Part VI contains
this document.

205

=== PAGE 234 ===
limited.”°*° The assets of the distributed corporation, Oneida, consisted principally of a note
from Bankers Trust.’ If the basis of the note had been reduced, Enron affiliates would have
been subject to tax on the gain when the notes were collected or when Oneida was liquidated.

In enacting the downward basis adjustment rule>** in 1999, Congress directly addressed
the type of basis duplication that occurred in the Tomas transaction. Had the downward basis
adjustment rule applied to the Tomas transaction, Enron would not have been able to take the
position that the transfer of the portfolio of leased assets to the Bankers Trust affiliates that
remained as Seneca partners would result ultimately in no tax to Enron or its affiliates. Gain
would have resulted from liquidation of Oneida or sale or other disposition of the assets held by
Oneida. Project Tomas was the only transaction of this type in which Enron engaged.

Recommendations

To dispose of the leased assets with a stepped-up basis without incurring tax, Enron
formed a partnership with Bankers Trust, which in essence served as an accommodation party in
the transaction. Without a willing though unrelated third party to hold the leased assets through
a partnership for at least two years before selling them off, the tax savings and financial
statement benefits claimed through the use of this structure would not have been possible. Use
of accommodation parties to achieve results under tax rules that contemplate parties with adverse
interests can give rise to unintended results. The Joint Committee staff recommends that use of
accommodation parties under the tax rules be addressed.

The Joint Committee staff recommends that the period for which disclosure is required
under the disguised sale regulations should be extended beyond two years, and a more detailed
disclosure of the source of permanent book-tax differences should be required. Congress has
repeatedly enacted legislation to limit the utility of partnerships as vehicles for the tax-free
disposition of assets. However, enforcement some of these rules, especially those involving a
facts and circumstances determination, may be difficult without adequate disclosure of the
transactions to the IRS. For example, extending the disclosure requirement under the disguised
sale rules to seven years, the period applicable to contributions and distributions under the pre-
contribution gain rules,*’ could make a facts and circumstances determination by the IRS both
more likely to occur and easier for the IRS to administer. Despite the possible recordkeeping
burden it might impose on taxpayers, a longer disclosure period would facilitate examination of
tax motivated transactions without impeding legitimate joint ventures.

For the IRS to identify this transaction on Enron's voluminous tax return may be difficult
without specific signposts pointing to it, because the high basis in Oneida's assets would be

536 Iq.

537 Oneida also acquired two commercial aircraft, which it sold in 2002, and a corporate
jet leased to Enron.

538. Sec, 732(f).

539 Secs. 704(c)(1)(B) and 737.

206

=== PAGE 235 ===
recovered primarily as depreciation deductions over time, or as the absence of gain recognition
on receipt of payment on a note Oneida held. As a corollary to increased disclosure of
contributions to and distributions from partnerships, a more detailed or earlier disclosure to the
IRS of the source of permanent book-tax differences could facilitate the discovery of
questionable transactions on audit.

207

=== PAGE 236 ===
3. Project Condor

Background

Brief overview
Project Condor™ was structured to generate approximately $930 million of Federal
income tax deductions without incurring any economic outlay. In addition, because there was no
corresponding financial statement expense, the tax savings associated with these deductions were
anticipated to generate approximately $330 million after-tax financial statement income. Enron
intended to report the $330 million of financial statement income over the anticipated 16-year
life of the structure, whereas the $930 million of Federal income tax deductions were not
anticipated to be available to offset Enron’s taxable income until beginning in 2015.

The structure involved the use of an existing partnership, Whitewing Associates, LP
(‘“Whitewing LP”), between Enron Corp. and an outside investor (the “Osprey Invesors”) that
held Enron Corp. preferred stock.**! In 1999, purportedly in connection with a restructuring of
the partnership, Houston Pipe Line Company (“HPL”), a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron
Corp., contributed natural gas pipelines and related storage facilities (the “Bammel Assets”) with
a fair market value of approximately $930 million and minimal tax basis’? to Whitewing in
return for a preferred partnership interest. The contributed assets were immediately leased back
to HPL for a period of 18 years.

Because the fair market value of the Bammel Assets was different than their adjusted tax
basis, the partnership tax rules operate to specially allocate the taxable income of the partnership
to take into account the tax consequences of this disparity (the “pre-contribution gain”)?
Enron planned to use these rules to allocate $930 million of deductions to Enron Corp. and to
allocate $930 million of income to HPL over a 16-year period. Because Enron Corp. and HPL
were both members of the Enron consolidated group, the allocation and the offsetting allocation,
in essence, equalized so as not to create any additional tax liability for the consolidated group.
However, under the partnership tax rules, the special allocation of income and deductions results

5° The information regarding Project Condor was obtained from Joint Committee staff
interviews of Robert J. Hermann, R. Davis Maxey, James A. Ginty, and Anne Marie Tiller, as
well as from documents and information provided by Enron Corp. and the Internal Revenue
Service.

“4! The primary purpose of the original transaction between Enron and the Osprey
investors had been to convert debt to equity. EC2 000037507.

5 Enron reported that the assets had $31 million of tax basis and a fair market value of
$930 million.

543 Sec. 704(c).

208

=== PAGE 237 ===
in a reduction of Enron Corp.’s tax basis in its partnership interest to zero’ and an increase in
HPL/’s tax basis in its partnership interest from zero to $930 million.

The strategy anticipated distributing the Bammel Assets back to HPL in redemption of its
Whitewing preferred partnership interest after 16 years. Under the partnership tax rules, HPL
would ascribe its partnership tax basis to the Bammel Assets. Thus, the tax basis would be
“stepped-up” from zero to $930 million and HPL could begin to depreciate the Bammel Assets
for Federal income tax purposes. The Enron preferred stock held by the partnership would be
“stepped-down” by a corresponding amount; however, Enron Corp. could use one of several
strategies to avoid recognizing any taxable gain with respect to such stock.

Reported tax and financial statement effects

Project Condor generated approximately $88 million in net earnings for financial
reporting purposes through the third quarter of 2001.°4° Project Condor had no impact on
Enron’s tax return through 2001°”” other than the deduction of approximately $2 million of
transaction costs.°“8

Development of Project Condor

The development of the tax aspects of Project Condor began as early as December of
1998.5 Correspondence between Deloitte & Touche LLP (“Deloitte & Touche”), and Mr.
Maxey and other Enron tax personnel indicate that during the early months of 1999 various

544 The $930 million of deductions would have exceeded Enron Corp.’s tax basis, thus
resulting in some deductions being suspended under sec. 704(d). However, the structure
envisioned Enron Corp. purchasing the interest of the Osprey Investors or contributing cash to
alleviate this problem.

545 Sec. 705.

546 Tn December 2001, Enron recorded an $84.1 million financial accounting charge in
order to place a valuation reserve against the previously reported earnings. The Project Condor
materials in Appendix B contain an opinion letter to Chase Securities, Inc. from Arthur Andersen
regarding the the financial accounting implications of a transaction that mirrors Project Condor.
Enron indicated that it was unclear why Chase Securities, Inc. received this opinion or why they
sent it to Enron. Presumably, that Chase was marketing or engaging a transaction similar to

Project Condor and was interested in ascertaining the accounting benefits of such transaction.
EC2 000037515 - EC2 000037520.

547 The approximately $930 million of tax deductions to be generated by Project Condor
were projected to be available beginning in 2015.

548 Information obtained from a summary discussion of Project Condor. EC2
000037455. Enron stated it was amortizing the transaction costs over a three-year period.

549 Structured Transactions Group Summary Nov. 2001 - Project Condor.

209

=== PAGE 238 ===
models were developed to evaluate the benefits to Enron of engaging in the tax strategy.” The
models used differing assumptions as to assets contributed, the tax basis of the assets
contributed, and residual value of the contributed property.

In April 1999, a draft presentation was prepared for Project Condor providing a broad
overview of the transaction structure, financial accounting impacts, the tax benefits of the
transaction, and the risks of the transaction and mitigating factors.°°! The presentation materials
identified the following transaction risks (1) the need for a business purpose, (2) a fiscal year
2000 budget proposal that would tighten the standards applicable to corporate tax shelters and
basis shifting transactions, and (3) a general risk of law change. The primary mitigating factors
listed were that (1) the transaction would occur as part of an overall restructuring of an existing
partnership, (2) the budget proposals were not expected to receive Congressional support and
could be structured around, and (3) the transaction could be unwound at any time and the
complications on an “unwind” are minimized since the transaction occurs mainly between two
Enron entities. A subsequent presentation document indicated that another mitigating factor was
that the audit risk is very low because no position is taken on Enron’s consolidated tax return
until assets are distributed from the Whitewing structure (anticipated to be 2015).>>

The evaluation of the proposed transaction continued into the summer months and on
August 20, 1999, an engagement letter between Enron and Deloitte & Touche was signed.°°?
The agreement provided that Deloitte & Touche would advise Enron on structuring a preferred
return partnership interest to be issued out of an existing entity.

At a special meeting of the Board of Directors of Enron on September 17, 1999, the
Board of Directors was presented with a broad overview of the proposed restructuring of the
Whitewing partnership, including the redemption of Whitewing’s existing Enron preferred stock
in exchange for a new class of Enron preferred stock and the contribution of merchant assets to
the Whitewing structure. Following the presentation, the Board of Directors approved a
resolution authorizing Enron to undertake the transactions involved in the refinancing of
approximately $1 billion of mandatory convertible preferred stock of Enron.

550 4 memo from Steven E. Klig of Deloitte & Touche to Mr. Maxey dated February 27,
1999 provided a summary of various alternatives and detailed schedules of the implications of

these alternatives for the anticipated sixteen year period of the structure. EC2 000037456 - EC2
000037481.

551 There is no indication of who prepared or received copies of the presentation
materials. The Project Condor materials in Appendix B contain the presentation materials. EC2
000037482 - EC2 000037493.

552 Discussion materials for Project Condor dated November 9, 1999. EC2 000037500.

553 Richard J. Causey on behalf of Enron and Stephen E. Klig on behalf of Deloitte &
Touche signed the agreement.

210

=== PAGE 239 ===
Enron’s stated business purpose for contributing the Bammel Assets to the Whitewing LP
structure was to provide enhanced collateral to support the Osprey Investors investment, thereby
reducing the overall financing cost to Enron.

Implementation of Project Condor

HPL Asset Holdings LP (“HPL Asset Holdings”), a Delaware limited partnership, was
formed on November 9, 1999. On November 10, 1999, HPL and Enron Corp.>* contributed
property to HPL Asset Holdings in return for partnership interests. HPL transferred the Bammel
Assets” to HPL Asset Holdings in return for a 99.89 percent limited partner interest and a 0.01
percent general partner interest.°°° Enron contributed $1 million to HPL Asset Holding in return
for a 0.10 percent limited partnership. The Bammel Assets contributed by HPL had adjusted tax
basis of approximately $30 million and an ascribed fair market value of $930 million. The
Bammel Assets were immediately leased back to HPL for a period of 18 years.° 37

Immediately following the contribution, HPL assigned its general partnership interest to
Blue Heron I LLC, (“Blue Heron”) a single member limited liability company owned by
Whitewing LP, in exchange for an interest in Blue Heron. Immediately thereafter HPL assigned
its interest in Blue Heron and its 99.89 percent limited partnership interest in HPL Asset Holding
to Whitewing LP in exchange for a preferred partnership interest in Whitewing LP. HPL,
immediately thereafter, contributed its limited partnership interest in Whitewing LP to

Kingfisher I LLC (“Kingfisher”), a single member Delaware limited liability company owned by
HPL.**

554 Enron’s interest was legally held by Peregrine I LLC. Because Enron Corp. elected
to disregard Peregrine I LLC for Federal income tax purposes, Enron Corp. is considered the

owner for Federal income tax purposes. As such, this Report reflects Enron Corp. as the owner
rather than Peregrine.

555 The Bammel Assets consisted of an underground natural gas storage reservoir and
related facilities, the storage facility equipment, and the Houston Loop and Texas City Loop
natural gas pipelines and related assets.

556 Information contained in Agreement of Limited Partnership of HPL Asset Holdings.
Ecx000002059.

557 The lease agreement between HPL Asset Holding and HPL required the parties to
obtain an appraisal to determine the fair value and residual value of the Bammel Assets for

purposes of computing the appropriate base rent between the related parties. This was to be
performed by December 31, 1999. The appraisal was never done.

558 Because HPL elected to disregard Kingfisher I LLC for Federal income tax purposes,

HPL is considered the owner of the Whitewing partnership interest for Federal income tax
purposes. As such, this Report reflects HPL as the owner rather than Kingfisher I LLC.

211

=== PAGE 240 ===
As a result of the aforementioned steps, Whitewing LP owned a 99.89 percent limited
partnership interest and 0.01 percent general partnership interest in HPL Asset Holdings*? and
Enron Corp. owned a 0.10 percent limited partnership interest in HPL Asset Holdings. In
addition, the Osprey Investors and HPL owned preferred partnership interests of Whitewing LP
with Enron Corp. and a partnership between Enron Corp. and the Osprey Investors owning the
remaining interests in Whitewing LP.

Because the Bammel Assets contributed by HPL had a minimal tax basis and an ascribed
value of $930 million at the time of contribution, the assets were subject to the tax allocation
rules of section 704(c). HPL Asset Holdings elected to use the remedial allocation method under
section 704(c) with respect to the Bammel Assets.°° For purposes of section 704(c), HPL Asset

Holdings elected to recover the Bammel Assets using the 150-percent declining balance method
over 15 years.” 61

The amended Whitewing LP partnership agreement contains special provisions that
allocate 100 percent of the depreciation deductions associated with the Bammel Assets to Enron
and 100 percent of the income, gains, deductions and losses associated with the Bammel Assets
to Enron and HPL.*™ Thus, the allocations required under section 704(c) and any income or loss
in the Bammel Assets would impact only Enron and its affiliate, HPL. The special partnership
provision, in connection with the section 704(c) allocation rules, would cause Enron Corp.’s tax
basis in Whitewing to decrease by $930 million and HPL’s to increase by $930 million over the
recovery period of the Bammel Assets.

55° Whitewing’s interest in HPL Asset Holdings was legally owned by Blue Heron.
However, Whitewing disregarded Blue Heron for Federal income tax purposes. Thus,
Whitewing is considered the owner of the HPL Asset Holding partnership interest for Federal
income tax purposes. As such, this Report reflects Whitewing as the owner rather than Blue
Heron.

560 As a result of HPL contributing its partnership interests in HPL Asset Holdings to
Whitewing LP (and Blue Heron), the regulations under section 704(c) require that Whitewing LP
allocate its distributive share of HPL Asset Holdings income and loss with respect to the section
704(c) property in a manner that takes into account the contributing partner’s remaining built-in
gain or loss. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.704-3(a)(9).

561 Asset Class 46.0 ascribed a recovery period of 15 years to assets used in the
commercial and contract carrying of natural gas by means of pipes. See Rev. Proc. 87-56,1987-2
CB 674 (as clarified and modified by Rev. Proc. 88-22, 1988-1 CB 785).

5© The Osprey Investors had no economic interest in the income, gain, loss, or deduction
associated with the Bammel Assets. E 28035 - E28036.

212

=== PAGE 241 ===
The strategy envisioned distributing the Bammel Assets back to HPL after 16 years, in
redemption of HPL’s partnership interest.°° Under the partnership tax rules, HPL would
ascribe its partnership tax basis (as increased through the partnership allocations) to the
distributed pipeline. Thus, it was anticipated that the tax basis in the Bammel Assets would be
“stepped-up” from approximately zero to $930 million. Whitewing, if a section 754 election
were made, would be required to decrease the basis of the remaining partnership property by an
offsetting amount. The strategy anticipated that Whitewing’s only asset at such time would be
Enron stock. As such, the Enron stock would be reduced by $930 million. However, Enron
Corp. could avoid recognizing the inherent gain in the Enron stock either through section 1032 or
by other tax strategies. Thus, Project Condor would result in an additional $930 million of tax
deductions without any economic outlay.

The diagram on the next page depicts the Project Condor structure.

56 Although the Whitewing partners generally had no right to a return of capital
contributions, a special provision of the partnership agreement permitted HPL to request a
distribuion of the Bammel Assets to the extent of its capital account. E28035

213

=== PAGE 242 ===
a Qunoury SurpunjzaAQ)
/ soMuNoag 1qaq UOIUA VOLT STIS
{ SION YOU VOLT gos
\ yooig paurajard a1qnuaauoy
SJ uorug Gunoury 08,4) UOTTIG O'1$

Juawisaidy JUAUIZTIES aeYsS

jenuapyuoo

UOTIIIW OGL$ < Sassoy/suted “deo Jo
ul+ YONNGINsIP paxrajard

WOHT!G 7'C$

a ssjossy ‘\
\ jourureg !

-

aoa |%001

ysaloqul 7]
asazoqur g7] paiayad
4SoIO}UT

dT %I0

yseo
uomg 297 / 10d %OS

100Z ‘TE Aequiadaqj Jo se anyon.
JIopuo, y2fo1g

sjassy
dtysrounreg

uoneodiog

ysNIL, popresaisiqourlg

sored PAL
juounsaauy pomayy Auinby
porepljosuod dyvVO volug

214

=== PAGE 243 ===
Role of outside advisors

Deloitte & Touche promoted the strategy and was the tax advisor on the structuring of the
preferred partnership structure. In addition, Vinson & Elkins was engaged to provide tax advice
on the transaction including a tax opinion regarding the Federal income tax treatment of certain
partnership events and activities.

Deloitte & Touche was paid $8.325 million for its services. Vinson & Elkins was paid
$1.2 million for its services.°°°

Subsequent developments

In June 2001, Enron Corp. sold HPL stock to American Electric Power (“AEP”), an
unrelated party. In connection with the sale, HPL transferred its leasehold interest in the
Bammel Assets and its interest in Whitewing LP to BAM Lease Company, a wholly owned
subsidiary of Enron. In addition, BAM Leasing Company subleased the Bammel Assets to AEP
for 30 years with a option to extend for an additional 20 years.

Discussion

Project Condor was specifically structured to take advantage of the interaction between
the partnership allocation and basis rules and section 1032, which provides for the
nonrecognition of gain or loss to a corporation on the receipt of money or other property in
exchange for stock of such corporation. Described in its simplest form, Project Condor purports
to permit Enron to shift approximately $930 million of tax basis from Enron’s own stock to the
Bammel Assets owned by HPL, a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron. Under the strategy
devised in Project Condor, the benefits of the increased tax basis would inure over a 16-year
period and would not be available for use on Enron’s consolidated tax return until the end of that

564 Engagement letter between Deloitte & Touche and Ernon Corp. dated August 20,
1999. EC2 000037496 - EC2000037498.

565 J etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated Jan 13, 2003, answer 57.

566 As mentioned above, Enron did not obtain an appraisal of the Bammel Assets in 1999
as required under the original lease agreement. Enron ascribed a value of approximately $930
million to the Bammel Assets for purposes of section 704(c). In 2001, in connection with the
sale of HPL to AEP, an internal Ernon memorandum valued the Bammel Assets at $460 million.
EC2 000054384. Because no independent appraisal was done in 1999, it is not clear whether
the value of the Bammel Assets declined by 50 percent between 1999 and 2001 or whether the
original valuation ascribed by Enron was grossly overstated to maximize the tax benefits of
Project Condor.

215

=== PAGE 244 ===
period (2015). However, and potentially more important to Enron, the strategy permitted Enron
to begin to record the benefits immediately for financial accounting purposes. 6

Business purpose

A determination of whether Enron should be entitled to the tax benefits Project Condor
purported to provide necessarily involves an analysis regarding Enron’s satisfaction of the literal
requirements of the tax rules as well as the rules and judicial doctrines (such as business purpose
and economic substance) that are often applied to evaluate claimed tax benefits in tax-avoidance
transactions.°™

Partnership allocations

Project Condor’s strategy involved the use of the remedial allocation method under
section 704(c) to allocate deductions to Enron while allocating an offsetting amount of income to
HPL. As described in more detail in present law, these rules were enacted in order to prevent the
shifting of tax consequences among partners with respect to pre-contribution gain or loss. Under
these rules, the required allocations generally have significant tax implications to the partners.°?
However, when related parties are involved, the shifting of income and deductions among the
partners, which would normally have significant economic implications to each partner, is no
longer aconcern. Thus, a taxpayer is potentially able to use the required allocation rules to shift
tax attributes among related entities to its advantage without any economic implications to the
taxpayer.

567 This occurs in certain situations because Statement of Financial Accounting Standard
109 in some cases permits the recognition of financial accounting benefits prior to the period in
which the tax benefits are recognized for income tax purposes. See the Background and
Rationale section to this part of the Report, which contains a general explanation of relevant
aspects of Financial Accounting Standard No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes.

568 For detailed information of the present law rules and judicial doctrines applicable to
tax avoidance transactions and related recommendations and developments, see e.g., Joint
Committee on Taxation, Background and Present Law Relating to Tax Shelters (JCX-19-02),
March 19, 2002; Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest
Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998 (including provisions relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (SCS-3-99), July
22, 1999; Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9017) to section 6011 (October 22, 2002);
Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9018) to section 6012 (October 22, 2002); Joint
Committee on Taxation, Description of the "CARE Act of 2003," (JCX-04-03), February 3, 2003;

Symposium: Business Purpose, Economic Substance and Corporate Tax Shelters, 54 SMU L.
Rev. 1 (2001).

5 Tn many situations, the allocation method chosen by the partnership to account for the
pre-contribution gain can be one of most contentious tax negotiations between the partners
because of the tax implications to the respective partners.

216

=== PAGE 245 ===
Highlighting that the allocation had no economic impact on the Enron partners, the
Whitewing partnership agreement contained a special provision that allocated 100 percent of the
depreciation deductions associated with the Bammel Assets to Enron (instead of its ratable
ownership share). Normally, such a special allocation would be detrimental to the contributing
partner as it would result in additional taxable income to such partner, but because both Enron
and HPL were part of the Enron consolidated tax return, the allocations had no impact on the
consolidated group’s taxable income.

The use of the remedial allocation method and the special provision allocating 100
percent of the Bammel Assets depreciation to Enron Corp. facilitated the maximization of the
purported tax benefits of the structure. Without these items Enron Corp. and HPL would have
been able to effectuate a basis shift between themselves of only a portion of the $930 million
value.”’”? However, through these items, a basis shift of the full $930 million value of the
Bammel Assets could be accomplished at no economic cost and the exit strategy could be
undertaken.

Partnership basis rules on liquidating distributions and section 754 adjustments

The strategy anticipated distributing the Bammel Assets back to HPL in redemption of its
Whitewing preferred partnership interest after 16 years. Under the partnership rules, HPL
ascribes its partnership tax basis to the Bammel Assets. Thus, the tax basis would be “stepped-
up” from zero to $930 million and HPL could begin to depreciate the Bammel Assets for Federal
income tax purposes. It was anticipated that the only remaining asset of Whitewing would be
Enron stock, and that the stock would be “stepped-down’” by a corresponding amount. However,
Enron Corp. could use one of several strategies to avoid recognizing any taxable gain with
respect to such stock under section 1032. The permanent exclusion of this gain allowed Enron to
report a financial accounting benefit with respect to the transactions.>”!

Application of May Company regulations

If finalized, it is possible that the transaction would be subject to proposed regulations
regarding gain recognition upon certain partnership transactions involving a partner’s own
stock.” Specifically, under the proposed regulations, the contribution of the Bammel Assets to
the Whitewing partnership (which held Enron preferred stock) may have resulted in a deemed

57 The exact amount would depend on the partnership ownership percentages and
operations.

571 Tf the partnerships held assets other than Enron stock, then instead of a permanent
exclusion of gain, the transactions would have generated only a deferral of gain (because Enron
eventually would pay tax with respect to the assets) with no resulting financial statement income.

5? Prop. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.337(d)-3(d). These regulations apply to transactions or

distributions occurring after March 9, 1989. See also, Notice 89-37, 1989-1 C.B. 679, and
Notice 93-2, 1993-2 C.B. 292 (effective date of proposed regulations under sec. 1.337(d)-3).

217

=== PAGE 246 ===
redemption requiring gain recognition by HPL.*” In addition, if Whitewing distributed to Enron
its own stock (or the stock of an affiliate), the distribution would be characterized as a
redemption (or an exchange of the stock of the partner) for a portion of the partner’s partnership
interest with a value equal to the stock distributed. 574 Thus, gain could be recognized on that
portion of the distribution.-”°

In evaluating the risks of the proposed regulations to Project Condor, Enron stated that, in
off-the-record discussions, Treasury Department personnel had indicated that the regulation will
never be finalized, and even if finalized, the regulation would take a different form. 6 Because
the regulations have not been finalized, they are not authoritative at this time.”

Application of partnership allocation anti-abuse rule

The section 704(c) regulations upon which Enron relied to trigger the basis shift state that
generally, the remedial allocation method is a reasonable method for allocating pre-contribution
gain”? However, an anti-abuse rule states that an allocation method is not reasonable if the
contribution of the property and the corresponding allocation of tax items with respect to the
property are made with a view to shifting the tax consequences of built-in-gain or loss among
partners in a manner that substantially reduces the present value of the partners’ aggregate tax
liability”? Although the allocations between the Enron entities offset for tax purposes,
considering that Enron had prearranged all of the steps to cause a substantial reduction of its tax

573 Because of the special allocations, distribution rights, and Enron Corp. being a
partner, it is not certain that HPL would be considered to have exchanged appreciated property
for an interest in Enron stock.

ou Prop. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.337(d)-3(e).

575 Id.

576 The Project Condor materials in Appendix B contain part of an interoffice
memorandum regarding the proposed restructuring of Whitewing LP from Anne Marie Tiller
dated February 26, 1999. EC 000850731- EC00850735. See also, Project Condor materials in
Appendix B, document titled “Nighthawk Restructuring Summary.” EC 000850800 - EC
000850801. Enron called the overall restructuring of which Project Condor was a part Project
Nighthawk and Project Daybreak.

577 For the legal authority attributed a proposed regulation, see Freesen v. Commissioner,
84 TC 920 (1985) (proposed regulations carry no more weight than position or argument
advanced by party on brief), Estate of H.A. True, Jr. v. Commissioner, 82 T.C. Memo 2001-167
(“we [courts] accord them [proposed regulations] no more weight than a litigating position’).

58 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.704-3(a)(1).

57 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.704-3(a)(10).

218

=== PAGE 247 ===
liability, and made affirmations that it would complete the steps,” the anti-abuse rule should
apply to preclude the use of the remedial allocation method in this situation.**! If the anti-abuse
rule does not preclude this type of activity, then the meaningfulness of this rule must be
questioned.™®

Application of partnership anti-abuse regulations

Subchapter K contains two anti-abuse rules relating to partnerships.°* These rules state
that if a partnership is formed or availed of in connection with a transaction a principal purpose
of which is to reduce substantially the present value of the partners’ aggregate Federal tax
liability in a manner that is inconsistent with the intent of subchapter K, the Commissioner can
recast the transaction for Federal tax purposes, as appropriate, to achieve tax results that are
consistent with the intent of subchapter K, in light of the applicable statutory and regulatory
provisions and the pertinent facts and circumstances.*

One factor that is potentially indicative of abuse is whether substantially all of the
partners are related. Using the Whitewing partnership superficially provided Enron with an
unrelated partner (the Osprey investors). However, a review of the documents indicates that the

580 Tn order for Enron to record the financial accounting benefits of such transaction it
was required to reasonably represent to its independent auditor that it has a planning strategy
that, without incurring significant cost, would enable it to retire or dispose of the Enron shares
without incurring a tax cost.

ot Treasury Regulation 1.704-3(a)(1) states that an allocation method is not necessarily
unreasonable merely because another allocation method would result in a higher aggregate tax
liability. However, related parties acting in concert should be a situation that warrants the
imposition of the anti-abuse rule. In this situation, had Enron used the traditional allocation
method the tax results it was intending to obtain would not have been available. It is also
possible that the traditional method with curative allocations would not have precluded it from
obtaining the desired results.

582 Interestingly, neither the Vinson & Elkins tax opinion nor any of the tax advice the
Joint Committee staff reviewed from Deloitte & Touche discussed the application or potential
application of the section 704(c) anti-abuse rule. However, Enron internal documentation
indicates that the application of the remedial allocation method should not run afoul of the rule
and, in fact, follows it to the letter. The document indicates that the anti-abuse regulation is not
applicable because in this case, the tax consequences are not being “shifted” but are instead
being allocated to the partner whose contribution of property had the built-in gain. EC
000850646. This reading of the regulation results in the remedial allocation never being subject
to the anti-abuse rule, a result specifically rejected by the Treasury Department in the issuance of
the final regulations (TD 8585, 1995-1 CB 120). The Project Condor materials in Appendix B
contain the internal document in its entirety. EC 000850644- EC 000850647.

583 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.701-2.

584 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.701-2(b).

219

=== PAGE 248 ===
unrelated partner did not share in any of the economic income or loss in the Bammel Assets.
Specifically, any income, gain, loss, or deduction associated with the Bammel Assets was
allocated solely to Enron or HPL. In addition, the partnership agreement contains a special
provision that requires the distribution of Bammel Assets to HPL upon HPL’s request. 85 These
facts reflect that, substantively, these transactions were solely between Enron and its wholly
owned subsidiary HPL.

Another factor that is potentially indicative of abuse is the lack of a business purpose.
Enron's stated business purpose for engaging in the structure was to enhance the collateral of the
Whitewing LP structure to lower it’s financing cost with the Osprey investors. However, the
amended and restated Whitewing LP agreement was completed on September 24, 1999. The
partnership agreement permits, but does not require, Enron to make further capital contributions
to Whitewing. 586 As described above, the Osprey investor had no economic interest in the
income, gain, loss, or deduction with respect to the Bammel Assets. In reality, the reviewed
documents indicate that the Whitewing LP partnership and its financial restructuring were used
to facilitate a transaction that arguably had no business relationship to the overall financial
restructuring.

Recommendations

Partnership allocations between members of the same affiliated group (and, in general,
-‘telated parties) may not have the same economic consequences as allocations between unrelated
partners. As a result, related partners can use the partnership allocation rules inappropriately to
shift basis among assets. Although the Joint Committee staff believes that the partnership
allocation anti-abuse rules should apply to preclude the tax benefits Project Condor purported to
generate, the Joint Committee staff recommends strengthening of the anti-abuse rules relating to
partnership allocations for property contributed to a partnership, especially in the case of partners
that are members of the same consolidated group, to ensure that the allocation rules are not used
to generate unwarranted tax benefits.

In addition, transactions that use partnership tax rules and section 1032 to obtain
unintended tax results appear to continue unabated. The Treasury Department has issued
guidance addressing certain situations in which gain or loss may be improperly created by
adjusting the basis of a partnership interest for partnership income that is not subject to tax under
section 1032, but as with many tax-motivated transactions, it is difficult to keep pace with the
promoters of these ideas. In light of this activity, the Joint Committee staff believes that further
guidance is needed to address the interaction of the partnership basis rules with the corporate
nonrecognition of gain rules under section 1032. Of particular concern is gain being excluded by

585 Absent this special provision, the Whitewing LP partners had no ability to request a
distribution of their capital contributions.

586 The Whitewing partnership agreement permitted Enron or an affiliate to make

additional capital contributions in exchange for additional partnership interests so long as such
interests are subordinate to the Osprey Investors preferred interest in Whitewing.

220

=== PAGE 249 ===
virtue of section 1032 that is attributable to a downward basis adjustment mandated by a section
754 election.

The Joint Committee staff recommends that either (1) section 1032 limit the
nonrecognition of any realized gain allocated to the corporate partner to the extent that the gain is
attributable to an economic benefit accruing to the corporate partner, or (2) that the partnership
basis rules should be altered to preclude an increase in basis to an asset if the offsetting basis
reduction would be allocated to stock of a partner (or related party). For example, if a
partnership sells the stock at a gain and the gain is due not to appreciation in the value of the
stock but rather to a decrease in the basis of the stock (as required by a section 754 election),
then the realized gain is not due to an economic benefit accruing to the partner (i.e., increase in
stock value). Rather, it is simply due to a reduction to the basis of the stock that was offset by an
increase in basis to another asset. Consequently, the corporate partner should not be permitted to
utilize section 1032 to avoid recognition of the realized gain allocated to it (or to have increased
the basis of an asset)

In addition, the Joint Committee staff believes that the proposed regulations under section
337, relating to partnership acquisitions of stock of a corporate partner, would preclude taxpayers
from engaging in these types of transactions. The Joint Committee staff recommends that final
regulations on this subject should be issued expeditiously.

4. Projects Tammy I and Tammy II
Brief overview

Projects Tammy I and Tammy II were structured to generate financial statement benefits
attributable to an increase in tax basis (in excess of book basis) in the Enron South office
building and other depreciable assets. In a simplified version of the transaction, Enron Corp. and
several of its subsidiaries contributed assets with significant unrealized built-in gains to a newly-
formed partnership. Financial institutions provided $500 million of financing to the partnership
in exchange for a preferred interest. Following the formation of the partnership, Enron and all
but one of the Enron partners transferred approximately 95 percent of their partnership interests
to a single Enron affiliate. The partnership then sold built-in gain assets, with the gain (and the
resulting basis increases) allocated almost entirely to the single Enron affiliate -- giving the
single Enron affiliate a high basis in its partnership interest. The partnership was to use the sales
proceeds to: (1) purchase a low value depreciable asset, (2) purchase Enron preferred stock, and
(3) repay the financial institutions.

Ina later year, the partnership would distribute the low value depreciable asset to the
single Enron affiliate in redemption of its partnership interest. The depreciable asset would
inherit the single Enron affiliate’s high basis in its partnership interest. The only remaining asset
in the partnership would be Enron preferred stock. The Enron partners then could implement
exit strategies to avoid the recognition of gain with respect to the Enron preferred stock.

221

=== PAGE 250 ===
Project Tammy I - background”
Reported tax and financial statement effects

Project Tammy I was projected to generate $1.09 billion in Federal income tax
deductions (without any economic outlay) resulting primarily from enhanced depreciation
deductions attributable to the Enron South office building. These deductions were anticipated to
be available to offset Enron’s taxable income beginning in 2007. The tax savings associated
with these deductions would have generated approximately $406.5 million of financial statement
income. The financial statement income would accrue during the years 2001 through 2005.°88

In actuality, Enron did not report a financial statement benefit with respect to Project
Tammy I for year 2001. As to the Federal income tax benefits, Project Tammy I was terminated
prior to their realization. However, the three dispositions by the partnership in year 2001 did
result in the recognition of gain (which was offset by losses from the Enron consolidated group).

Development of Project Tammy I

Deloitte & Touche proposed the idea for Project Tammy I to Enron. Enron held
appreciated non-core business assets that it planned to sell. Enron had sufficient net operating
losses to offset the projected gains from such sales. Project Tammy I was a mechanism that
allowed Enron to shift basis to another asset held by the Enron consolidated group (resulting in
greater future depreciation deductions).

The transaction was the product of collaboration between the Enron tax department and
Deloitte & Touche, Akin Gump, and Vinson & Elkins. Much time was spent on identifying the
proper Enron assets to place in the project structure. In addition, the structure originally
contemplated an intercompany sale of the partnership interests. The structure later was revised
to involve a tax-free transfer of the partnership interests.

On August 7, 2000, the Finance Committee of Enron Corp.’s Board of Directors
approved Project Tammy I for recommendation to the Enron Corp. Board of Directors. At the
Enron Corp. Board of Directors meeting (held later that day), Rebecca C. Carter presented a
report of the Finance Committee’s action, and the Board of Directors approved and ratified
Project Tammy 1.” On May 1, 2001, the Enron Corp. Board of Directors adopted and ratified
all of the actions taken with respect to Project Tammy I and authorized the creation of a new

587 The information regarding Project Tammy I was obtained from Joint Committee staff
interviews of James A. Ginty, Robert J. Hermann, Robert D. Maxey, and Alicia L. Goodrow, as
well as from documents and information provided by Enron and the IRS.

588 The General Background Materials in Appendix B contain the Structured
Transactions Group, Summary of Project Earnings & Cash Flows, November 2001.

58 Agenda item #5(c) of the Meeting of the Finance Committee of the Enron Corp.
Board of Directors, August 7-8, 2000, EC 000043879, 000043966-43972.

222

=== PAGE 251 ===
series of Enron preferred stock in the amount of $1 billion to be sold to a subsidiary of the
partnership.”

Implementation of Project Tammy I

The implementation of Project Tammy I involved several steps that were to be executed
over a period of years. The steps involved: (1) the formation of a partnership, (2) a transfer of
the partnership interests, (3) a sale of the built-in gain assets, and (4) certain post-sale events.

Formation of the partnership.—The initial step in the implementation of Project Tammy I
was the formation of the partnership through which the reallocation of built-in gain would occur.
The partnership, called Enron Finance Partners, LLC (“Enron Finance’’), was formed on July 14,
2000, with three members of the Enron consolidated group being the initial members.’ New
members were admitted to the partnership during October and November 2000.

On November 28, 2000, Enron Finance’s membership interests were reclassified into
Class A Members, Class B Members, and Class C Members. The managing member of the
partnership” *2 owned the Class A Membership interest, the Enron consolidated group members
owned the Class B Membership interests, and Zephyrus LLC (“‘Zephyrus”), through which the
minority interest was held,°”? owned the Class C Membership interest.

In exchange for their membership interests, the members contributed various assets and
had various liabilities assumed by Enron Finance. Zephyrus contributed $500 million in
exchange for its Class C Membership interest.°* The Class B Members contributed several
assets with significant unrealized built-in gain. For example, Enron Corp. contributed 11.5
million shares of EOG Resources, Inc. stock with an agreed fair market value of $485.875

590 Minutes of the Meeting of the Enron Corp. Board of Directors, May 1, 2001, EC
0000498 17-49828.

591 The three members were Smith Street Land Company (“Smith Street”), Enron Capital
Investments Corp., and Enron Global Exploration & Production, Inc. Smith Street was
developing the Enron South office building.

5° Enron Finance Management, LLC, a disregarded entity from its sole owner, Enron,
was the sole manager of Enron Finance.

°3 Zephyrus was a Delaware limited liability company formed on November 17, 2000.
Its initial members were Chase Equipment Leasing, Inc., Bank of America, N.A., BNP Paribas,
and Fleet National Bank. Royal Bank of Scotland subsequently was admitted as a member. The
members contributed to Zephyrus an aggregate of $481.725 million in their capacities as
“lenders” and $18.275 million in their capacities as “certificate purchasers,” for a total of $500
million in minority interest financing.

54 Zephyrus received ten membership units evidencing the Class C Membership interest.

Each Class C unit represented a capital contribution of $50 million. The Class C Membership
interest was to have been redeemed sometime in year 2005.

223

=== PAGE 252 ===
million (subject to a debt of approximately $461.5 million) and a tax basis of approximately
$40.71 million. Another Class B Member executed an option that allowed Enron Finance to
purchase (for $1) the stock of Enron Renewable Energy Corp. with an agreed fair market value
of $550 million (subject to a debt of approximately $524 million) and a tax basis of
approximately $200 million.°”> Another Class B Member contributed all of the outstanding
stock of Enron Oil & Gas India Ltd. with an agreed fair market value of $550 million (subject to
a debt of $523.2 million).>° Other built-in gain assets contributed to Enron Finance included the
outstanding stock of Enron LNG Power (Atlantic) Ltd., with an agreed fair market value of $260
million (subject to a debt of $118.750 million) and a tax basis of $14.283 million, and a
partnership interest in Enron Capital Management III Limited Partnership with an agreed fair

market value of $99.083 million (subject to a debt of $93.634 million) and a tax basis of $21.288
million.”

Collectively, the Class B members (i.e., Enron Corp. and its subsidiaries) contributed
property with a gross value of approximately $1.95 billion (subject to a debt of $1.85 billion) and
an estimated tax basis of $500 million. In each instance, the contributing member remained
liable for the debt that Enron Finance had assumed in connection with the contributions.

Transfers of partnership interests.-The second step of the transaction involved a transfer
of the partnership interests within the Enron consolidated group. In this regard, Enron and all but
one of the Class B members contributed 95 percent of their respective Class B Membership
interests to Enron Capital Investments Corp. (the other Class B Member) in exchange for Enron
Capital Investments common stock.°”* Each contributor remained liable for the debt that Enron
Finance had previously assumed. After the transfers, Enron Capital Investments Corp. owned
more than 98 percent of the Class B Membership interests in Enron Finance, and the other Class
B members (Enron Corp., Smith Street, Enron Global, Enron Caribbean Basin, and Boreas

°°5 The option was intended to transfer tax ownership of the Enron Renewable Energy
Corp. stock to Enron Finance without requiring the approval of the Federal Energy Regulatory

Commission to transfer the stock. Discussion material for Project Tammy, June 30, 2000, EC2
000037666.

59 Enron’s tax basis in the Enron Oil & Gas India Ltd. stock is unclear.

397 Capital contribution schedule for Project Tammy I as of May 30, 2002, EC
000851323.

598 On November 21, 2000, Enron, Smith Street, Enron Global, and Enron Caribbean
Basin LLC contributed their interests to Enron Capital Investments Corp. On December 11,
2000, Boreas Holdings agreed to contribute 95 percent of its Class B Membership interest in
Enron Finance in exchange for Enron Capital Investments Corp. stock with a value of $5.177
million. ECx000005 165-5167.

224

=== PAGE 253 ===
Holdings) collectively owned less than two percent of the Class B Membership interests.°°? The
net value of the transferred Class B Membership interests was $95,302,656.

Sale of built-in gain assets Following the transfers of the Class B Membership interests
to Enron Capital Investments Corp., Enron Finance was to sell the unrealized built-in gain
assets.! Enron Finance, through a lower-tiered partnership,° sold the following assets: (1) the
stock of Enron Oil & Gas India Ltd. for $388 million,? (2) the stock of EOG Resources, Inc. for
approximately $400 million,“ and (3) an interest in an East Coast power plant.

Post-sale events.—Enron Finance was to use the sales proceeds to: (1) purchase the Enron
South office building from Smith Street, (2) purchase newly-issued Enron preferred stock and (3)
redeem the Class C Membership interest held by Zephyrus.°° Thereafter, Enron Finance was to
distribute the Enron South office building to Enron Capital Investment Corp. in liquidation of its
partnership interest, leaving the Enron preferred stock as Enron Finance’s only asset. The
precise exit strategy with respect to the Enron preferred stock was unclear -- one option under

599 BCx000005156.
609 &Cx000005155.

601 As discussed below, this would result in the recognition of the built-in gain (of which
95 percent would have been allocated to Enron Capital Investments Corp., thereby increasing its
tax basis in its partnership interest).

602 Enron Finance contributed the assets to Enron Intermediate Holdings (a disregarded
entity), which, in turn, contributed the assets to Enron Asset Holdings. Enron Asset Holdings
continues to hold the unsold assets.

63 @ revised agreement was signed on January 22, 2002, with a sales price of $350
million. Enron Deal Approval Sheet for EOGIL Divestiture, EC2 000037748-37752.

604 Enron Risk Assessment and Control Deal Approval Sheet for Cerberus (involving the
divestiture of the EOG stock), EC2 000037753-61. The EOG Resources, Inc. stock had already
been monetized for approximately $517.5 million through an arrangement with the Cooperatieve
Centrale Raiffeisen-Boerenleenbank B.A. (“Rabobank”). As part of the arrangement, Enron
North America entered into an equity swap with Rabobank to make up any shortfall between the
$517.5 million and the proceeds from the disposition of the EOG Resources, Inc. stock.

65 Bnron transaction history of Project Tammy I, EC2 000037647.

696 As originally planned, Enron Asset Holdings was to purchase approximately $630
million of Enron Corp. preferred stock in September 2000, using the proceeds from the
monetization of the EOG Resources, Inc. stock. As previously discussed, the Enron Corp. Board
of Directors did not approve the issuance of a new class of Enron Corp. preferred stock until
May 1, 2001. Enron Asset Holdings never purchased the Enron Corp. preferred stock, nor did it
purchase the Enron South office building.

225

=== PAGE 254 ===
consideration was for Enron Finance to distribute the stock to the remaining partners (all
members of the Enron consolidated group) in liquidation of their partnership interests.°””

The diagram on the next page depicts the Project Tammy I structure as of December 31,
2001.

607 Discussion material for Project Tammy I dated June 30, 2000, pgs. EC2 000037662-
37665.

226

=== PAGE 255 ===
syssy <-> eorne

youug C) c ‘

{ SOON H

diysioumg NZ SN a

Aquo drysiaumO xe], ! “tT
uonviodiod (77 ARAL ‘S oom -=5
oO { on \ 7 Sipuy SeD 7B TIOX, eee aa
sonmed PL Ea SS 90 oe” soso { womasoaqes (parson)
Sse-4--- \ SQ _uoyy spaasoig, +” \ ;
pareptjosuod dvWO uolug =] | = ~ po SE ae
a
pusseT dVVOPEL S 1

on SQ Joquiay pauajaid
f S3ION N
( eonbas
S
ane cell JAQUIaIA 20S

aque
wounoD
Burseuew,

worm OOSS aiqeked igop

vont!d 61

Joquiay
Surseuey

ueaqques vomg

Jaquiayl [0S

-diog uorg Jo sareryyVv paumo-Atjou mM J09NIpUy Jo 199M

LOOZ Joquissaqq Jo sv oINjONNS

j Aue y, eloig
peyuapyuod

227

=== PAGE 256 ===
Role of outside advisors

Deloitte & Touche promoted the idea of Project Tammy I to Enron and was a principal
advisor with respect to its structuring. Deloitte & Touche received fees totaling $8 million in
connection with the transaction.©® Vinson & Elkins acted as Enron’s corporate and tax counsel
in Project Tammy I and received fees totaling $698,775 for its services. Vinson & Elkins
provided a tax opinion in connection with the transaction. In the opinion, Vinson & Elkins
concluded that (1) no gain or loss “should” be recognized by Enron or the other Class B
Members upon the contributions of the assets to Enron Finance; (2) no gain or loss “should” be
recognized by Enron Capital Investments Corp. or the Class B Members on the contribution of
95 percent of their interests to Enron Capital Investments Corp.; (3) 95 percent of the built-in
gain with respect to the contributed assets “should” be allocable to Enron Capital Investments
Corp. by reason of the contribution, and on the subsequent sale of the contributed assets, Enron
Capital Investments Corp.’s basis in its partnership interest “should” be increased by the built-in
gain allocated to it; and (4) the creation and use of Enron Finance “should” not be disregarded as
a sham and should not be subject to the partnership anti-abuse rules.

Akin, Gump also served as tax counsel to Enron and received fees totaling $235,234 for
its services.°?

Appendix C, Part VIII to this Report contains the tax opinion Enron received in
connection with Project Tammy I.

Subsequent developments

Enron’s bankruptcy foreclosed the ability to recognize the anticipated financial and tax
benefits with respect to Project Tammy I. Enron and Zephyrus are in litigation/settlement
discussions over defaults in payments related to the minority interest financing. In addition,
some groups are reviewing some of the asset sales, and a number of issues are expected to be

608 The General Background Materials in Appendix B contain the Estimated Project Fees
schedule (6/4/2001), EC2 000036379.

609 Other law firms that were involved in Project Tammy I included LeBouef, Lamb,
Greene & Mac (received fees totaling $219,231) and Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer (received
fees totaling $145,000).

Arthur Andersen acted as Enron’s principal advisor on accounting and financial
statement issues in connection with Project Tammy I and received a fee of $152,250 in
connection with the transaction.

JP Morgan Chase led the group of financial institutions that invested $500 million in

Project Tammy I (through Zephyrus). JP Morgan Chase received fees totaling $2.289 million in
connection with the transaction.

228

=== PAGE 257 ===
presented to the creditors committee.°!° The IRS is in the process of auditing Enron’s tax returns
for years 1996 through 2001.

Project Tammy II — background”

Project Tammy II employed the same structure as Project Tammy I. The only differences
were the assets to be sold and the depreciable asset(s) that would benefit from the increased tax
basis. As originally contemplated, the primary asset Enron Corp. intended to sell through the
Project Tammy structure was its interest in Portland General Electric Company (“PGE”).
However, in order to reduce its exposure in connection with an IRS audit of the transaction, the
Enron tax department decided to create two separate Project Tammy structures to dispose of the
unwanted assets. Project Tammy II was the vehicle through which Enron was to sell its PGE
stock. Enron never identified the depreciable assets that were to benefit from the increased tax
basis.

Reported tax and financial statement effects

Project Tammy II was expected to generate approximately $1.06 billion of Federal
income tax deductions (without any economic outlay) resulting primarily from enhanced
depreciation deductions attributable to unidentified depreciable assets. These deductions were
anticipated to be available to offset Enron’s taxable income beginning in 2007. In addition, the
tax savings associated with these deductions would have generated approximately $370 million

of financial statement income. The financial statement income would accrue during the years
2002 through 2005.°?

In actuality, Enron did not report a financial statement benefit with respect to Project
Tammy II. As to the Federal income tax benefits, Project Tammy IT was terminated prior to their
realization. However, the two dispositions by the partnership in 2001 did result in the
recognition of gain (which was offset by losses from the Enron consolidated group).

Development of Project Tammy II

As previously discussed, Projects Tammy I and II relied on the same legal analysis and
involved similar structures (except for the assets to be sold and the depreciable asset(s) that

610 The Project Tammy I materials in Appendix B contain the Project Tammy I deal
basics, EC2 000037649.

611 The information regarding Project Tammy II was obtained from Joint Committee
staff interviews of R. Davis Maxey, Robert J. Hermann, and Alicia L. Goodrow, as well as from
documents and information provided by Enron, the IRS, and filings with the United States
Bankruptcy Court in the Southern District of New York.

612 The General Background Materials in Appendix B contain the Structured
Transactions Group, Summary of Project Earnings & Cash Flows, November 2001.

229

=== PAGE 258 ===
would benefit from the increased tax basis).°'? The primary motivation for using multiple
projects was to reduce Enron’s IRS audit exposure with respect to the transactions.

On April 30, 2001, Finance Committee of Enron Corp.’s Board of Directors approved
Project Tammy II for recommendation to the full Board of Directors. At the Enron Corp. Board
of Directors meeting held the following day, Herbert S. Winokur, Jr. presented a report of the
Finance Committee’s action, and the Board of Directors approved and ratified Project Tammy
11.°'* At the same time, the Board authorized the creation of a new series of Enron Corp.
preferred stock in the amount of $1 billion that was to be sold to a subsidiary of the
partnership.°°

Implementation of Project Tammy II

Like Project Tammy I, the implementation of Project Tammy II involved several steps
that were to be executed over a period of years. The steps involved: (1) the formation of the
partnership, (2) the transfer of the partnership interests, (3) the sale of the partnership’s built-in
gain assets, and (4) certain post-sale events.

Formation of the partnership.—The initial step was the formation of the partnership that
would be used to reallocate the built-in gains. The partnership, called Enron Northwest Finance,
LLC (“Enron Northwest”), was formed on May 2001, with Enron Corp., Enron Property &
Services Corp. (“Enron Property”), and J ILP-LP*'* (all members of the Enron consolidated
group) as the initial members.°!’

In exchange for a Class B Membership interest in Enron Northwest, the members
contributed various assets and had various liabilities assumed by Enron Northwest.°"® Enron
Corp. contributed the following assets:

613 Current Enron management is not aware of any written documentation prepared by
Deloitte & Touche in connection with the development and implementation of Project Tammy II.
Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation,
dated January 13, 2003, answer 98.

614 Agenda item #8(c) of the Meeting of the Enron Corp. Board of Directors, EC
000049507, ENE 0000001542, 15550-15555.

615 yg

616 JLP-LP was a wholly-owned subsidiary of Enron North America.

617 Enron Finance Management, a disregarded entity from its sole owner (Enron Corp.)
was the sole manager of Enron Northwest. Enron Finance Management contributed $1,000 to
Enron Northwest for its Class A Membership interest. Enron Finance Management also acted as

the sole managing member in the Project Tammy I structure.

618 Th each instance, the contributing member remained liable on the debt that was
assumed by Enron Northwest in connection with the particular transfer.

230

=== PAGE 259 ===
(1) An agreement that granted Enron Northwest an option to purchase (for $1) all the
stock of PGE (a wholly-owned subsidiary of Enron) with an agreed fair market
value of $2.1 billion and a tax basis of approximately $1.25 billion (“PGE
Option”),

(2) 3,276,811 common units of EOTT Energy Partners, LP (the “EOTT Units”) with
an agreed fair market value of $58,491,076, and a zero tax basis, and

(3) A derivative interest that tracked the economic value of its limited partnership
interest in Joint Energy Development Investments, LP (“JEDI”) relating to an
indirect interest in 67,849 shares of common stock of Hanover Compressor.

Enron Property assigned to Enron Northwest a $200 million demand note issued by
Enron to Enron Property with an agreed fair market value of $200 million.

JILP-LP contributed a derivative interest that tracked the economic value of its limited
partnership interest in Ponderosa Assets, LP relating to an interest in 1,680,840 shares of
common stock of Hanover Compressor.

In the aggregate, the Class B members (i.e., Enron Corp. and its subsidiaries) contributed
property with a gross value of approximately $2.1 billion (subject to liabilities of $2 billion) and
an estimated tax basis of $1 billion. In each instance, the contributing member remained liable
for the debt that Enron Northwest had assumed in connection with the contributions.”

Enron Northwest was designed to raise $500 million of minority interest financing, but
the financing was never arranged. 20

Transfers of partnership interests Following the formation of the partnership, Enron
Corp. contributed 2.715 percent of its Class B Membership interest in Enron Northwest to Enron
Property (another holder of a Class B Membership interest). JILP-LP contributed 95 percent of
its Class B Membership interest in Enron Northwest to Enron Property in exchange for shares of
Enron Property common stock.

Sale of built-in gain assets.—In the second half of 2001, Enron Northwest, through a
lower-tiered partnership, sold (1) the EOTT Units for $64.55 million (all of which was gain),°”"

619 Enron Northwest contributed the assets (and transferred the liabilities) to Enron
Northwest Intermediate LLC, which in turn, contributed the assets to Enron Northwest Assets,
LLC. Enron Northwest Assets, LLC continues to hold the unsold assets.

od Project Tammy II Tax Overview, EC2 000037764; Letter from Enron’s counsel
(Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer
94.

621 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 95.

231

=== PAGE 260 ===
and (2) the derivative interest in the Hanover Compressor stock.©* In October 2001, Northwest
Natural Gas Company entered into an agreement to purchase the PGE stock from Enron (and
Enron Northwest Assets, LLC). Because of issues raised by Enron’s bankruptcy, however, the
purchase was never consummated. The parties terminated the agreement in May 2002.5

Post-sale events.Project Tammy II effectively was terminated before Enron Northwest
purchased either the depreciable asset for distribution to Enron Property or the Enron Corp.
preferred stock.

The diagram on the next page depicts the Project Tammy II structure.

622 Project Tammy II Tax Overview, EC2 000037766.

623 See In re Enron Corp., et al., Motion of Enron Corp., et al., for an Order, Pursuant to
Sections 105, 363(b), and 365 of the Bankruptcy Code and Rules 2002, 6004 and 9013 of the
Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure, Authorizing and Approving (a) the Execution and
Delivery of Termination Agreements in connection with the PGE Option Agreement, (b) the
Execution and Delivery of a Tax Allocation Agreement, and (c) the Consummation of the
Transactions Contemplated Therewith, Filed by Debtors and Debtors in Possession, U.S.
Bankruptcy Court (S.D.N.Y.), Dec. 6, 2002.

64 Current Enron management is not aware that any replacement asset was ever

identified. Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 97.

232

=== PAGE 261 ===
siessy
yourrg
dryssouyeg
Aug dryssoumg xe,
uoneiodiol
sonised PHUL
palepyosuod dVV wosUg

pUSITT AIVVOREL S

/ \S019\U|
JeyoeL 7

ysasoqu]
JOyoeL dT

jenueplyyuod

177” YOU WO ~S.
i eIqeAleooy }
‘SL eIN L”

=o Se

Jaquiay\y
uowWwoD
Buibeuey

Jequiey| 8j0S

Jequisy\,
Buibeue-,

Jaquiey 2810S

IOOZ Joquisseq] Jo se aNjoN.NS
yy Aue y 0forg

atqeded iqap
worl! L60°7$

233

=== PAGE 262 ===
Role of outside advisors

Vinson & Elkins acted as corporate and tax counsel to Enron on Project Tammy II.
Deloitte & Touche advised Enron with respect to the tax structuring and other related matters.
Enron did not receive any tax opinions in connection with Project Tammy m0.

Subsequent developments

Enron’s bankruptcy foreclosed the ability to recognize the anticipated financial and tax
benefits with respect to Project Tammy II. Pursuant to a motion filed and approved by the
bankruptcy court, effective December 23, 2002, Enron Corp., Enron Northwest Intermediate
LLC, and Enron Northwest terminated the PGE Option and the assumption of the Enron Corp.
liabilities.

The IRS is in the process of auditing Enron’s tax returns for years 1996 through 2001.

Discussion™®

Similar to Project Condor, the transactions in Projects Tammy I and II were designed to
generate a total of over $2 billion in additional depreciable tax basis via the shifting of tax basis
(in excess of book basis) to long-lived assets. The expected tax benefits were the result of the
interaction of the partnership tax rules that address the allocation of built-in gains with respect to
contributed assets,” the partnership basis rules on liquidating distributions, 28 and, depending on
the exit strategy, the interaction of the partnership basis rules and the corporate nonrecognition
rules in exchanges involving a corporation’s own stock. These rules are discussed below.

Under the strategy devised in Projects Tammy I and II, the benefits of the increased tax
basis (in the form of greater depreciation deductions) would inure over a 39-year period and was
not expected to be reflected in Enron’s consolidated tax return until 2007. However, and

5 The Project Tammy II materials in Appendix B contain the Project Tammy II deal
basics, EC2 000037767; Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint
Committee on Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 99.

66 Enron’s bankruptcy effectively prevents Enron from realizing the tax benefits that

were contemplated in Projects Tammy I and II. Nevertheless, this section discusses the tax
benefits that Enron sought to achieve from the transactions (without regard to the bankruptcy).

$27 Sec. 704(c).
628 Sec. 732(b).

$9 Secs. 705 and 1032.

234

=== PAGE 263 ===
potentially more important to Enron, the strategy permitted Enron to begin recording the benefits
immediately for financial accounting purposes.”*°

Partnership allocations

One of the first steps in the implementation of Projects Tammy I and II involved the
contribution of built-in gain assets by members of the Enron consolidated group to a partnership.
As previously discussed, present law requires that any income, gain, loss, and deduction with
respect to contributed property must be shared among the partners so as to take account of the
variation between the tax basis of the property to the partnership and its fair market value at the
time of contribution.“! The purpose of this rule is to prevent the shifting of tax consequences
among partners with respect to pre-contribution gain or loss. However, the regulations under
section 704(c) state that when a contributing partner transfers a partnership interest (or a portion
of such interest), built-in gain or loss (proportionate to the interest transferred) must be allocated
to the transferee partner as it would have been allocated to the transferor partner.°” Therefore, in
Projects Tammy I and II, when the various members of the Enron consolidated group transferred
95 percent of their partnership interests (the “transferring members”) to another Enron partner
the “single Enron affiliate”), 3 a corresponding amount of the built-in gain on the contributed
property had to be allocated to the single Enron affiliate. Typically, such a transaction does not
present a problem and results in an appropriate tax and economic result. Under this rule, the sale
of the built-in gain assets will result in 95 percent of the built-in gain being allocated to the single
Enron affiliate, with a corresponding increase in the affiliate’s tax basis in the partnership
interest.

In Projects Tammy J and II, the transferring members remained liable on the indebtedness
that Enron Finance (in Tammy J) and Enron Northwest (in Tammy II) assumed in connection
with the formation of the partnerships.°° Similarly, when the transferring members contributed
their 95 percent partnership interests to the single Enron affiliate, the transferring members

630 See the Background and Rationale section to this part of the Report which contains a
general explanation of relevant aspects of Financial Accounting Standard No. 109, Accounting
for Income Taxes.

$1 Sec. 704(c)(1)(A).
632 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.704-3(a)(7).

633 The single Enron affiliate was Enron Capital Investments Corp. in Project Tammy I
and Enron Property in Project Tammy II.

634 Whether the gain is allocated to the single Enron affiliate or to Enron Corp. is
irrelevant because both partners are members of the Enron consolidated group (and the gain will
be offset by consolidated net operating losses).

635 By remaining liable on the indebtedness, the contributing partners avoided any gain

recognition that would have resulted by virtue of having been deemed to receive a distribution of
money in excess of the partners’ basis. See secs. 752(b) and 731(a)(1).

235

=== PAGE 264 ===
remained liable on their respective amount of indebtedness (presumably to avoid a deemed
distribution or discharge on the transfer).

The contribution of the 95 percent partnership interests has the effect of splitting each
partnership interest into two components: (1) a five percent equity interest that guarantees
partnership debt (which the transferring partners retained), and (2) a 95 percent equity interest
(which the transferring partners transferred to the single Enron affiliate). In general, when a part
of a larger property is sold, the tax basis is equitably apportioned among the parts for
determining gain or loss. This determination is usually not difficult to make. However, the
determination becomes much more difficult when dealing with a transfers of a non-economic
property interest. This is what occurred in Projects Tammy I and Tammy II. While the 95
percent equity interest had economic value as measured by the value of the partnership assets,
the interest was uneconomical if the associated tax liabilities embedded in the partnership
interest are considered. Enron determined that the single Enron affiliate would take a zero basis
in the 95 percent equity interest.’ This result, coupled with the partnership allocation rules,
enabled Enron to shift tax basis to a depreciable asset in excess of its value.

The following example illustrates how the basis shift occurred. Assume that a
partnership has a single long-lived depreciable asset with a value of $1 billion, a tax basis of
$200 million, and a $900 million partnership liability that the partner (“transferor partner”)
guarantees.°* The transferor partner has a $200 million basis in its partnership interest. Assume
further that the transferor partner transfers 95 percent of its partnership interest (with no
guarantee of the liability) to another partner, and that the transferee partner ultimately will
receive an interest in the long-lived asset in a liquidating distribution. The transferee partner has
received an interest in partnership property worth $95 million (95 percent x $100 million value)
with an associated tax liability of $266 million ($800 million of sec. 704(c) gain x 95 percent x
35 percent tax rate).°°° The unresolved question is what portion of the transferor partner’s $200

636 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.61-6(a).

637 This conclusion was based on an interpretation of Rev. Rul. 84-53, 1984-1 C.B. 159.
This revenue ruling involves the determination of tax basis in connection with a sale of a partial
partnership interest to an unrelated purchaser. In Projects Tammy I and II, the transactions
involved a tax-free transfer of a partial interest to members of the same consolidated group.

638 This hypothetical is similar to an example that Steve Klig of Deloitte & Touche
provided to Alicia Goodrow of Enron, in a message dated October 23, 2001, regarding the
application of Rev. Rul. 84-53 to Project Tammy I. The Project Tammy I materials in Appendix
B contain a Message from Steven E. Klig to Alicia L. Goodrow, subject: Tammy Example.

639 While the built-in gain will give rise to $760 million in greater future depreciation
deductions ($800 million x 95 percent), unrelated taxpayers (without capital losses) generally
would be unwilling to realize $760 million of current year gain in exchange for $760 million in
future depreciation deductions. If the partner could force an immediate liquidation of the
partnership, then the transferee partner would be entitled to receive $95 million and would have a
$665 million capital loss (that would offset most of the $760 million of gain).

236

=== PAGE 265 ===
million basis should be ascribed to the transferred interest. Under similar facts, Enron
apportioned a zero basis to the transferred partnership interest because the transferee partner (i.e.,
the single Enron affiliate) did not assume any of the liabilities. While there is support for this
position,” the result is difficult to justify and easy to manipulate (particularly when the
transferor and transferee are related). A more theoretically sound approach may be to apply
principles similar to the excess loss account rules of the consolidated return regulations,” " (that
allow downward basis adjustments below zero) to the transferee partner’s interest. The basis
reduction rules of section 358(h) also might serve as a useful model.” These approaches more
accurately reflect the underlying economics of the transfer, and would negate the tax and
financial accounting benefits that Enron sought to achieve from Projects Tammy I and 1.

To summarize, the partnership built-in gain rules generally provide appropriate economic
results with respect to partnerships whose partners have adverse interests. When the partners are
related, however, the section 704(c) rules may be manipulated to produce uneconomic and
unwarranted results. This was the case in Project Condor, and the pattern continued in Projects
Tammy I and Tammy II.

Partnership basis rules on liquidating distributions and section 754 adjustments

In Projects Tammy I and II, the partnership was to use the proceeds from the sale of the
built-in gain assets to purchase (1) a low value depreciable asset(s) and (2) a new series of Enron
preferred stock. Subsequently, the low value depreciable asset(s) was to be distributed to the
single Enron affiliate in liquidation of the affiliate’s high basis partnership interest. Under the

640 See, Rev. Rul. 84-53, 1984-1 C.B. 159 (situation four).

641 The excess loss account rules allow negative adjustments to a consolidated member’s
stock basis that exceed the shareholder’s basis in such stock. The resulting negative amount is
the shareholder’s excess loss account in the stock and is treated as negative basis. Treas. Reg.
sec. 1.1502-19.

642 Section 358(h), previously discussed in the corporate section of this Report, mandates
a basis reduction in stock received by a transferor in connection with a tax-free transfer (but not
below its fair market value) by the amount of any liability that is assumed in the exchange which
was not treated as money received by the taxpayer. If the resulting outside basis is lower than
the partnership’s basis in the asset, then basis reduction principles similar to section 732(f),
previously discussed in this section of the Report, also may be appropriate.

63 The idea of using low-basis high value assets to maximize the financial accounting
benefits in Project Tammy I was not lost on the Deloitte & Touche advisors. As Steven E. Klig
from Deloitte & Touche noted in an electronic message to the Enron tax department, “THE
MORAL OF THE STORY IS THAT THE HIGHER THE BASIS OF THE BUILT-IN GAIN
PROPERTY TRANSFERRED TO THE PARTNERSHIP, THE SMALLER THE SHIFT IN
BUILT-IN GAIN AS A PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL BUILT-IN GAIN.” EC2 000054817. The
Project Tammy I materials in Appendix B contain an Electronic Message from Steven E. Klig to
Alicia L. Goodrow, subject: Tammy Example, at 2.

237

=== PAGE 266 ===
partnership tax laws, the depreciable asset(s) would take a tax basis equal to the affiliate’s basis
in its partnership interest. This results in larger depreciation deductions over the life of the

depreciable asset (or a larger loss on the sale of such asset). This was the tax benefit that Enron
sought to achieve.°“

The excess of the basis of the depreciable asset in the hands of the single Enron affiliate
over its basis in the hands of the partnership immediately prior to the distribution would trigger a
downward basis adjustment in some or all of the remaining partnership property assuming that a
section 754 election was in effect. If the only remaining partnership property was Enron
preferred stock and it was of a similar character to the depreciable asset, then the partnership
would be required to reduce its basis in the Enron preferred stock, thereby creating built-in gain
on the Enron preferred stock.“ This is a desirable result -- Enron would not recognize gain
when the partnership sells the Enron preferred stock,™® but Enron would increase its basis in the
partnership interest by its proportionate share of the gain. The permanent exclusion of this gain
allowed Enron to report a financial accounting benefit with respect to the transactions.©”

Business purpose

As is the case with several of Enron’s structured transactions, any analysis of whether the
tax benefits in Projects Tammy I and II would be respected must take into account the
applicability of the relevant rules and judicial doctrines regarding tax-motivated transactions.°“*

644 See generally Christopher H. Hanna, Partnership Distributions: Whatever Happened
to Nonrecognition? 82 Ky. L. J. 465, 488-92 (1994) (various examples, ranging from a bag of
peanuts to a typewriter, in which a low value, low basis asset would receive a high basis on
liquidation of a partner’s interest).

645 The depreciable asset distributed to the single Enron affiliate should be section
1231(b) property (assuming it was held by the partnership for more than one year). If the
partnership distributes the depreciable asset and is required to make a downward adjustment to
the basis of its remaining partnership property, the downward adjustment must be made to
property of a similar character, i.e., capital assets or section 1231(b) property. See sec. 734(c),
sec. 755(b), and Treas. Reg. sec. 1.755-1(c). The Enron preferred stock should be a capital asset
and therefore the downward adjustment would be made to it.

646 Sec. 1032.

647 Tf the partnerships held assets other than Enron stock, then instead of a permanent
exclusion of gain, the transactions would have generated only a deferral of gain (because Enron
eventually would pay tax with respect to the assets) with no resulting financial statement income.

648 For detailed information of the present law rules and judicial doctrines applicable to
tax motivated transactions and related recommendations and developments, see, e.g., Joint
Committee on Taxation, Background and Present Law Relating to Tax Shelters (JCX-19-02),
March 19, 2002; Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest
Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998 (including provisions relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (JCS-3-99), July

238

=== PAGE 267 ===
The Vinson & Elkins tax opinion states that Enron engaged in the transaction “to secure $500
million of financing from unrelated banks through a structure that would provide favorable
‘minority interest’ treatment.”©” The tax opinion discusses a Tax Court memorandum
decision®™ in which the court respected a partnership arrangement that yielded significant tax
benefits because the taxpayer established that the investment had a valid non-tax business
purpose. The tax opinion states that “[c]learly, [Project Tammy T] serves an important business
purpose as it facilitates the raising of $500 million of funds for use within the Enron Group,” and
on this basis, concludes that the transaction should not be treated as a sham or without
substance.*!

The business purpose test is a subjective inquiry into the motives of the taxpayer -- that
is, whether the taxpayer intended the transaction to serve some useful non-tax purpose.°* While
a proper analysis of the non-tax business purpose requires a more thorough knowledge of the
relevant facts and circumstances (which is beyond the scope of this Report), some general
observations are appropriate. The tax opinion apparently accepts as fact the notion that the
partnership structure “facilitates” the borrowing, but fails to explain how it facilitates the
borrowing. The tax opinion also fails to analyze (1) recent court cases that have disregarded the
existence of a partnership structure that serves little business purpose other than to achieve tax
benefits,°”? or (2) the possibility that a court may separate a transaction in which independent
activities with non-tax objectives are combined with an unrelated transaction having only tax-
avoidance objectives in order to establish an overall business purpose.°™

22, 1999; Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9017) to section 6011 (October 22, 2002);
Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9018) to section 6012 (October 22, 2002); Joint
Committee on Taxation, Description of the "CARE Act of 2003," (JCX-04-03), February 3, 2003;
Symposium: Business Purpose, Economic Substance and Corporate Tax Shelters, 54 SMU L.
Rev. 1 (2001).

649 Opinion Letter from Vinson & Elkins to Enron Corp., February 9, 2001, Appendix C,
Part VIII, at 19.

650 Salina Partnership LP v. Commissioner, 80 T.C.M. 686 (2000)

651 Opinion Letter from Vinson & Elkins to Enron Corp., February 9, 2001, Appendix C,
Part VIII, at 19-20.

652 See ¢.¢., Rice’s Toyota World v. Commissioner, 752 F.2d 89 (4" Cir. 1985); ACM
Partnership v. Commissioner, 157 F.3d 231 (3d Cir. 1998), aff’g 73 T.C.M. (CCH) 2189 (1997),
cert. denied 526 U.S. 1017 (1999); Peerless Indus. v. Commissioner, 1994-1 U.S.T.C. (CCH)
para. 50,043 (E.D. Pa. 1994).

653 See, e.g., ASA Investerings Partnership v. Commissioner, 76 T.C.M. (CCH) 325
(1998), aff'd, 201 F.3d 505 (D.C. Cir. 2000), cert. denied, 531 U.S. 871 (2000).

654 ACM Partnership v. Commissioner, 157 F.3d 231, 256 at n. 48 (3d Cir. 1998), aff’g

73 T.C.M. (CCH) 2189 (1997), cert. denied, 526 U.S. 1017 (1999). Otherwise, any tax-
motivated transaction that is combined with, for example, a borrowing, would be respected.

239

=== PAGE 268 ===
Of greater concern is the fact that the opinion letter regards and analyzes each element of
the transaction (i.e., the contributions to the partnership, the transfer of the partnership interests,
and the allocation of the built-in gain) as if the steps were independent and isolated. The tax
opinion fails to consider the tax consequences of the anticipated exit strategy and does not
provide an overall evaluation of the transaction (notwithstanding that the tax opinion describes
the strategy).°°° Project Tammy I was a multi-step, orchestrated arrangement, whose tax and
financial statement benefits were known to Enron, the promoter, and the accountants®*° long
before Vinson & Elkins issued its tax opinion. Ignoring the exit strategy and failing to provide
an overall evaluation should call into question (1) the tax advisor’s compliance with the relevant
tax shelter opinion standards,®” and (2) Enron’s reliance on the tax opinion to establish
reasonable cause and good faith.°*

Recommendations

The Joint Committee staff recommendations regarding Project Condor®” include

recommendations regarding the partnership allocation rules under section 704(c) and corporate

655 Qpinion Letter from Vinson & Elkins to Enron Corp., February 9, 2001, Appendix C,
Part VIIL, at 7-8.

656 Arthur Andersen provided an opinion regarding the appropriate application of GAAP
to the transaction in June, 2000. EC2 000037676-000037685.

657 Proposed regulations under Circular 230, Regulations Governing Practice Before the
IRS, provide that, in rendering a tax shelter opinion to a client, the advisor must not rely on
unreasonable factual assumptions. An unreasonable factual assumption includes “a factual
assumption that the practitioner knows or has reason to believe is incorrect, incomplete,
inconsistent with an important fact, or another factual assumption, or implausible in any material
respect.” Circular 230, Prop. Sec. 10.35(a)(1)(ii)(A). Even the standards applicable to marketed
tax shelter opinions provides, “[a] practitioner who provides a tax shelter opinion analyzing the
Federal tax effects of a tax shelter investment shall . . .[[w]here possible. . .provide an overall
evaluation whether the material tax benefits in the aggregate more likely than not will be
realized. Where such an overall evaluation cannot be given, the opinion should fully describe
the reasons for the practitioner’s inability to make an overall evaluation.” Circular 230, Sec.
10.33(e).

658 An accuracy-related penalty is not imposed with respect to any portion of any
underpayment if the taxpayer can show that there was reasonable cause for, and the taxpayer
acted in good faith with respect to, such portion. Sec. 6664(c)(1). Reliance on a tax opinion
constitutes reasonable cause and good faith if, under all the circumstances, such reliance was
reasonable and the taxpayer acted in good faith. Among the elements needed to establish such
reliance, “[t]he advice must be based upon all pertinent facts and circumstances and the law as it
relates to those facts and circumstances.” Treas. Reg. sec. 1.6664-4(c)(1)(i).

65° Project Condor is discussed in this partnership section of the Report (following
Project Tomas).

240

=== PAGE 269 ===
nonrecognition of gain rules under section 1032. Those recommendations also are appropriate
with respect to Projects Tammy I and Tammy II. In addition, the Joint Committee staff believes
that further guidance is needed regarding the apportionment of tax basis upon the transfer of a
partial partnership interest (particularly when the transfer involves related parties).

241

=== PAGE 270 ===
D. Other Structured Transactions
1. Project Apache

Brief overview

Project Apache was a financing arrangement in which the Enron group borrowed funds
from third-party foreign lenders. By channeling this third party borrowing through an Enron
controlled foreign corporation and blending this borrowing with debt that the Enron group owed
itself, the Enron group sought to claim U.S. tax deductions not only for interest paid on the third-
party debt, but also for the interest paid to itself, without triggering any offsetting income
inclusion on the Enron controlled foreign corporation’s receipt of such interest. Viewed another
way, the transaction was intended to generate deductions on the Enron U.S. consolidated return
in an amount roughly equal to the entire cash flow paid by Enron to the third-party lenders -- not
only the interest, but also the repayment of principal. The third-party borrowing also was
designed to be treated as “mezzanine,” or minority interest financing for financial reporting and
rating agency purposes, notwithstanding its characterization as debt for U.S. Federal income tax
purposes.

In general terms, the transaction involves a U.S. corporation and its unrelated foreign
lenders indirectly establishing and funding a Dutch entity that in turn lends its funds indirectly to
the U.S. corporation. The U.S. corporation indirectly contributes 60 percent of the cash in
exchange for common ownership units representing 60 percent of the value of the entity, and the
foreign lenders indirectly contribute 40 percent of the cash in exchange for preferred ownership
units representing 40 percent of the value of the entity. The terms of the ownership units ensure
that no earnings can be distributed on the U.S. corporation’s common units while the foreign
lenders’ preferred units remain outstanding. The preferred units are redeemable at the option of
the Dutch entity and are entitled to cumulative preferred distributions out of retained earnings
and to a liquidation preference equal to the foreign lenders’ initial investment in the Dutch entity.

The Dutch entity lends nearly all of its funds indirectly to the U.S. corporation, which
deducts all of the interest on this debt on its U.S. tax return. In view of the relative cash
contributions to the Dutch entity, 60 percent of this debt is effectively owed by the U.S.
corporation to itself, and 40 percent represents borrowing by the U.S. corporation from third
parties.

660 Tn Enron’s case, as explained in further detail below, the bulk of these deductions
took the form of factoring deductions arising from purported sales of trade receivables to a
financial asset securitization investment trust (“FASIT”). The discounts that generated the
factoring deductions may be regarded as equivalent to interest, since the factoring transactions,
to the extent that they had any significant non-tax effect, were economically similar to short-term
secured borrowings (cf. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.861-9T(b)(3)(i), treating factoring discounts as
interest expense for sourcing purposes). As explained below, this form was chosen in an effort
to avoid the restrictions of section 163(j).

242

=== PAGE 271 ===
The Dutch entity is treated as a controlled foreign corporation, which ordinarily would
entail current U.S. taxation of the entity’s passive type earnings under subpart F. The interest
that the Dutch entity receives indirectly from the U.S. corporation is subpart F income, and the
Dutch entity’s debt investment normally would be subject to the deemed repatriation rules of
section 956. However, since the terms of the ownership units and the earnings of the Dutch
entity are structured and managed in such a way as to render it impossible for any earnings of the
Dutch entity to be distributed to the U.S. corporation, the U.S. corporation takes the position that
none of the entity’s subpart F income is allocable to the U.S. corporation, and that there is no
deemed repatriation of earnings to the U.S. corporation under section 956. In other words, the
parties effectively seek to specially allocate all adverse subpart F consequences to the foreign
lenders, who are indifferent to it because subpart F does not apply to them.

When the transaction is unwound, the redemption of the foreign lenders’ preferred units
(i.e., the repayment of their principal) is treated under the terms of the instruments as a
distribution of the Dutch entity’s remaining undistributed earnings (i.e., the rest of the interest
income received indirectly from, and deducted by, the U.S. corporation). The U.S. corporation
takes the position that this elimination of the preferred units also eliminates all of the Dutch
entity’s earnings and profits for U.S. tax purposes, allowing the U.S. corporation to liquidate the
entity without any recognition of income.

In sum, by effectively allocating all of the principal repayment on the combined debt to
the U.S. corporation’s common units and all of the interest payments on the combined debt to the
foreign lenders’ preferred units, the U.S. corporation ultimately claims U.S. tax deductions
approximating the entire cash flow from its group to the foreign lenders -- both interest and
principal -- while making no offsetting income inclusions under subpart F or otherwise.

Background™

Purported tax and financial statement effects

Project Apache was projected to increase Enron’s financial net income by $167 million
over the years 1999-2006. Ultimately, according to the company, the transaction increased
financial net income by $50.7 million ($11.3 million, $20.6 million, and $18.8 million for 1999,
2000, and 2001, respectively) before the company declared bankruptcy at the end of 2001. This
increase in financial net income was attributable to the tax benefit of interest and receivables
factoring deductions that were not offset on the company’s tax return by subpart F inclusions or
other potential tax liabilities.

On its 1999 return, the company claimed $47.6 million of factoring deductions and $33
million of interest deductions on short-term debt, for a total of $80.8 million of deductions for
the year in connection with the transaction. On its 2000 return, the company claimed $110.5
million of factoring deductions and $49.9 million of interest deductions on short-term debt, for a

661 The Joint Committee staff obtained this information through interviews of Robert
Hermann, James A. Ginty, and R. Davis Maxey, as well as from documents and materials
provided by Enron Corp.

243

=== PAGE 272 ===
total of $160.5 million of deductions for the year in connection with the transaction. Sixty
percent of these amounts were effectively circular -- i.e., paid by the Enron group to itself.

In addition, the Enron group’s net borrowing in the amount of $500 million, which was
treated as debt for U.S. tax purposes, was treated as minority interest, or “mezzanine” financing,
for financial statement and rating agency purposes.

Development of Project Apache

The idea for Project Apache was brought to Enron by Chase Securities, an affiliate of
Chase Manhattan Bank, in mid-1998. Mr. Hermann named the transaction after a favorite golf
course in Arizona.°™

As originally proposed, the transaction involved direct lending by the Dutch controlled
foreign corporation to Enron.©? After a concern was raised that interest on a direct loan might
be subject to the restrictions of section 163(j), the transaction was redesigned to direct the loan
through a FASIT, with the FASIT borrowing from the Dutch controlled foreign corporation and
using the borrowed funds to purchase trade receivables from Enron affiliates, effectively loaning
the funds to Enron based on the security of the receivables.“ The transaction was structured to
designate a third party as the owner of the FASIT, and Enron was able to take the equivalent of
interest deductions largely in the form of receivables factoring deductions.

On September 25, 1998, a presentation was made to management regarding the
transaction. The transaction was approved by a corporate officer of Enron, and Enron’s Board of
Directors’ Executive Committee approved the transaction on November 2, 1998. At a meeting
on December 8, 1998, Enron’s full Board of Directors approved and ratified the transaction. Mr.
Maxey and Mike Herman were instructed to execute the transaction.

Implementation of Project Apache

Blending third-party and related-party lending through controlled foreign corporation

In May of 1999, Enron Corp. transferred $748.5 million to Seminole Capital, LLC
(“Seminole”), a newly formed Delaware limited liability corporation, in exchange for a 99.8
percent ownership interest in Seminole. The Lucelia Foundation, a New York not-for-profit

662 Joint Committee staff interviews.

663 Memorandum from R. Davis Maxey to Robert J. Hermann, with transaction diagram,
June 23, 1998, EC2 000037282, EC2 000037285; Presentation by Chase Securities to Enron,
with transaction diagram, June 8, 1998, at EC2 000037313 (see Appendix B, Part X to this
Report).

664 Joint Committee staff interviews; Presentation by Chase Securities to Enron, with
transaction diagram, June 8, 1998, at EC2 000037313 (with the words “163(j) issue” written by
hand on a copy of a diagram showing direct lending by the controlled foreign corporation to
Enron) (see Appendix B, Part X to this Report).

244

=== PAGE 273 ===
corporation unrelated to Enron, transferred $1.5 million to Seminole in exchange for a 0.2
percent ownership interest. Seminole was treated as a partnership for U.S. Federal income tax
purposes.

Seminole in turn transferred its $750 million to Cheyenne Finance SARL (“SARL”), a
newly formed Luxembourg company, in exchange for the entire equity interest in SARL. SARL
was treated as a corporation for U.S. Federal income tax purposes and was a controlled foreign
corporation as defined in section 957.

Rabo Merchant Bank N.V. (“Rabo”), a Dutch bank unrelated to Enron, transferred $15
million to Choctaw Investors B.V. (“Investors B.V.”), a newly formed Dutch company, in
exchange for all of the Investors B.V. common stock. Investors B.V. then borrowed $485
million from a syndicate of mostly foreign banks.

SARL and Investors B.V. then formed Cherokee Finance VOF (“Dutch VOF’”), a Dutch
entity treated as a partnership for tax purposes in both the Netherlands and Luxembourg. SARL
transferred its $750 million to Dutch VOF in exchange for all of the “common” ownership units
of Dutch VOF (the “Common Units”). Investors B.V. transferred its. $500 million to Dutch VOF
in exchange for all of the “preferred ownership units of Dutch VOF (the “Preferred Units”).
The holder of the Common Units had the right to elect two out of the three directors of Dutch
VOF, and the holder of the Preferred Units had the right to elect one director. Pursuant to an
election under the “check the box” regulations, Dutch VOF was treated as a corporation for U.S.
Federal income tax purposes. Dutch VOF also was a controlled foreign corporation as defined in
section 957, because Enron Corp. (through Seminole and SARL) indirectly owned more than 50
percent of the Dutch VOF stock.

The Common Units held indirectly by Enron Corp. could not receive any distributions of
earnings while any of the Preferred Units remained outstanding. The Preferred Units had an
initial liquidation preference of $500 million, as well as the right to a floating-rate cumulative
preferred distribution out of retained earnings equal to a percentage of the liquidation preference,
as declared by the Board of Directors. The Preferred Units were subject to redemption at a stated
date ten years from issuance, at which time any outstanding units would be redeemed for their
liquidation preference. Dutch VOF also had the right to redeem the Preferred Units in whole or
in part at any time, again for the units’ liquidation preference. The initial $500 million
liquidation preference would be increased by the amount of any accrued but unpaid preferred
distributions and would be decreased by the amount of any redemption proceeds received.

Generating receivables factoring and interest deductions through FASIT transactions

Of the $1.25 billion that Dutch VOF possessed immediately upon its formation by SARL
and Investors B.V., Dutch VOF invested $1.23 billion in monthly senior debt obligations (the
“Interim Notes”) of Sequoia Financial Assets, LLC, a FASIT (the “FASIT”). When each Interim
Note matured and was repaid, Dutch VOF would reinvest the proceeds in another Interim Note.

°°5 This $500 million represented Enron’s net third-party borrowing in the transaction
and was treated as minority interest financing for financial accounting purposes.

245

=== PAGE 274 ===
Dutch VOF earned interest on the Interim Notes in the form of short-term original issue discount.
The FASIT in turn effectively loaned the Interim Note proceeds to Enron at the beginning of
each month by making discounted purchases of third-party trade receivables from Enron North
America and Enron Power Marketing, domestic affiliates of Enron Corp. In cases in which
the FASIT received payment on the receivables prior to the end of the month, these funds were
used to purchase Enron North America commercial paper from Enron Corp. The transactions
between Enron Corp. and its affiliates and the FASIT generated factoring deductions on the
Enron consolidated return (reflecting the discount on the sales of the receivables), as well as
interest deductions with respect to the commercial paper.

The “owner interest” in the FASIT was held by Ojibway, Inc., a domestic corporation
unrelated to the Enron group. Ojibway contributed $2 million to the FASIT for this interest.
Enron Corp. contributed $50 million to the FASIT in exchange for a subordinated interest in the
FASIT.©” Enron’s interest in the FASIT was treated as a “regular interest” under the FASIT
rules. The $1.23 billion Interim Notes held by Dutch VOF also were characterized as “regular
interests” under the FASIT rules. Enron Corp. acted as the servicer of the FASIT. In this
capacity, Enron Corp. not only handled the accounting, billing, collection, and other
administrative functions with respect to the receivables sold by its affiliates to the FASIT, but
also held the receivables and other assets of the FASIT and administered the monthly
reinvestment program described above.

Intended exit strategy and net effects of transaction

At the time of the transaction, it was anticipated that Dutch VOF would exercise its right
to redeem the Preferred Units of Investors B.V. in 2006, and that Dutch VOF and SARL would
be liquidated immediately thereafter. Since all of Dutch VOP’s earnings and profits (i.e., the
interest paid by the FASIT) would have been allocated to the Preferred Units, the company
would take the position that the redemption of the Preferred Units eliminated Dutch VOF’s
earnings and profits, and thus that Dutch VOF and SARL could be liquidated tax-free. In order
to achieve this characterization, the redemption of the Preferred Units had to be treated as a
dividend for U.S. tax purposes. In furtherance of this goal, Seminole had been granted an option
to purchase all of the outstanding shares of Investors B.V. from Rabo. This option was intended
to make Enron Corp. the “owner” of all of the stock of Investors B.V. and Dutch VOF under the
constructive ownership rules of section 318(a)(4), such that the redemption of Investors B.V.’s
Preferred Units would be treated as a dividend under section 302 and would eliminate Dutch
VOF’s earnings and profits.

Over the 7 years that the project was intended to have been in place, the structure would
have generated receivables factoring and interest deductions on the Enron group’s U.S.

666 The receivables arose primarily from Enron North America’s natural gas and electric
power businesses. The collection rate on these receivables exceeded 98 percent. “Discussion
Material for Sequoia Financial Asset Trust,” Mar. 2, 1999, at EC2 000037245.

667 Enron’s subordinated interest was intended to insulate Dutch VOF, and hence the
third-party foreign lenders, from credit risk on the receivables.

246

=== PAGE 275 ===
consolidated return approximating the entire cash flow from the Enron group to the unrelated
foreign lenders. As it happened, the transaction generated $80.8 million and $160.5 million of
such deductions for 1999 and 2000, respectively. These annual deductions were expected to
increase gradually through 2006, thus generating deductions at least equal to the principal and
interest on the $500 million that the Enron group borrowed from third parties in the transaction.
It was intended that this benefit be unmitigated by any offsetting U.S. tax under subpart F or
otherwise, despite the fact that 60 percent of the debt in the structure, or $750 million,
constituted a circularity in the sense that it was owed by the Enron group to itself.

The diagram on the following page depicts the Project Apache structure.

247

=== PAGE 276 ===
Ad s3utpjoH
spue]soyjoN
uolUY WOl,
SION AJosstwosg
vor O7$

(SaiON WLaqUT)
WOH OEZT$
ysazaquy Jo1uag

uor[M OOS$ UOrT[I OSL
syuQ paLajorg syluq) vod,
qed
WOT S8h$

Aynby
wor STS

ysoroquy
OT1 47

wor OS$ Isox01U]
poreurpsoqng

ysoxoquy
OTT %8'66

«Vn

sseiD

6661 ‘87 ABN JO Se oIN|DN.G
ayoedy yololg

jenuepyuog

AUSVA

sjassy

uonerodioc

diyssouneg

samed PL
paleprosuoD gVVO womg

worm 7$
ysolo}U] JOUME
«Ow SSPTID.

qed UoTUY WEL -WOYys)
pur so[qeatoooy oper Aue pe
Jo ates AymuoW

248

=== PAGE 277 ===
Role of outside advisors

As noted above, Chase Manhattan Bank promoted the transaction to Enron. Chase
Manhattan personnel presented the idea to Messrs. Hermann and Maxey in a meeting and gave
them promotional materials.

Shearman & Sterling provided a “should” opinion as to the key intended tax
consequences of the transaction, in particular the treatment of the transaction under subpart F, the
characterization of various instruments as debt or equity, and the appropriateness of respecting
the form of the transaction rather than disregarding it as an economic sham.

Shearman & Sterling also provided a separate tax opinion as to issues relating to the use
of the FASIT in the transaction, including qualification as a FASIT (“will” opinion), treatment of
Ojibway as the owner of the FASIT (“will” opinion), treatment of the receivables transactions as
true sales (“should” opinion), the inapplicability of section 163(j) (“should” opinion), and the
inapplicability of U.S. withholding tax on interest paid by the FASIT to Dutch VOF (“should”
opinion). This latter opinion letter also included a separate “comments” section that addressed
other issues, including the potential treatment of the FASIT as the originator of debt.

As of June 2001, Enron had paid over $14 million in fees in connection with the
transaction, including $10,362,038 to Chase Manhattan, $2,070,000 in “syndicate bank fees”
relating to various administrative costs of concluding the transaction, $1,108,940 to Shearman &
Sterling for its U.S. tax opinions, and $300,000 to Freshfields LLC for a foreign-law opinion,
among other fees.

Appendix C, Part IX to this Report contains the tax opinions that Enron received in
connection with Project Apache.

Subsequent developments

On January 13, 2003, the company advised the Joint Committee staff that no steps had
been taken to unwind the Project Apache transaction structure, but that the parties had stopped
cycling cash through the structure since Enron’s bankruptcy filing.°?

Following the bankruptcy filing, JP Morgan Chase Bank (the successor to Chase
Manhattan Bank) exercised its right under the Dutch VOF organizing documents to appoint a
majority of Dutch VOF’s directors. JP Morgan Chase also initiated litigation against Enron on
behalf of Dutch VOF and its investors, seeking the turnover of $2.1 billion of accounts
receivable, commercial paper, cash, and other property that JP Morgan Chase believes is still

668 Enron Estimated Structured Transaction Project Fees as of June 4, 2001, EC2
000036379 (see Appendix B, Part I to this Report).

°°? Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, Jan. 13, 2003, answer 74.

249

=== PAGE 278 ===
held by Enron in its capacity as servicer of the FASIT.®” JP Morgan Chase claims that this
property is not part of the Enron bankruptcy estate and fears dissipation of the assets if they
remain in Enron’s hands.

Discussion

In general

In order for Project Apache to provide the tax benefits intended, a number of different
issues would have to be resolved in Enron’s favor. First, the transaction would have to survive
scrutiny under the judicial doctrines applicable to tax-avoidance transactions, despite the obvious
tax motivation and large circular flow of cash at the heart of the transaction.°”! Second, the
intended allocation of all of Dutch VOF’s earnings and profits to the Preferred Units for subpart
F purposes” would have to be sustained, in order for Enron to avoid current income inclusions
under subpart F. Third, the receivables factoring and interest deductions arising from the FASIT
transactions would have to be allowed, despite the tax motivation for the use of the FASIT and
its close relationship to Enron.

Judicial doctrines and the circular flow of cash

The intended tax benefits of Project Apache arguably should be denied on the grounds
that the bulk of the transaction lacked economic substance and non-tax business purpose. The
overall transaction undoubtedly had a significant tax motivation, and in particular the circular
flow of cash in the form of $750 million of debt (and the interest thereon) owed by the Enron
group to itself appears to have lacked both economic substance and non-tax business purpose.
Instead, this self-owed debt seems to have been created solely for the purpose of blending it with
the third-party debt through Dutch VOF in order to generate interest and interest equivalent

679 Since the assets are under Enron’s control, JP Morgan Chase could not be sure of the
amount and composition of the assets and thus based its complaint on an estimate. The
complaint thus also seeks a full and complete accounting of the assets. Complaint, JP Morgan
Chase Bank v. Enron Corp., et al., Chapter 11 Case No. 01-16034 (AJG), Adversary Proceeding
No. 01-03637 (Bankr. S.D. N.Y.), Dec. 11, 2001, EC2 000054744.

671 For detailed information on the present-law rules and judicial doctrines applicable to
tax-avoidance transactions and related recommendations and developments, see e.g., Joint
Committee on Taxation, Background and Present Law Relating to Tax Shelters (JCX-19-02),
March 19, 2002; Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest
Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998 (including provisions relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (JCS-3-99), July
22, 1999; Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9017) to section 6011 (October 22, 2002);
Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9018) to section 6012 (October 22, 2002); Joint
Committee on Taxation, Description of the "CARE Act of 2003," (JCX-04-03), February 3, 2003;
Symposium: Business Purpose, Economic Substance and Corporate Tax Shelters, 54 SMU L.
Rev. 1 (2001).

672 See Treas. Reg. sec. 1.951-1(e)(2).

250

=== PAGE 279 ===
deductions in excess of those attributable to the third-party debt, while at the same time avoiding
any of the offsetting income inclusions that normally apply. To the extent that the receivables
factoring and interest deductions claimed by Enron are attributable to this circularity, they
arguably should be denied as lacking economic substance and non-tax business purpose. Since
this debt accounted for 60 percent of the overall debt in Project Apache, it could reasonably be

argued that 60 percent of the deductions claimed by Enron in connection with the structure
should be denied.

According to Enron, the non tax business purposes of Project Apache were to raise $500
million of outside financing that would qualify as minority interest financing for financial
accounting and rating agency purposes, as well as to manage the trade receivables generated in
the course of its affiliates’ gas pipeline and electric power wholesale businesses by engaging in
factoring transactions.

With respect to the first purpose cited, even if managing financial statement presentation
and rating agency evaluations are found to constitute a valid business purpose, this purpose can
justify only part of the transaction. This purpose fails to account for the complex and unusual
manner in which Enron went about raising $500 million of minority interest financing. Indeed,
this purpose fails to account for the majority of the debt involved in the transaction -- the
business need to raise $500 million of outside financing does not explain the inclusion of $750
million of intra-group debt in the same structure. The only evident explanation for the use of the
intra-group debt relates to the intended tax benefits of the transaction.

The receivables factoring business purpose cited also seems unconvincing. According to
Enron tax department personnel interviewed by the Joint Committee staff, Enron did not even
consider including trade receivables in the transaction until it concluded that the initial
transaction design, which involved a more straightforward loan from Dutch VOF to Enron, was
vulnerable to attack under section 163(j), which denies deductions for certain interest on related-
party debt.°” Thus, a tax-motivated transaction structure that did not involve any trade
receivables was designed first, and the later inclusion of the receivables and use of the FASIT
served the primary purpose of reducing one of the perceived tax risks in the transaction.

Moreover, to the extent that the factoring transactions were ultimately financed 60
percent by intra-group debt, the transactions cannot be said to have achieved the same non-tax
effects as factoring transactions with unrelated parties. Factoring transactions generally serve the
purpose of accelerating the conversion of trade receivables into cash, thus increasing liquidity
and decreasing credit exposure. To the extent that a company effectively advances the bulk of
the cash in a factoring transaction to itself and retains an indirect interest in the receivables, these
benefits are not realized.

63 See also Presentation by Chase Securities to Enron, with transaction diagram, June 8,
1998, at EC2 000037313 (with the words “163(j) issue” written by hand on a copy of a diagram
showing direct lending by the controlled foreign corporation to Enron) (Appendix B, Part X to
this Report).

251

=== PAGE 280 ===
In sum, while the matter is not free from doubt, the Joint Committee staff believes that a
strong argument could be made to deny the intended tax benefits of Project Apache under
longstanding judicial doctrines addressing tax-motivated transactions.

Avoidance of subpart F and other potential offsetting tax liabilities

Allocation of subpart F income away from Enron.—The deductions generated by Project
Apache would confer no net tax benefit to Enron if they were offset by subpart F inclusions.
Under section 951(a), a U.S. shareholder of a controlled foreign corporation generally must
include in income its pro rata share of the corporation’s subpart F income for the year, as well as
its pro rata share of the corporation’s deemed repatriations for the year determined under section
956. Enron Corp., as an indirect 60-percent shareholder of Dutch VOF, which was a controlled
foreign corporation, ordinarily would have been subject to current U.S. tax with respect to 60
percent of Dutch VOF’s subpart F income. Dutch VOF’s interest income was treated as subpart
F income, and thus, under normal circumstances, it would be expected that Enron Corp. would
include 60 percent of this interest income on a current basis for U.S. tax purposes. This of
course would have the effect of offsetting 60 percent of the deductions generated in the
transaction, thus eliminating the intended tax benefit. This treatment.would, however, comport
with the overall economics of the transaction, given that 60 percent of the total lending in Project
Apache was a self-owed circularity.

Enron sought to avoid these current subpart F inclusions by structuring Dutch VOF’s
ownership instruments in such a way as to allocate all of the earnings and profits to the Preferred
Units held by Investors BV, and none of the earnings and profits to the Common Units held by
SARL, and thus indirectly by Enron. In determining a shareholder’s pro rata share of subpart F
income in cases involving multiple classes of stock, Treas. Reg. section 1.951-1(€)(2) provides
that the subpart F income attributable to a class of stock is that proportion of the controlled
foreign corporation’s total subpart F income that the earnings and profits distributable to such
class in a hypothetical year end distribution of all of the corporation’s earnings and profits would
bear to the corporation’s total earnings and profits. Since Dutch VOF’s ownership instruments
provided that no earnings distributions could be made on the Common Units as long as any
Preferred Units remained outstanding, Enron took the position that the Common Units would be
entitled to no distribution at all in a hypothetical distribution of all of Dutch VOF’s earnings and
profits in any particular year, and thus that none of Dutch VOF’s subpart F income was allocable
to the Common Units (and thus to Enron Corp.) under Treas. Reg. section 1.951-1(e)(2). Even if
Dutch VOF’s right to redeem the Preferred Units were taken into consideration in this analysis,
Enron took the position that the result would not change, on the basis that even a complete
redemption of the Preferred Units would be treated as a dividend distribution by reason of the
option attribution arrangement described above in connection with Enron’s intended exit
strategy.

The allocation method applicable to subpart F income also applies in the case of section

956 inclusions, and thus Enron took the same allocation position with respect to both subpart F
income and section 956 inclusions.

252

=== PAGE 281 ===
Enron found support for this allocation position in the case of Barnette v.
Commissioner,o"* a memorandum opinion of the Tax Court addressing a similar issue that arose
under the foreign personal holding company regime.*” The issue was one of 15 issues decided
in the case, which addressed several tax years of an individual who had been convicted of both
tax fraud and government contracting fraud in connection with the foreign business arrangements
at issue.°”° The present discussion of the case is limited to the issue pertinent to Enron’s subpart
F position in Project Apache.

Among other tax reduction strategies, the taxpayer in the Barnette case arranged for a
Panamanian foreign personal holding company that he controlled to issue a new class of
preferred stock, with a conceded purpose of deflecting foreign personal holding company income
away from himself. As in Project Apache, the terms of the ownership instruments provided that
no distributions could be made on the taxpayer’s common stock while the preferred stock
remained outstanding. Under the applicable Treasury regulation, if a foreign personal holding
company has outstanding both preferred and common stock, and the preferred stock is entitled to
a specified dividend before any distribution can be made on the common stock, foreign personal
holding company income is treated as being distributed first with respect to the preferred
shares.°”” Thus, like Enron under the subpart F multiple-classes-of-stock regulation, the taxpayer
in Barnette took the position that none of the “tainted” foreign income was allocable to the
common shares that he held. The IRS, on the other hand, contended that all such income should
have been allocated to the taxpayer’s common shares, since there was no reason for the creation
of the preferred shares other than tax avoidance.

The court ruled in favor of the taxpayer on this issue, sustaining his allocation of foreign
personal holding company income away from himself under the regulation, despite the
acknowledged tax motivation for the issuance of the preferred stock and related transactions.
The court concluded that, even if the sole purpose for creating and transferring the preferred
stock were tax avoidance, the stock’s existence still could not be ignored. Since the transactions
at issue altered the taxpayer’s financial position, the court decided that no non-tax business
purpose was necessary. In other words, the court seems to have concluded that the foreign
personal holding company income allocation regulation was to be applied literally, and its results

674 63 T.C.M. (CCH) 3201 (1992), reh’g denied, 64 T.C.M. (CCH) 998 (1992).

675 The foreign personal holding company regime (secs. 551-558) is an anti-deferral
regime that preceded subpart F, and that now has been largely supplanted by it. Under
coordination rules applicable for taxable years of U.S. shareholders beginning after July 18,
1984, subpart F generally trumps the foreign personal holding company regime. Sec. 951(d).
During the taxable years at issue in the Barnette case, however, the foreign personal holding

company rules generally trumped the subpart F rules. Sec. 951 (d), prior to amendment by P.L.
98-369.

676 The case also involved several tax years of the individual’s company and certain
members of his family.

677 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.551-2(c).

253

=== PAGE 282 ===
respected, even with respect to a tax-motivated structure entirely lacking any non-tax business
purpose.

Given the similarities between the foreign personal holding company issue raised in the
Barnette case and the subpart F issue raised in Project Apache, the Barnette case arguably lends
support to Enron’s position that none of Dutch VOF’s subpart F income should be allocated to
Enron, regardless of the tax motivation behind the structuring of the ownership instruments.
Nevertheless, if the issue were litigated, a court would approach the issue de novo and accord the
Barnette case little or no precedential weight. As a memorandum opinion (as opposed to a
“regular,” or “T.C.” opinion) of the Tax Court, the case is not regarded as controlling precedent
by any court, including the Tax Court itself.°”® Memorandum opinions are generally limited to
their specific facts; if a case raises novel legal issues, the Tax Court generally issues a “regular”
opinion, which the court then regards as controlling precedent.

Thus, a court determining how to apply Treas. Reg. section 1.951-1(e)(2) to Enron and
Dutch VOF would be free to analyze the issue on its own merits and would not be bound by the
earlier memorandum decision of the Tax Court applying Treas. Reg. section 1.551-2(c) to the
taxpayer in Barnette. On this basis, it is impossible to predict how a court might resolve the
issue. A literal application of the regulation to the carefully structured ownership instruments of
Dutch VOF appears to yield the results intended by Enron. However, it is possible that a court
would sustain an argument along the same lines advocated by the IRS in the Barnette case. In
other words, a court might conclude that the transaction was structured to generate tax benefits
not intended by the Congress, that there was no significant non-tax business purpose for the
complex manner in which the transaction was structured, and that the subpart F income
allocation sought by Enron would violate the purpose of subpart F and would abuse the rule set

forth in Treas. Reg. section 1.951-1(e)(2), thus requiring an allocation of some subpart F income
to Enron.

A court might reach this conclusion on a somewhat narrower basis by disregarding
Seminole’s option to purchase the Investors B.V. stock as lacking any non-tax business purpose.
The court then could apply the hypothetical of Treas. Reg. section 1.951-1(e)(2) by treating
Dutch VOF’s redemption right as exercised, and treating the hypothetical redemption of the
Preferred Units as a sale instead of a dividend distribution, which in turn would leave earnings
and profits distributable to the Common Units in a hypothetical year-end distribution, thus
requiring an allocation of subpart F income to Enron.

Avoidance of other potential offsetting tax liabilities —Subpart F was the main, but not the
only, potential source of U.S. tax that needed to be avoided in order for Project Apache to
generate the net tax benefits intended. For example, if the interest paid to Dutch VOF had been
subject to U.S. withholding tax, then the transaction would not have been worthwhile, even if the
other tax issues raised by the transaction were resolved in Enron’s favor. In this regard, Enron
took the position that no withholding tax applied, principally because the interest earned by

678 See, e.g., Darby v. Comm’r, 97 T.C. 51, 67 (1991); Nico v. Comm’r, 67 T.C. 647, 654
(1977), aff'd in part and rev’d in part on other grounds, 565 F.2d 1234 (2d Cir. 1977); McGah v.
Comm’r, 17 T.C. 1458 (1952).

254

=== PAGE 283 ===
Dutch VOF on the Interim Notes took the form of short-term original issue discount, which is
exempt from withholding tax.°?

Another potential U.S. tax problem for the structure, the passive foreign investment
company regime,°*° was avoided by reason of Dutch VOFP’s status as a controlled foreign
corporation, and Enron’s status as a U.S. shareholder of Dutch VOF. Under section 1297(e),
which Congress enacted in 1997 to address the overlap of the passive foreign investment
company rules and subpart F, a controlled foreign corporation generally is not also treated as a
passive foreign investment company with respect to a U.S. shareholder of the corporation. Thus,
even though Enron took the position that it would not be allocated any of Dutch VOF’s subpart F
income, Enron’s status as a U.S. shareholder of Dutch VOF within the meaning of section 951(b)
nevertheless exempted Enron from the application of the passive foreign investment company
rules in connection with Dutch VOF.

Use of a FASIT to avoid earnings stripping rules

As explained above, Project Apache as originally conceived did not involve the use of a
FASIT. Rather, the original transaction design would have used direct lending by Dutch VOF to
Enron to cycle funds through the structure and generate the desired deductions.**! Only after a
concern was raised that the interest on such a direct loan might be subject to disallowance under
section 163(j) was the transaction redesigned to direct the loan through a FASIT.® Since the
limits of section 163(j) generally apply only to interest paid between related parties, Enron took
the position that interposing an unrelated FASIT between itself and Dutch VOF rendered those
limits inapplicable. The FASIT rules? in turn made it possible for Enron to place a relatively
small ‘owner interest” in the FASIT with an unrelated party, and thereby to take the position that
the FASIT was unrelated to Enron, despite the fact that Enron: (1) was the largest investor in the

6 Sec. 871(g)(1)(B). Even if the interest did not qualify as short-term original issue
discount, the portfolio debt exception of section 881(c)(2)(B) might have shielded the interest
from withholding taxes. In addition, U.S. income tax treaties with the Netherlands and
Luxembourg arguably would have provided a further backstop against the imposition of
withholding tax.

689 Secs. 1291-1298.

681 Memorandum from R. Davis Maxey to Robert J. Hermann, with transaction diagram,
June 23, 1998, EC2 000037282, EC2 000037285; Presentation by Chase Securities to Enron,
with transaction diagram, June 8, 1998, at EC2 000037313 (see Appendix B, Part X to this
Report).

682 Joint Committee staff interviews; Presentation by Chase Securities to Enron, with
transaction diagram, June 8, 1998, at EC2 000037313 (with the words “163(j) issue” written by
hand on a copy of a diagram showing direct lending by the controlled foreign corporation to
Enron) (see Appendix B, Part X to this Report).

683 Secs. 860H - 860L.

255

=== PAGE 284 ===
FASIT; (2) exercised day-to-day control over the FASIT through the servicing arrangement; and
(3) treated the FASIT as an Enron consolidated entity for financial reporting purposes.

Although the Treasury Department has never issued final regulations under section
163(j), a comprehensive set of proposed regulations was issued in 1991.°*4 Under these
proposed regulations, the IRS would have broad authority to disregard entities created with a
principal purpose of avoiding section 163(j). Specifically, the proposed regulations provide that
“fa]rrangements, including the use of partnerships and trusts, entered into with a principal
purpose of avoiding the rules of section 163(j) and [the proposed regulations] shall be

disregarded or recharacterized to the extent necessary to carry out the purposes of section
163(j).” ©

In the case of Project Apache, it is clear from Joint Committee staff interviews with
Enron personnel involved in planning the transaction, as well as from documentary evidence and
the structure of the transaction itself, that the FASIT arrangement was established “with a
principal purpose of avoiding section 163(j).” In addition, given that the arrangement was used
to ensure that no interest or interest-equivalent deductions would be disallowed on what in
substance was a related-party borrowing, and that Enron maintained that the payments in
question were not subject to any offsetting Federal tax (e.g., withholding tax, or tax arising under
subpart F), recharacterizing the transaction would “carry out the purposes of section 163(j).°8°
Thus, if the proposed regulation had applied to the transaction, the conditions for the application
of the anti-avoidance rule would have been present.

Proposed regulations do not have the force of law, but taxpayers commonly use them as
guidance and as indicators of the government’s position on the issues addressed. In this case,
Enron disregarded a proposed regulation that was directly on point and contrary to its return
position.

The Shearman & Sterling opinion letter that addressed FASIT-related issues briefly
discussed the proposed regulations and concluded that “the anti-abuse rule in the proposed
regulations should not be applicable to disregard [the FASIT], because no principal purpose of
the transaction is to avoid section 163(j).”"°7 In light of the evidence that avoiding section 163(j)
in fact was the principal purpose for using a FASIT in the first place, the Joint Committee staff
finds this statement in the opinion letter troubling.

684 Prop. Reg. sec. 1.163(j)-1 et seq.

685 Prop. Reg. sec. 1.163()-1(f).

686 This issue, of course, would not be reached if it were determined that Dutch VOF’s
subpart F income was taxable to Enron, since the amounts then would be subject to Federal tax,
canceling out the benefit of the interest deductions. Sec. 163(j)(3)(A).

687 1 etter from Shearman & Sterling to Enron Corporation and Cherokee

Finance VOF c/o Rabobank Management B.V., May 28, 1999, at 10-11 (Appendix C, Part IX to
this Report).

256

=== PAGE 285 ===
Although the analysis of the opinion letter is somewhat elliptical on this point, it implies
that avoidance of section 163(j) could not have been a principal purpose of using the FASIT,
since payments of interest directly from the obligors on the receivables (i.e., Enron’s natural gas
and electric power customers) to Dutch VOF would have been Payette between unrelated
parties, and thus would not have been subject to section 163()). 88 Of course, the FASIT was not
interposed in any larger lending transaction between Enron’s customers and Dutch VOF; it was
interposed in a larger lending transaction between Enron and Dutch VOF. The purported sales of
trade receivables by Enron affiliates to the FASIT may be viewed as secured financings
comprising merely one component of the larger financing arrangement -- in other words, Dutch
VOF loaned funds to the FASIT, and the FASIT in turn effectively loaned the funds to Enron on
the strength of the receivables. Viewed in this manner, the transaction may be understood as
avoiding section 163(j), since the interest, if paid directly by Enron to Dutch VOF (and not
subjected to Federal tax) potentially would have been subject to section 163@). The opinion
letter raises this possibility, and dismisses it, in a footnote.©°

The opinion letter’s explanation of the transaction is that “the principal purpose of the
arrangement is to create a revolving securitization vehicle for accounts receivable generated by
[domestic affiliates of Enron] 7 Again, this declared purpose is implausible, given that the
idea to use a FASIT in fact arose as a solution to a perceived section 163(j) problem, and that the
structure did not generate the non-tax benefits (increased liquidity, decreased credit exposure)
that normally accompany third-party factoring transactions, due to the circularity at the heart of
the arrangement. The Joint Committee staff believes that, at a minimum, the opinion letter
reflects an unquestioning reliance on company representations as to business purpose, as well as
a failure to look beyond isolated parts of an overall transaction to evaluate it in its totality.

Notwithstanding these concerns about the opinion letter’s analysis of the proposed
regulations, the fact remains that the lack of final regulations on this issue, combined with the
availability under the FASIT rules of an entity that Enron could control but treat as unrelated for
tax purposes, enabled Enron to take the position that section 163(j) could be avoided through the
expedient of interposing an additional entity”!

688 The opinion letter acknowledges that this reasoning would not apply to the Enron-
group commercial paper held by the FASIT. The opinion letter instead downplays the
importance of this debt, implying that it could not be significant enough to form “a principal
purpose” of avoiding section 163(j). Id., at 10-11.

689 7g, at 11, n.7.

69 Id., at 10.

6°! Subsequent to the closing of the transaction, the Treasury Department issued
proposed regulations under the FASIT rules, which included a broad anti-abuse rule. Prop. Reg.
sec. 1.860L-2 (Feb. 7, 2000). In view of the company’s treatment of the anti-abuse rule provided
in the proposed regulations under section 163(j), it would seem unlikely that a second anti-abuse
tule in proposed form would have caused Enron or its advisors to reach a different conclusion as
to the appropriateness of the use of the FASIT.

257

=== PAGE 286 ===
Recommendations

In general

As discussed above, Project Apache raises a set of familiar concerns encountered in
connection with tax-motivated transactions, in particular issues relating to the economic
substance and business purpose doctrines. In addition to these general concerns, however, the
transaction also raises some specific issues regarding the potential abuse of particular statutory
and regulatory provisions. The Joint Committee staff believes that amendments to some of these
provisions should be considered in order to render them less prone to abuse in tax-motivated
transactions.

Allocation of subpart F income

Project Apache exploited a highly mechanical earnings and profits allocation rule in
Treas. Reg. sec. 1.951-1(e)(2) in an effort to achieve results that cannot have been envisioned or
intended by the Treasury Department when it issued the regulation. The putative ability to
allocate all of the subpart F income of Dutch VOF to tax indifferent foreign parties was critical
to Enron’s position that it could blend its third-party debt with self-owed debt within Dutch VOF
in order to generate inflated interest and interest-like deductions without incurring any offsetting
tax liability under subpart F. The transaction thus illustrates that special allocation abuses
similar to those that have been encountered in the partnership taxation area®” are also possible in
the context of controlled foreign corporations. Enron took the position that it could specially
allocate the subpart F “taint” to tax-indifferent parties, and it was able to find some support for
this position under both the regulation and analogous non-subpart-F case law.

The Joint Committee staff believes that this tactic is inconsistent with the purposes of
subpart F and that the results that it purports to produce are inappropriate. The Joint Committee
staff recommends adding an exception to the subpart F income allocation method set forth in the
regulation for cases involving allocations of earnings and profits to tax-indifferent shareholders,
if such allocations are made for tax avoidance purposes. If such an exception had been
applicable to Project Apache, the transaction would not have been viable.

Passive foreign investment company regime

Another concern raised by Project Apache involves the statutory elimination of the so-
called overlap between the passive foreign investment company regime and the subpart F
regime. In 1997, Congress enacted section 1297(e) in order to mitigate the complexity and
uncertainty that arose when a foreign corporation met the definitions of both the controlled
foreign corporation rules of subpart F and the passive foreign investment company rules, thus
requiring shareholders to negotiate two sets of anti-deferral rules in connection with the same
investment. Section 1297(e) largely eliminates this overlap by providing that a corporation
generally is not treated as a passive foreign investment company with respect to a particular
shareholder if the corporation is also a controlled foreign corporation, and the shareholder is a

02 See, e. g., sec. 704(b); Treas. Reg. sec. 1.704-1(b)(2) (addressing special partnership
allocations that lack “substantial economic effect”).

258

=== PAGE 287 ===
“U.S. shareholder” as defined in section 951(b). Thus, subpart F is allowed to trump the passive
foreign investment company rules, and a U.S. shareholder generally no longer needs to contend
with these rules in connection with the ownership of controlled foreign corporation stock.

As applied to Project Apache, section 1297(e) enabled Enron to claim exemption from
the passive foreign investment company rules with respect to its ownership of Dutch VOF stock
on the basis of Enron’s subpart F status as a U.S. shareholder, despite the fact that Enron had
implemented a structure designed to render it impossible for Enron to recognize any income
under subpart F in connection with the stock. Thus, in a case in which Enron was a 60-percent
U.S. shareholder of a foreign corporation with nothing but passive assets and passive income,
Enron could take the position that neither subpart F nor the passive foreign investment company
tules applied.

The Joint Committee staff believes that the exception to the passive foreign investment
company tules for U.S. shareholders of controlled foreign corporations should be geared more
closely to the U.S. shareholder’s potential taxability under subpart F, as opposed to mere status
as a U.S. shareholder under subpart F. Accordingly, the Joint Committee staff recommends
adding an exception to section 1297(e) for cases in which the likelihood that a U.S. shareholder
would have to include income under subpart F is remote. In such a case, the subpart F rules and
the passive foreign investment company rules cannot be said to “overlap” in the manner that the
Congress found objectionable in 1997. Rather, allowing the two regimes to “overlap” in these
cases would allow the passive foreign investment company rules to serve the useful purpose of
providing a backstop to subpart F. If the passive foreign investment company rules had applied
to Enron in Project Apache, the transaction as structured would not have been viable, even if
Enron’s position under subpart F were sustained.

FASIT rules

As explained above, the availability under the FASIT rules®? of an entity that Enron

could control but treat as unrelated for tax purposes enabled Enron to take the position that
section 163(j) could be avoided through the expedient of interposing an additional entity. In
view of the wide range of rules under the Code that apply special restrictions to transactions
between related parties, the ability to treat a FASIT as unrelated for tax purposes while
maintaining effective control of it for other purposes renders FASITs prone to abuse in a wide
range of situations. Regulatory anti-abuse rules, if issued in final form, might mitigate this
potential to some extent, but history suggests that the administration of such rules would be
problematic, leaving considerable potential for abuse remaining. Moreover, recent commentary
suggests that the FASIT rules, which were first enacted in 1996, are not widely used in the
manner envisioned by the Congress and thus have failed to further their intended purposes.*°

63 Secs. 860H - 860L.

64 See, e.g., Prop. Reg. sec. 1.163(j)-1(f); Prop. Reg. sec. 1.860L-2.

a See, e.g., New York State Bar Association, “Report on Securitization Reforms” (Dec.
20, 2002) (“It is clear that the FASIT rules are not being used to any significant degree and

259

=== PAGE 288 ===
The Joint Committee staff believes that the abuse potential inherent in the FASIT vehicle
far outweighs any beneficial purpose that the FASIT rules may serve, and thus recommends that
these rules be repealed.

Earnings stripping regulations

The lack of final regulations under section 163(j) has created a void in an area in which
more definitive guidance is needed. Project Apache illustrates that taxpayers may treat proposed
regulations as a one-way street, to be relied upon when supportive of the desired return position,
and to be disregarded when contrary to such position. If the anti-abuse rule of the proposed
regulations under section 163(j)" had been in final form, Enron might have reconsidered this
transaction. As noted above, the administration of such rules is always problematic, but the
existence of a finalized anti-abuse rule directly on point would induce at least some change to a
company’s cost benefit assessment of a transaction like Project Apache. Accordingly, the Joint
Committee staff recommends that the regulations implementing an anti-abuse rule to combat the
avoidance of section 163(j) should be finalized expeditiously.

2. Project NOLy®™”

Project NOLy was a series of transactions structured to generate sufficient taxable
income so that Enron could offset all of its tax losses from earlier years. Enron engaged in this
transaction because it would allow Enron to settle and close tax examinations for those years.
Project NOLy involved the constructive sale rules and the partnership rules. The following is a
discussion of these rules, followed by a detailed discussion of Project NOLy.

Discussion of relevant tax laws

Tax treatment of section 1259 constructive sales

For transactions entered into after June 8, 1997, taxpayers are required to recognize gain
(but not loss) upon entering into a constructive sale of any appreciated position in stock, a
partnership interest, or certain debt instruments as if such position were sold, assigned or
otherwise terminated at its fair market value on the date of the transaction. If the requirements

accordingly are not achieving their purpose”); New York State Bar Association, “Simplification
of the Internal Revenue Code” (March 18, 2002), reprinted in 95 Tax Notes 575 (April 22, 2002)
(“In our experience, the FASIT legislation is not being used by those who would be expected to
benefit from it and it is unlikely that situation will change”); Letter from James M. Peaslee and
David Z. Nirenberg to Assistant Treasury Secretary (Tax Policy) Mark A. Weinberger (June 6,
2001), reprinted in 91 Tax Notes 2079 (June 18, 2001) (“The FASIT legislation has failed’).

66 Prop. Reg. sec. 1.163(j)-I(f).

67 The project was named for “Molly,” a girlfriend of one of the attorneys on the
transaction. Joint Committee staff interview.

68 Sec. 1259, enacted in the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-34, sec.
1001(a). A “position” is defined as an interest, including a futures or forward contract, short

260

=== PAGE 289 ===
for a constructive sale are met, the taxpayer recognizes gain in a constructive sale as if the
position were sold at its fair market value on the date of the transaction and immediately
repurchased. 69

In general, a taxpayer is treated as making a constructive sale of an appreciated position if
and when the taxpayer (or, in certain circumstances, a person related to the taxpayer) does one of
the following: (1) enters into a short sale of the same (or substantially identical) property; (2)
enters into an offsetting notional principal contract with respect to the same (or substantially
identical) property; or (3) enters unt a futures or forward contract to deliver the same (or
substantially identical) property.” °° Im addition, in the case of an appreciated financial position
that itself is a short sale, a notional principal contract, or a futures or forward contract, the holder
is treated as making a constructive sale when it acquires the same (or substantially identical)
property as the underlying property for the position.’ ' Finally, to the extent provided in
Treasury regulations, a taxpayer is treated as making a constructive sale when it enters into one
or more other transactions, or acquires one or more other positions, that have substantially the
same effect as any of the transactions described. 702

A forward contract results in a constructive sale of an appreciated financial position only
if the forward contract provides for delivery, or for cash settlement, of a substantially fixed

sale, or option. A “position” includes a notional principal contract or other derivative instrument
that provides that a taxpayer make or receive payments (or contractual credits) that approximate
ithe economic effect of ownership of stock, a debt instrument or a partnership interest. For
example, a contract that provides a right to receive payments (or contractual credits) based on a
calculation having the effect of interest on a notional principal amount is treated as a position
with respect to a debt instrument.

9 Sec. 1259(a)(1).

709 Sec. 1259(c)(1). A constructive sale does not include a transaction involving an
appreciated financial position that is mark to market, including positions governed by section
475 (mark to market for securities and commodities dealers and traders) or section 1256 (mark to
market for futures contracts, options and currency contracts). Nor does a constructive sale
include any contract for sale of an appreciated financial position which is not a “marketable

security” (as defined in section 453(f) if the contract settles within one year after the date it is
entered into). ;

701 Id.

72 Sec. 1259(c)(1)(E). Future Treasury regulations are anticipated to treat as
constructive sales other financial transactions that, like those specified in section 1259, have the
effect of eliminating substantially all of the taxpayer’s risk of loss and opportunity for income
and gain with respect to the appreciated financial position. It is anticipated that the Treasury
regulations, when issued, will provide specific quantitative standards for determining whether
several common transactions will be treated as constructive sales. H.R. Rep. No. 105-148, at
442-443 (1997).

261

=== PAGE 290 ===
amount of property and a substantially fixed price.’ Thus, a forward contract providing for
delivery of property, such as shares of stock, the amount of which is sore to significant
variation under the contract terms does not result in a constructive sale.”

Tax treatment of partnership formation

Generally, a es does not recognize gain or loss on the exchange of property for a
partnership interest’’> and a partner’s basis in a partnership interest acquired by contribution of
property to a partnership is the amount of money plus the partner’s adjusted basis of the property
contributed.” In Rev. Rul. 80-235” the IRS held that if the property contributed to a
partnership is an obligation of the contributing partner, that partner’s basis is not increased to
reflect the partner’s obligation because the partner has no basis in its own obligation under
certain circumstances. Treasury regulations provide that if parties enter into an off-market swap
with significant nonperiodic payments, the contract is treated for Federal income tax purposes as
two separate transactions, an on-market swap and a loan.”°8 Consequently, it could be argued
that the loan part of the swap transaction would be within the holding of Rev. Rul. 80-235 and
the contributing partner would receive no basis in its partnership interest as a result of
contributing its own obligation.

Liquidation of a partnership

Gain is not recognized to a partner as a result of a distribution from a partnership except
to the extent that any money distributed exceeds the adjusted basis of such partner’s interest in
the partnership immediately before the distribution.” No loss generally will be recognized to a
partner upon receipt of a distribution from a partnership except upon a distribution in complete
liquidation of a partner’s interest in the partnership if no property other than money, unrealized
receivables and inventory is received.’!° If the criteria for recognizing a loss are met, the loss is
recognized to the extent of the excess of the adjusted basis of the partner’s interest in the
partnership over the sum of the money distributed and the basis to the distributee, as determined

703 See Sec. 1259(d)(1).

704 HR. Rep. No. 105-148, at 442 (1997).
75 Sec. 721.

198 Sec. 722.

707 1980-2 C.B. 229. See also, Gemini Twin Fund III v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo
1991-315 (1991) aff'd without published opinion, 8 F3d 26 (9" Cir. 1993).

78 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-3(g)(4).
7 Sec. 731.

19 Sec, 731(a)(2).

262

=== PAGE 291 ===
under section 732, of any unrealized receivables and inventory distributed.’!! Gain or loss
recognized as a result of a distribution pursuant to section 731 is treated as gain or loss from the
sale or exchange of the partnership interest of the distributee partner’! and is generally treated as
gain or loss from the sale of a capital asset.’!? If a distribution is made to a partner of the
partner’s obligation received by the partnership in exchange for a partnership interest, there is no
direct authority as to how this should be treated.’* Commentators have indicated that this
should be treated as a nonevent for tax purposes.’”° As a result the loss on the liquidation would
be recognized to the extent basis exceeds the amount of cash distributed plus the basis to the
distributee of any unrealized receivables and inventory received.”"°

Capital loss carryback

Capital losses are required ‘to be carried back three years and, if not used in the carryback
years, carried forward five years.”"7 A capital loss carryback cannot increase or produce a net
operating loss for the year to which it is carried back.”"* Treasury regulations provide ordering
rules for capital loss carrybacks in situations when there are also net operating losses at issue. 9
Generally, the capital loss carryback would offset capital gains in the carryback year to the extent
a net operating loss is not created or increased in the carryback year. To the extent a net
operating loss from a year prior to the year that produced the capital loss was carried into the
carryback year and offset capital gains, that net operating loss is freed up to be carried to a
subsequent year.’”°

71 Id.
712 Td.
13 Sec. 741.

714 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.731-1(c)(2) and Rev. Rul. 93-7, 1993-1 C.B. 125, involve partner
obligations that were either a loan or were acquired from a third party.

oes McKee, Nelson & Whitmire, Federal Income Taxation of Partnerships and Partners,
Para. 19.02[5] (1997).

116 Sec. 731(a)(2).

™7 Sec. 1212(a)(1)(A) and (B).

18 Sec, 1212(a)(1)(A)(ii).

19 ‘Treas, Reg. sec. 1.1212-1(a)(3).

720 See Examples 4 and 5 of Treas. Reg. sec. 1.1212-1(a)(3).

263

=== PAGE 292 ===
Statute of limitations on NOL carryover years and adjustment of NOL carryover

Generally tax must be assessed within three years from the date a return for that year is
filed.’! Courts have held that, although the period of limitations for the year a net operating loss
carryover arose is not open, the amount of net operating loss carryover from a barred year can be
recalculated when determining a deficiency for an open year.’””

IRS Appeals’ “no immediate tax consequence” policy

If a taxpayer does not agree with adjustments made by an examiner, generally a taxpayer
has the opportunity to take that dispute to Appeals, a dispute resolution function within the IRS.
Most cases considered by Appeals involve disputed tax liability and as a general rule Appeals
will not consider cases when there is “‘no immediate tax consequence.”””* However, cases can
arise in which there is no disputed tax liability for the period under consideration. In such cases,
if required by law, IRS policy, regulation, ruling or procedure, Appeals will consider issues that
do not have an immediate tax consequence.’”* Appeals has indicated that one example of such a
case is a year in which a net operating loss carryover arises and the carryforward year has not yet
been examined.’ The IRS has recently established other dispute resolution procedures and at
least one of these might be available in no immediate tax consequence situations.’”°

Brief overview of Project NOLy

Project NOLy was a series of transactions structured to “soak up” losses generated in the
1996 through 2000 taxable years so that Enron could settle and close tax examinations for those
years. The transactions involve using limited liability companies (“LLCs”) taxed.as partnerships
and the constructive sale rules of section 1259 to generate capital gains that can be offset by
NOL carryovers to and losses incurred in 2000. Because the exact amount of the losses for 2000
was not known, Enron used two techniques to try to match the amount of gain as closely as
possible to the ultimately determined losses. First, it set up 14 different LLCs, each with a
different amount of potential gain available, so that when the amount of the losses was finally
determined, it could be matched as closely as possible by using a combination of LLCs. Also,

721 Sec. 6501(a).

722 Hill v. Commissioner, 95 T.C. 437, 440 (1990) and Stiebling v. Commissioner, 1994
T.C. Memo 233, aff’d without published opinion 113 F3d 1242 (9" Cir. 1997). See also Rev.
Rul. 56-285, 1956-1 C.B. 134.

73 IRM 8.1.2.2.3(1) (February 2, 1999). Apparently one reason for this position is that
Appeals resources should not be used in cases when there is no tax currently at issue.

74 IRM 8.1.2.2.3(2) (February 2, 1999).

725 Id.

© Internal IRS correspondence indicates that early referral might be available in such a
situation. See Rev. Proc. 99-28, 1999-2 C.B. 109, for a description of the early referral program.

264

=== PAGE 293 ===
Enron used certain technical provisions of the constructive sale rules to delay determining how
much gain to report in 2000 until the end of March 2001 7 Enron intended to recognize the
corresponding loss in a subsequent year.

Background”

Reported tax and financial statement effects

Enron reported a capital gain of $5.6 billion on its 2000 consolidated tax return as a
consequence of Project NOLy and paid taxes of $63 million in that year. The partnerships were
liquidated in late 2001, causing recognition of a capital loss of $5.6 billion.’ That capital loss
was carried back to 2000, offsetting capital gain that resulted from the constructive sale in that
year.”°° Pursuant to the ordering rules, NOLs would be freed up allowing them to be carried to
subsequent years.’?! Enron anticipated that application of the capital loss carryback would also
result in a refund of the $63 million in taxes paid in 2000.7

For financial purposes, this transaction was considered to be neutral.”

Development of Project NOLy

Project NOLy was initially developed internally within Enron. Enron wanted to close out
examinations on back years from which there were loss carryovers and believed that to do so
they needed to trigger enough gain so that there was tax liability for 2000. The Managing
Director and General Tax Counsel asked one of the directors in the Tax Department to devise a
plan to accomplish this. A plan was developed that utilized the constructive sale rules of section
1259 to generate gain in 2000 by segregating the gain portion of existing financial contracts into
partnerships so that the gain could be recognized. Pursuant to section 1259, a taxpayer is
deemed to have sold an appreciated financial asset if derivatives or short sales are used to lock in
the gain. The gain part of the project had to be completed by the end of 2000. However, by

PT Sec. 1259(c)(3) discussed in more detail below.
78 The information regarding Project NOLy was obtained from Joint Committee staff
interviews of Robert J. Hermann, Greek L. Rice, and Stephen H. Douglas as well as from

documents and information provided by Enron and the IRS.

723 Enron Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation Staff, June 7, 2002, at 15.
The General Background Materials in Appendix B contain this document.

730 Id.
31 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.1212-1(a)(3).

732 BC2 000038222. Part of a document entitled, “Chiricahua Partnerships and Related
Transactions (“Project NOLY”)” provided to the Joint Committee staff by Enron.

733 Joint Committee staff interview.

265

=== PAGE 294 ===
using 14 different LLCs taxed as partnerships and certain technical requirements of section

1259(c)(3), determining the exact amount of the gain to be recognized was postponed until late
March 2001.

The business purpose of Project NOLy was stated to be to economically segregate the
“{n-the-money” portion of the financial trading book of Enron North America, Corp., a wholly
owned subsidiary of Enron Corp. (“ENA”). 7" The reason 14 LLCs were needed to do this was
not given.

Implementation of Project NOLy”>

ENA routinely entered into positions, including swaps, futures contracts, options and
forward contracts with third parties relating to the price of natural gas and other commodities.
Usually ENA would enter into offsetting positions with its wholly owned subsidiary Risk
Management and Trading Corp. (“RMT”) pursuant to an ISDA Master Agreement”*° dated
March 31, 1997, and periodic confirmations executed in association with that agreement (“ENA
Master Swap). This served to place the risks for these types of transactions in one entity, RMT,
which made managing the risk easier.

On December 20, 2000, 14 Delaware LLCs were formed by RMT and FS 360 Corp., a
wholly owned subsidiary of RMT (“FS 360”).’°7 These 14 LLCs, which elected to be taxed as
partnerships, were named RMT Chiricahua 1’°8 through RMT Chiricahua XIV (‘Chiricahuas”).
FS 360 owned a .01 percent interest in the capital, profits and losses of each partnership, which it
acquired in exchange for a cash contribution to that entity. RMT acquired a 99.99 percent

734 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 114. The answer references a memorandum to Robert

J. Hermann from Stephen H. Douglas dated August 29, 2001. Appendix B, Project NOLy
contains this document.

735 This section is based in large part on an opinion letter from Vinson & Elkins to Enron
Corp. dated February 26, 2001, contained in Appendix C, Part X to this Report; a draft opinion
letter from Vinson & Elkins to Enron Corp. dated December 17, 2001, also contained in
Appendix C, Part X to this Report; summaries of the transaction provided to the Joint Committee
staff by Enron at EC2 000038199-206 and a memorandum from Stephen H. Douglas to Robert J.
Hermann dated August 29, 2001. Appendix B, Project NOLy contains this memorandum.

736 An ISDA Master Agreement is a standard form agreement copyrighted by the
International Swap Dealers Association that sets forth the terms and conditions governing any
specific swaps made pursuant to the agreement among the parties to it.

737 Current Management is not aware of any internal approval process for Project NOLy.
Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation,
dated January 13, 2003, answer 110.

738 The Chiricahua partnerships were named for a golf course at the Desert Mountain
Golf Club in Scottsdale, Arizona. Joint Committee staff interviews.

266

=== PAGE 295 ===
interest in the capital, profits and losses of each entity, in exchange for a cash contribution and its
agreement to enter into an ISDA Master Agreement dated December 20, 2000, between RMT
and the Chiricahuas and the associated confirmation dated December 27, 2000 (“RMT Swaps”),
which represented offsetting positions with respect to certain of the contracts held by RMT. All
of the RMT Swaps were substantially in the money at the time of execution and represented a
transfer of value from RMT to the Chiricahuas. The amount of the net cash payments required to
be made under each of the RMT Swaps to each Chiricahua was based upon the specific terms set
forth in the associated confirmation based on the notional volumes and prices set forth therein. It
was anticipated that a substantial net payment would be made by RMT to each Chiricahua over
the life of the RMT Swaps rather than requiring a payment to be made by the Chiricahuas to
RMT. None of the Chiricahuas was required, under the terms of the RMT Swaps, to make any

net payments in the aggregate to RMT in excess of the amounts actually received by such entity
from RMT.

Tularosa LLC was a Delaware LLC whose members were ENA and Mangas I Corp., a
wholly owned subsidiary of ENA (“Mangas”). ENA owned a 99.99 percent interest in Tularosa
and Mangas owned the remaining .01 percent interest. Subsequent to the execution of the RMT
Swap, RMT entered into an ISDA Master Agreement dated December 20, 2000 with Tularosa
and an associated confirmation dated December 27, 2000, for a total return swap (“Tularosa
Swap”) with respect to RMT’s membership interest in each Chiricahua. Under the terms of the
Tularosa Swap, RMT was entitled to receive from Tularosa on the settlement date, a fixed sum
equal to the fair market value of RMT’s membership interests in the Chiricahuas on the initial
contract date and RMT was required to pay Tularosa the fair market value of the membership
interests in the Chiricahuas on the settlement date, plus the amount of any distributions from the
Chiricahuas during the term of the contract. The Tularosa Swap was effective December 27,
2000, and the settlement date was January 2, 2002. Enron Corp. guaranteed Tularosa’s
obligation under the Tularosa Swap. By entering into the Tularosa Swap, RMT became subject
to the constructive sale rules of section 1259, causing it to recognize $5.6 billion in gain (the
difference between its basis in the Chiricahuas and the fair market value of its interest in the
Chiricahuas) in the 2000 taxable year.

Because it would take a few months to determine precisely the amount of losses at the
end of its 2000 taxable year, Enron sought to use technical rules contained in section 1259(c)(3)
to delay final determination of the amount of gain until the end of March 2001. There is an
exception to constructive sale treatment for any transaction that is closed before the end of the
30th day after the close of the taxable year in which it was entered into.” This exception to the
constructive sale rules is only available if the taxpayer holds the appreciated financial position to
which the transaction relates throughout the 60-day period beginning on the date such transaction
is closed and at no time during such 60-day period is the taxpayer’s risk of loss reduced (under
the principals of section 246(c)(4)) by holding positions with respect to substantially similar or
related property.’“°

9 Sec, 1259(c)(3).

740 Id.

267

=== PAGE 296 ===
To this end, less than 30 days after the end of the taxable year, on January 29, 2001, RMT
and Tularosa entered into an early settlement of the Tularosa Swap. This early settlement
triggered a $701.8 million termination payment by Tularosa to RMT (because gas prices had
declined since December 27, 2000) and was considered to be a closed transaction, nullifying the
constructive sale, provided the 60-day rule was not applicable.”*! However, Enron intended to
use the 60-day rule to further extend the time for determining how much gain was needed to
offset the losses. By March 27, 2001, Enron’s Tax Department had concluded that the entire
$5.6 billion gain should be recognized in 2000. In order to ensure that the entire gain was
recognized, RMT and Tularosa entered into a new total return swap within 60 days of
termination of the termination of the original Tularosa Swap. This brought the transactions
within the 60-day rule”? with the result that the $5.6 billion gain was deemed to be recognized in
2000. RMT’s basis in the Chiricahuas was increased by the same amount.

At the time Project NOLy was developed and implemented, it was assumed that it would
be unwound in January 2002.3 However, due to Enron’s financial deterioration in 2001, a
decision was made to unwind Project NOLy in 2001 by liquidating the Chiricahuas thereby

triggering the offsetting $5.6 billion capital loss. The Chiricahuas were liquidated in December
2001."

The following consequences resulted from the liquidation of the Chiricahuas.”° FS 360
redeemed its original $500,000 investment and all other assets and liabilities were transferred to
RMT. The only assets of the Chiricahuas were accounts receivable from RMT, the RMT Swaps
and cash. When the liquidation occurred, RMT was distributed cash and the RMT Swaps.
RMT’s basis now included the $5.6 billion gain recognized in 2000. Because it received
relatively little cash and its own liability, the RMT Swaps, on which it recognized no gain or
loss, a large capital loss, essentially equal to the $5.6 billion capital gain in the previous year,
was recognized. The recognition of this loss and the resultant carryback to earlier years was
projected to result in a refund of the $63 million of tax paid in 2000. Because the capital loss
carryback from 2001 cannot increase or produce an NOL, the approximately $2.5 billion of
operating losses that arose in 2000 would continue to offset capital gains of that amount in 2000.

741 Id.
742 Id.

™3 Opinion letter from Vinson & Elkins to Enron Corp. dated February 26, 2001, at 2.
Appendix C, Part X to this Report contains this letter.

™4 Enron Corp. Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation Staff, June 7, 2002, at
15. The General Background materials in Appendix B contain this document.

45 Draft opinion letter from Vinson & Elkins dated December 17, 2001, at 4-10.
Appendix C, Part X to this Report contains this letter.

268

=== PAGE 297 ===
However, the pre-2000 NOL carryovers would be freed up and available to be carried to
subsequent years,“

The diagram on the next page depicts the Project NOLy structure as of December 2000.

746 EC2 000038222. Part of a document entitled, “Chiricahua Partnerships and Related
Transactions (Project NOLy)” provided by to the Joint Committee staff by Enron.

269

=== PAGE 298 ===
JO AIAG (1) usomjoq aoueroyyip Jo JUOUIOTNES Yseo ION “OTT enyeouiyD Ul ysouojUl S.LINY 0} poyefor suMjor [fe DTT esosepny,
0} Ked 0} uoneSigo s,LINY JOJ winjor UT UOTTTIG 9¢¢°s$ LINY Aed 0} soorde OTT esosejny, Aqozoym yownuos dems winjol [BIOL s

‘quowiXed poxly UOTIIG 9¢¢°S$ (IT) pUk ‘JSoZOJUT YONS UO SUOTINGINSIP + BJep JUSWII]IOS Je JSOIOUT ENYeOIIIYD

%66'66

(s}oeI]UOD [eIDUeUTy
OM} QAOG? WOIJ
JOUNSIP SI uoTIsod
sIUL) SLOVULNOOD
*NId ONILLLESAIO
LOaVW-sAO

Ca LVIOdaddV

%10°0

_ 09€ SA

W- -----------------------

drysiouyzed - VW
uonerodios - [|
pussey xe “SN

Jenuapyuop

“Thy %66'66
NX ua %001
YI
fOg
“diod sesureyy . IN
%0OT 4 (uontsod Ayred ,.€ WNA [eursi0
%001 vA Woy youNSIp uoNIsod SumesjjO)
a SLOVULNOO ‘Nid ONLLLASHAO
WN t--------"
+ eee
%001 SLOVurNR >
VULNOO ‘NET saLLava
ae
aNd

0007 Jequiaseq — AION 10f01d

270

=== PAGE 299 ===
Role of outside advisors

Although the plan that became Project NOLy originated within the Enron Tax
Department, Vinson & Elkins became involved during the development stage. Arthur Andersen
was involved on the accounting side of the transaction and concluded that it was a “neutral”
transaction for financial accounting purposes. ”4’

In an opinion letter dated February 26, 2001, Vinson & Elkins opined that the
transactions should result in the following: (1) a constructive sale of RMT’s membership interest
in Chiricahua under section 1259; (2) the recognition of gain in an amount equal to the excess of
the fair market value of RMT’s member interest in Chiricahua over its basis in such interest; and
(3) an increase in RMT’s basis in its interest in Chiricahua in an amount equal to the gain
recognized as a result of the constructive sale.“8 An important element in conclusion (2) was
that RMT did not receive any basis for its interest in any of the Chiricahuas as a result of its
agreement to enter into the RMT Swap because it was an obligation of a partner in which the
partner had no basis.

In a separate letter, Vinson & Elkins opined with regard to the tax consequences of the
liquidation of all of the Chiricahuas concluding the liquidation should generate capital losses that
Enron would be able to carry back to 2000. Vinson & Elkins also concluded that RMT’s basis in
the Chiricahuas would be increased by the amount of gain recognized on the constructive sale in
2000. When the partnerships were liquidated, RMT received only cash and the RMT Swaps. -
Vinson & Elkins concluded that for the same reasons it was viewed as a nonevent in the
formation of the Chiricahuas, it should be viewed as a nonevent in the liquidation.

Consequently, RMT should be regarded as receiving only cash in the liquidation enabling it to
recognize a loss in the amount its basis exceeded the cash received.

Appendix C, Part X to this Report contains the tax opinions Enron received in connection
with Project NOLy.

747 Joint Committee staff interviews and letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to
Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 107, which
indicates that current management of Enron is unaware of “any documents relating to the
financial accounting for Project NOLy, other than a passing comment in a document Bates
stamped EC2 000038207.” The Project NOLy materials in Appendix B contain this document --
a memorandum to Robert J. Hermann from Stephen H. Douglas dated August 29, 2001. The
document states “[t]he transaction will not result in negative accounting consequences for ENA
because the tax gain resulting at the outset of the transaction will be offset with subsequently
recognized tax losses in an equal amount...”

748 Enron indicated that the February 26, 2001 opinion letter was a final opinion. Letter
from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation, dated
January 13, 2003, answer 111. However, the copy bears numerous hand-written changes, and
therefore does not appear to be the final version.

271

=== PAGE 300 ===
Fees billed by Vinson & Elkins for project NOLy totaled approximately $90,000."
Enron’s current management is not aware of any fees paid to Arthur Andersen in connection
with services that may have been performed with respect to Project NOLy.”* °

Subsequent developments

By mid-October of 2001, IRS was close to completing the examination cycle involving
the losses that were to be carried forward. At that time, it was likely that the examination would
be agreed with the exception of one issue. IRS appears to have been concluded that the Appeals
Office could take jurisdiction of the remaining disputed issue in the years the NOLs arose. ‘if
the disputed issue were resolved, this would allow the examination cycle for those years to be
closed.

The IRS is in the process of examining Enron’s tax returns for years 1995 through 2001.

Discussion

Enron had loss carryovers from the 1996 through 1999 taxable years into the 2000
taxable year of approximately $3 billion.’ Based on operations in 2000, it was anticipated that
additional operating losses of more than $2 billion would be generated in that year.” 3 The Enron
Tax Department wanted to close out the earlier loss years to finalize the tax treatment of items in
those years, but believed that they needed to use up the loss carryovers and pay some tax in order
to do so. Project NOLy was designed to generate sufficient gains to soak up all of the NOLs and
losses so that Enron paid some tax in 2000.

The IRS has provided exceptions to its general policy that the Appeals Office will not
accept cases unless there is tax at issue.”>4 One of the exceptions to this no immediate tax
consequence policy is for adjustments made to an NOL carryforward when the carryforward year
has not yet been examined. By mid-October of 2001, IRS was close to completing its

74° Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 113. The answer indicates that Enron has paid
$77,228.62 of this amount. The remainder, $13,363.75, was billed in the fall of 2001 and related

to the liquidation of the Chiricahua entities, but may not have been paid due to the bankruptcy
filing.

750 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 108.

75! Internal IRS correspondence.

72 Qpinion letter from Vinson & Elkins to Enron Corp. dated December 17, 2001.
Appendix C, Part X to this Report contains this letter.

753 Id.

734 IRM 8.1.2.2.3(2) (February 2, 1999).

272

=== PAGE 301 ===
examination of a cycle including years in which the net operating loss carryforwards arose with
only one issue remaining unagreed. IRS appears to have concluded that an Appeals forum would
be available to Enron in that situation to resolve the unagreed issue.”

The stated reason for Project NOLy was to finalize the treatment of items in the years the
net operating losses were generated, 1996 through 1999. These were the years in which Enron
implemented a number of the structured transactions described in this Report. It appears that the
purpose behind Enron’s implementation of Project NOLy was to use technical tax rules to
manipulate its tax situation in order to put the IRS in the position that it would have to sign off
on years in which Enron implemented other structured transactions.

Project NOLy is also another example of the disparity between financial statement
treatment of a transaction and tax treatment of the same transaction. For financial statement
purposes, Project NOLy was neutral. However, for tax purposes, the taxpayer recognized $5.6
billion of capital gains in one year and an essentially equal amount of capital losses in the next
year.

755 TRS internal correspondence.

273

=== PAGE 302 ===
E. Transactions in Which Enron is an Accommodation Party
1. Project Renegade
Brief overview

Enron was an accommodation party in Project Renegade. Project Renegade was
designed to enable Bankers Trust to achieve favorable tax benefits while Enron received an
accommodation fee of $1.375 million for engaging in the transaction.

Project Renegade involved Bankers Trust loaning $320 million to ECT Equity
Corporation (“ECT Equity”), a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron, in return for a long-term note
payable. Almost immediately, ECT Equity contributed the $320 million to Enron Finance
Holding Corporation (“Enron Finance”), a wholly owned subsidiary of ECT Equity, which
loaned $8 million of the proceeds to Enron Corp. and contributed the remainder ($312 million) to
Wiltshire Financial Assets, LLC (“Wiltshire”) in return for approximately 98 percent ownership
of Wiltshire.”°° Wiltshire also received a capital contribution of $8 million from a Bankers Trust
subsidiary in return for approximately a two percent ownership interest. Subsequently, Wiltshire
used the $320 million to purchase from Bankers Trust $320 million note issued by the ECT
Equity. Thus, after the circular flow of funds through the various entities, Enron had effectively
borrowed $8 million from Bankers Trust. However, as a result of certain tax rules with respect
to financial asset securitization investment trusts (“FASITs”), Bankers Trust was able to achieve
its desired tax goals.

Background’””
Reported tax and financial statement effects

Project Renegade generated $1.375 million of taxable income in 1998. The taxable
income was the fee paid by Bankers Trust to Enron for acting as an accommodation party in the
transaction. In lieu of paying Enron directly, Enron stated that Bankers Trust reduced its fee for
advising on Project Teresa by $1.375 million.’** In addition, Project Renegade increased

756 Wiltshire elected to be classified as a financial asset securitization investment trust for
Federal income tax purposes.

757 The information regarding Project Renegade was obtained from Joint Committee staff
interviews of Robert J. Hermann and R. Davis Maxey, as well as from documents and
information provided by Enron Corp. and the Internal Revenue Service.

78 An amended Project Teresa engagement letter between Bankers ‘Irust and Enron was
signed on December 29, 1998 to reflect the fee reduction. EC2 000037573 - EC2 000037592.

274

=== PAGE 303 ===
reported financial statement earnings in 1998 by approximately $800,000 ($1.375 million
accommodation fee less associated income taxes on such amount).”

Development of Project Renegade

Bankers Trust promoted the concept of Project Renegade to Enron in December 1998.7
Enron named the proposed project after one of the five golf courses at Desert Mountain Golf
Club.” The project was presented to Enron as a structure that would enable Enron to use a
special purpose entity, owned by Bankers Trust and Enron, to raise capital.

On December 18, 1998 the Executive Committee of the Board of Directors of Enron
reviewed the proposed structure. Richard A. Causey presented the proposal to the Executive
Committee with Mr. Hermann in attendance.” Mr. Causey’s presentation indicated that the
proposed transaction would create a financial structure that would enable Enron to obtain
financing from independent investors at a lower cost of funds.

The presentation to the Executive Committee indicated that a financial institution would
loan Enron $320 million in exchange for a long-term note. Subsequently, the note would be
contributed by the financial institution to a limited liability company in which Enron would
acquire four tranches of debt obligations issued by the limited liability company in an amount
approximately equal to the $320 million loaned by the financial institution. As part of the
transaction the financial institution agreed to use its best efforts to offer for sale to independent
investors the most senior tranche of the debt obligations. The total amount offered was expected
to be approximately $80 million. The interest rate payable was expected to be significantly
lower than currently available to Enron on borrowed funds. The Executive Committee was
informed of two specific risks of entering into the transaction and mitigating factors to such risk.
The two specific risks identified were (1) the ability of the outside party to market the debt
obligation, and (2) the Federal income tax consequences of the transaction.’ The Executive

759 The tax return and financial statements are also impacted by the payment of interest
expense on the net $8 million loan from Bankers Trust. The interest expense is accounted for in
the same manner as any third party loan.

76° Discussion Material for Project Renegade dated December 17, 1998 prepared by
Bankers Trust. The Project Renegade materials in Appendix B contain the materials. EC2
000037527-EC2 000037544.

76! Enron also used three of the other four Desert Mountain Country Club golf course
names to identify other tax department structured transactions. They are Cochise, Apache, and
Chiricahua. The other golf course, Geronimo, was also used, but none of the transactions that
used its name were completed.

762 Minutes of the December 18, 1998 meeting of the Executive Committee, EC
000037550.

’©3 Presentation materials titled “Below Market Financing Proposal.” EC2 000037546-
EC2 000037548.

275

=== PAGE 304 ===
Committee was informed that the marketing risk was mitigated by (1) the best efforts
underwriting agreement, and (2) the fact that the transaction could be unwound at the end of the
marketing period. The tax risks were mitigated by (1) an indemnification agreement between
Enron and Bankers Trust for any adverse tax consequences to Enron, and (2) the fact that the
transaction could be unwound in the event of any adverse tax law change.” At the conclusion
of the presentation, the Executive Committee adopted resolutions approving the transaction.’

Enron’s stated business purpose for entering into the transaction was to obtain a net
borrowing at a relatively low interest rate and earning fee income for engaging in the transaction
with Bankers Trust.’

Implementation of Project Renegade

On December 23, 1998, Bankers Trust London branch loaned $320 million to ECT
Equity. The note was a 25-year note with interest payable semiannually and principal due at the
end of the term.” Also, on December 23, 1998, ECT Equity and Bankers Trust entered into a
deposit agreement that required ECT Equity to deposit the loaned funds with Bankers Trust for
seven days with no right of withdrawal. 68 The deposit agreement would terminate on December
29, 1998, if ECT Equity requested the funds be credited to the account of Enron Finance. Enron
Finance also entered into an agreement with Bankers Trust on December 23, 1998, to deposit the
funds loaned to ECT Equity on December 29, 1998 unless Enron Finance purchased
approximately $312 million of debt securities from Wiltshire.

In addition, on December 23, 1998, Enron Finance and Bankers Trust also entered into a
put option that permitted Bankers Trust to sell the $320 million ECT Equity note to Enron
Finance unless the note had been validly assigned to Wiltshire before December 30, 1998,7°°
Enron Corp. and Bankers Trust also entered into an agreement to permit Enron to purchase the

764 Id.

765 Information contained in the minutes of the December 18, 1998 meeting of the
Executive Committee. EC 000037551. The Board of Directors of Enron was provided the details
of the transaction as part of its meeting on February 8, 1999. At such time, the Board of
Directors of Enron approved the recommendation of the Executive Committee, EC2 000037556.

766 Per Project Renegade tax overview. EC 000037523.

767 The note had a temporary interest rate of 7.2825 percent for the period December 23
through December 29. In addition, Enron indicated that the permanent rate was also 7.2825
percents. Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 31, 2003, answer 5.

768 The deposit earned interest at a rate of 4.9844 percent per annum.
76 After assigning the note to Wiltshire, Bankers Trust would have recouped $312

million of the $320 million loaned to ECT Equity and Enron would own all but $8 million of the
note.

276

=== PAGE 305 ===
ECT Equity note on December 30, 1998, if the note had not been validly assigned to Wiltshire,
and Bankers Trust had not exercised its put option. Thus, through the various deposit
agreements and put agreement, Bankers Trust was able to ensure Enron would complete the
steps and make certain the funds would be deposited with Bankers Trust during the
implementation of the transactions.

In accordance with the preconceived plan, on December 29, 1998, ECT Equity loaned
$320 million to Enron Finance. Enron Finance subsequently loaned $8 million of the proceeds
to Enron Corp. and exchanged approximately $312 million for $72 million of Class A interests,
$40 million of Class B-1 interests, $40 million of Class B-2 interests, and $160 million of Class
B-3 interests of Wiltshire. 7”° Subsequently, an affiliate of Bankers Trust exchanged $8 million
for an equivalent amount of Class A interests of Wiltshire and Bankers Trust London Branch
exchanged $1,000 for all of the Class O interests of Wiltshire. Wiltshire then used the $320
million to purchase the ECT Equity note from Bankers Trust London branch.

Upon its formation, Wiltshire elected to be classified as a FASIT for Federal income tax
purposes. The Wiltshire LLC agreement reflects the Class A and Class B interests as regular
interests under the FASIT rules (such rules generally treat the interests as a debt instrument) and
the Class O interest as the designated ownership interest. Under the Wiltshire LLC agreement
the cash flow generated from its assets ($320 million ECT Equity note receivable) was to be used
in the following order: (1) to pay the current yield and principal on the Class A interests; (2) the
current yield on the Class B-1, Class B-2, and Class B-3 interests, respectively; (3) the principal
on the Class B-1, Class B-2, and Class B-3 interests, respectively; and (4) the Class O interests.

In addition, on December 29, 1998, Bankers Trust and Enron Finance entered into a tax
indemnity agreement. In general, the tax indemnity agreement provided that Bankers Trust
would pay any taxes, penalty, and interest that Enron incurred as a result of its participation in
the transactions in excess of the amount of taxes that would be due if the interests Enron Finance
purchased were treated as debt instruments with the same economic terms as the Class A and
Class B interests purchased.””!

Enron Finance, Bankers Trust London branch, and BT Alex Brown Incorporated (“BT
Alex Brown”) entered into a placement agreement on December 29, 1998 in which Enron
engaged BT Alex Brown as its exclusive placement agent (on a best efforts basis) for the sale of
$72 million of Class A interests in Wiltshire until June 30, 1999. BT Alex Brown’s fee was
$50,000 plus out-of-pocket expenses. However, the fee was to be paid by Bankers Trust not
Enron.

7 The Class A interests accrued interest at 5.7 percent per annum, the Class B-1 accrued
interest at 7.126283289 percent per annum, the Class B-2 accrued interest at 7.276283289
percent per annum, and the Class B-3 accrued interest at 7.426283289 percent per annum. It was
anticipated that the Class A interests would be fully amortized by December 31, 2002.

™ The Project Renegade materials in Appendix B contain the tax indemnity agreement.
ECx000002324-Ecx000002336.

277

=== PAGE 306 ===
Bankers Trust and Enron Finance also entered into a purchase option agreement on
December 29, 1998, permitting Enron Finance the right to purchase Bankers Trust Class O
interests in Wiltshire on or after December 15, 2006, provided no Wiltshire Class A interests are
then outstanding.

The diagram on the next page depicts the Project Renegade structure.

278

=== PAGE 307 ===
$}SO19}]U] CE SSPID

000‘ L$ pue sise1a}u|

jenuspljuod

$1S019}U Z-g SSBID U!
S}S@19}U] |-g SSBID U

—---~—~---+----}

aiqeked
AION ‘dog Aynba
LOZ uoKIwW OZE$
pue 000‘L00'8$

aiqekey ajON ‘diog Ayinba 104-7
woze$  L-~ 2
a

i -
-_ -
-_ -
“7 “7

oo
a7 277 UO OZES

rm
iw

sjossy
youug CO
usva
uoneiodiog =]
soneg pry, =
parepyosuop dvvOuomg =

!
|
| uo ZLE$

279

vol OZEs

oI Bg

S661 ‘67 JequIadeq JO sB aINjJON-S

apesousy yoloi1g

=== PAGE 308 ===
Subsequent developments

The placement of the $72 million of Wiltshire Class A interests held by Enron Finance
was not a success. Enron stated that it was unaware of the efforts, if any, that BT Alex Brown
made to sell the Class A shares or what market conditions resulted in the sale being
unsuccessful.’ As such, except for interest on approximately $8 million, the interest on the
$320 million ECT Equity note held by Wiltshire was returned to Enron Corp. via Enron

Finance’s interest in Wiltshire.
Discussion

Enron’s corporate resolutions state that Enron engaged in Project Renegade to obtain
financing at a significantly lower cost of capital than could be obtained through more traditional
means. However, Enron tax personnel involved in the project indicated that the primary reason
for entering into the arrangement was to earn an accommodation fee. The fact that Project
Renegade only provided Enron with $8 million of financing, and such financing was anticipated
to fully amortize within five years, lends credence to their statements that Enron engaged in the
transaction as an accommodation party. In addition, Enron could not produce any risk analysis,
investment analysis, or other documentation regarding the determination of the appropriate
market rate of interest on the Class A and B interests in Wiltshire.” Enron also could not
produce any analysis illuminating the financial reasons an investor would be willing to purchase
a general obligation ECT Equity debt instrument at a lower yield than a comparable Enron debt
instrument.’”* The lack of contemporaneous financial analysis also indicates that Enron’s main
objective in the transaction was to earn an accommodation fee.

A review of the documents involved in Project Renegade reflects that many agreements
were subject to additional agreements with related parties that effectively altered the actual
economic arrangement of the parties and further supports the notion that Enron would not have
engaged in the transactions absent the accommodation fee.

For example, ECT Equity borrowed $320 million from Bankers Trust in return for a 25-
year note. However, deposit agreements among ECT Equity, Enron Finance, and Bankers Trust
required the funds to be deposited with Bankers Trust for one week with no right of withdrawal
except for the purpose of enabling ECT Equity and Enron Finance to effectuate the prearranged
steps to facilitate Bankers Trust goals. If the prearranged steps were not completed within one
week, an option agreement between Bankers Trust and Enron permitted Bankers Trust to put the
ECT Equity note to Enron. Thus, through the deposit agreements and the option agreement,

77 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 44.

7 Letter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 47.

774 7 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on

Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 46. Enron stated that this type of analysis would
normally be undertaken by outside advisors.

280

=== PAGE 309 ===
Bankers Trust could ensure that the $320 million would never be outside its control unless ECT
Equity and Enron Finance completed the prearranged steps. If the steps were completed,
Bankers Trust was assured of having only $8 million of capital at risk.””> Thus, although ECT
Equity and Bankers Trust documented a $320 million note, the economic reality was that
Bankers Trust was willing to put only $8 million of capital at risk and only if Enron and its
controlled subsidiaries engaged in the prearranged steps for the benefit of Bankers Trust.’”°

Although Enron did not engage in Project Renegade to generate a Federal income tax
benefit for itself, Project Renegade highlights the potential for abuse of tax code provisions if
taxpayers act in concert. In this transaction Enron and Bankers Trust, arguably in an attempt to
shroud the facts of its financial relationship, had Bankers Trust pay the accommodation fee via a
reduction of fees owed to Bankers Trust with respect to another structured transaction.

As the focus of this Report is to address Enron’s tax situation, the Joint Committee staff
has not been able to review Bankers Trust’s tax situation to determine the reasons Banker Trust
desired to engage in the transaction. However, the structure appears to have enabled Bankers

Trust to report taxable gain on the sale of the $320 million ECT Equity note to Wiltshire in 1998
that would reverse at a later date.’””

The taxable gain results from the treatment required for contributions of property to a
FASIT under section 860L. In general, gain (but not loss) is recognized immediately by the
owner of the FASIT upon the transfer of assets toa FASIT. A taxpayer generally computes any
recognized gain based on the fair market value of the contributed assets. However, in the case of
debt instruments that are not traded on an established securities market, special valuation rules
apply for purposes of computing gain on the transfer of such debt instruments to a FASIT.
Under these rules, the value of such debt instruments is the sum of the present values of the
reasonably expected cash flows from such obligations discounted over the weighted average life
of such assets. The discount rate is 120 percent of the applicable federal rate, compounded
semiannually, or such other rate that the Secretary shall prescribe by regulations. Using this
formula, Bankers Trust, as the Federal income tax owner of the Wiltshire FASIT, likely reported
a taxable gain on the sale of the ECT Equity note irrespective no such gain occurred on the sale.

775 This result occurs because one of the prearranged steps required Wiltshire to purchase
the ECT Equity note from Bankers Trust for $320 million. Wiltshire paid for such purchase
using $312 of the $320 million purportedly loaned to ECT Equity and returning the $8 million
contributed by Bankers Trust for a Class A interest.

7 The Bankers Trust materials presented to Enron specifically highlighted the circular
cash flow arrangement with the end result being a $10 million loan to Enron. The Project
Renegade materials in Appendix B contain the documents. EC2 000037544. The executed
documents resulted in only an $8 million loan to Enron.

777 Although taxpayers do not normally accelerate taxable income, there are
circumstances when such acceleration is beneficial to taxpayers (e.g., see Project NOLy in this
Report). As stated above, the Joint Committee staff has not reviewed Bankers Trust tax
situation.

281

=== PAGE 310 ===
In summary, the Joint Committee staff believes that the documents reviewed reflect that
Project Renegade had no purpose to Enron other than to facilitate its participation as an
accommodation party in a tax motivated transaction undertaken by Bankers Trust.

2. Project Valhalla

Brief overview

Project Valhalla was a financing transaction structured to provide tax benefits to
Deutsche Bank under foreign law. Enron served as an accommodation party and effectively
received a fee for its participation in the transaction. It appears that the transaction allowed
Deutsche Bank to receive from Enron a stream of income that was treated as a nontaxable
dividend under German law, but to finance this stream of income with deductible interest
payments made to Enron. Enron’s fee took the form of a rate spread between these two amounts.

In implementing Project Valhalla, Enron formed a German entity that was treated as a
corporation under German law, but that elected to be treated as a disregarded entity for U.S.
Federal tax purposes. Deutsche Bank transferred $2 billion to this entity in return for
participation rights that provided for minimum distribution payments at a 7.7-percent rate of
interest. The participation rights were treated as debt for U.S. Federal tax purposes, but as equity
for German tax purposes. The German entity used the cash received from Deutsche Bank to
purchase preferred stock in an Enron domestic affiliate, and then used the dividend income from
the preferred stock to fund the minimum distribution payments on the participation rights.

At the same time, the parties established a largely offsetting loan and payment stream, in
which Enron transferred $1.95 billion to a Deutsche Bank branch in exchange for a promissory
note bearing interest at a rate of 8.74 percent.

Under German law, since the participation rights were treated as equity, the minimum
distribution payments associated with these rights were treated as dividends, which Deutsche
Bank was able to receive free of tax under German law. At the same time, the payments of
interest to Enron on the note presumably were deductible to the Deutsche Bank branch. Taken
together, it appears that this treatment allowed Deutsche Bank to use deductible payments to
finance a stream of tax-exempt income.

From Enron’s perspective, the rate spread in its favor between the note and the
participation rights generated net pre-tax interest income and effectively constituted Enron’s
accommodation fee. Enron deducted the smaller payments on the participation rights as interest
expense, and included the larger payments received on the note as interest income, thus reporting
net interest income on its U.S. Federal consolidated return as a result of the transaction.

282

=== PAGE 311 ===
Background’”®

Reported tax and financial statement effect

The $2 billion in participation rights less the $1.95 billion note resulted in a net $50
million borrowing by Enron from Deutsche Bank.

The interest rate spread in Enron’s favor was expected to yield approximately $100
million of pre-tax income, or approximately $65 million in financial net income, over the
intended five-year life of the structure.” Enron reported approximately $7 million of financial
net income from the transaction for 2000, and $9 million through the third quarter of 2001. The
primary tax return effect for 2000 was net taxable income of $11 million.’*°

Development of Project Valhalla

Based on Joint Committee staff interviews, it appears that Deutsche Bank originated the
idea for Project Valhalla and prepared the early promotional materials for the transaction. R.
Davis Maxey and Tina Livingston were the primary Enron personnel working on the transaction.

On December 13, 1999, Richard A. Causey introduced the idea for Project Valhalla to
Enron’s Board of Directors’ Finance Committee. Mr. Causey described the transaction as a
proposed subsidiary preferred stock financing. He stated that as part of Enron’s overall
financing plan, the Company was proposing the sale of up to $2.2 billion of securities to a non-
affiliated investor group. The proposed sale of securities was approved for recommendation to
Enron’s Board of Directors.’®!

The following day, Herbert S. Winokur, Jr. addressed Enron’s Board of Directors and
recommended the Finance Committee’s proposal for a subsidiary preferred stock financing. The
Board approved the proposal maintaining that it was in Enron’s best interest to provide financing
and liquidity to its affiliates and provided for the sale of up to $2.2 billion of securities to an
investor or investor group not affiliated with Enron. 782

78 The information regarding Project Valhalla was obtained from Joint Committee staff
interviews of Robert Herrman, James A. Ginty, R. Davis Maxey, Jordan Mintz, and Tina
Livingston, as well as from documents and information provided by the Enron Corporation.

79 Enron “Project Valhalla Business Review,” EC2 000038364-65.

780 Enron “Tax Overview of Project Valhalla,” EC2 000038072.

781 Agenda for the Meeting of the Finance Committee of the Enron Board of Directors,
December 13, 1999, item #3, at EC2 000038092; Minutes of the Meeting of the Finance
Committee of the Enron Board of Directors, December 13, 1999, paragraph 4, at EC2
000038098.

782 Minutes of the Meeting of the Board of Directors of Enron Corp., December 14,
1999, EC2 000038084-87.

283

=== PAGE 312 ===
Implementation of Project Valhalla

In May 2000, Enron and Enron Diversified Investments Corporation (“EDIC”), a
domestic affiliate of Enron, formed Enron Valkyrie (“Valkyrie”), a Delaware limited liability
company that elected to be classified as a partnership for U.S. Federal income tax purposes.
Enron contributed $67,535,500 in exchange for a 95 percent membership interest in Valkyrie,
and EDIC contributed $3,554,500 in exchange for a five percent membership interest in
Valkyrie. Under Valkyrie’s company agreement, all items of income, gain, loss, deduction, and
credit were allocated in accordance with the members’ respective interests.

Shortly thereafter, Valkyrie formed Valhalla GmbH (“Valhalla”), a German limited
liability company. Valkyrie contributed $71.09 million to Valhalla in exchange for all of the
common shares of Valhalla. Valhalla, in turn, contributed $71.09 million to Rheingold GmbH
(“Rheingold”), a German limited liability company, in exchange for all of the common shares of
Rheingold. Rheingold obtained additional financing through a loan from Enron of $106.63
million and issuance of a note to Enron evidencing the loan with interest payable at a rate of 7.7
percent.’ Valhalla and Rheingold both elected to be treated as disregarded entities for U.S.
Federal income tax purposes.

Following this series of transactions, Valhalla and Rheingold entered into a subscription
and procurement agreement, pursuant to which Valhalla agreed to procure a subscriber for, or to
subscribe for, certain participating debt rights in Rheingold. The subscription price for the
participation rights was $2 billion. Then Rheingold, Valhalla, and Deutsche Bank entered into

‘an agreement on the participation rights, pursuant to which Valhalla waived its right to subscribe
for such rights and Rheingold issued the participation rights to Deutsche Bank in exchange for
$2 billion.

Deutsche Bank is a German corporation that is engaged in the banking and financial
services business. It is a resident of Germany for German tax purposes and therefore is eligible
for benefits under the U.S.-German income tax treaty. Under German corporate law, Deutsche
Bank, as holder of the participation rights, had no voting rights and generally had the rights of a
creditor. The terms of Deutsche Bank’s participation rights were as follows: (1) participation
with the common stock in distributions made by Rheingold to the extent of their ratable share of
Rheingold’s capital; (2) entitlement to minimum distributions paid annually by Rheingold at a
rate of 7.7 percent to the extent Rheingold had sufficient distributable profits; (3) participation in
liquidation proceeds to the extent of their ratable share of Rheingold’s capital; and (4) a fixed
maturity of 35 years.’*4

783 Tn order to address certain German tax and accounting issues, the note provided for
repayment of the greater of: (1) the Euro equivalent of $106.63 million at the exchange rate on
the date of issuance; or (2) the Euro equivalent of $106.63 million on the day the note was

repaid. Rheingold had the right under the note to prepay all or any portion of the principal
amount of the loan.

784 ‘A sreement on Participation Rights, May 2, 2000, Ecx0000094 13.

284

=== PAGE 313 ===
Subsequent to Deutsche Bank purchasing the participation rights, Valhalla, Valkyrie, and
Deutsche Bank entered into put and call option agreements. The agreements generally required
Deutsche Bank to sell the rights back to the Enron group within a five-year period. Deutsche
Bank and Valhalla entered into a put option agreement pursuant to which Valhalla granted
Deutsche Bank the right to sell its participation rights to Valhalla upon the occurrence of a “put
circumstance.” ”®° At the same time, Valkyrie and Deustche Bank entered into a call option
agreement”®° pursuant to which Deustche Bank granted Valkyrie the right to acquire the
participation rights upon the occurrence of a “call circumstance.” ”8”

The sale and repurchase agreements served two purposes. They facilitated unwinding the
financing transaction in a manner that would minimize both U.S. and German tax consequences,
and they provided a mechanism for substantiating Valhalla’s beneficial ownership of the
participation rights under a U.S. debt-equity analysis. If the participation rights were treated as
an equity interest for U.S. tax purposes, it would jeopardize Rheingold’s disregarded entity status
and result in additional tax to the Enron group. Therefore, the terms related to the put and call
option agreements were structured to prevent beneficial ownership of the rights from transferring
to Deutsche Bank.

Risk Management and Trading Corporation (“RMT”), a domestic affiliate of Enron, was
engaged in the business of hedging and trading financial instruments and commodities.
Rheingold used the funds it received from Deutsche Bank’s purchase of the participation rights,
along with the funds it received from Valhalla’s capital contribution and the loan from Enron, to
purchase two classes of RMT preferred stock. The first class (“Series 1”) was non-voting, non-
participating (except to the extent of a fixed 7.54048 percent dividend), and not convertible into
any other class of RMT stock. The second class (“Series 2”) included voting rights, but was
non-participating (except to the extent of a fixed 7.54048 percent dividend).’*® Valkyrie granted
Rheingold the right to put the RMT preferred stock to Valkyrie at a price that was the greater of
(1) the original issue price of the preferred stock or (2) the U.S. dollar equivalent of the original
Deutsche mark price on the date the put was exercised.’®?

As one of the final steps to the transaction, Enron loaned $1.95 billion to Deutsche
Bank’s New York branch in accordance with the terms of a promissory note. Later in 2000,
Deutsche Bank’s London branch took the place of the New York branch as obligor on the note.

785 Put Option Agreement between Deutsche Bank AG and Valhalla, May 2, 2000,
Ecx000009474.

786 Call Option Agreement, May 2, 2000, Eex000009432.

787 The put and call circumstances included, among other things, a downgrade in Enron’s
long-term credit rating.

788 Securities and Purchase Agreement between Risk Management and Trading Corp.
and Rheingold GmbH, May 2, 2000, Ecx0000099500.

789 Put Option Agreement between Enron Valkyrie, LLC and Rheingold GmbH, May 2,
2000.

285

=== PAGE 314 ===
The note was due and payable on May 2, 2005 (or earlier if a “payment event” occurred) and
required Deutsche Bank to make annual coupon payments at a fixed rate of 8.74 percent.””° The
spread between the 8.74 percent interest rate on the note and the 7.7-percent rate on the
participation rights” served as Enron’s accommodation fee on the transaction.

The $1.95 billion promissory note largely offset Enron’s $2 billion liability to Deutsche
Bank with respect to the participation rights. Enron personnel interviewed by the Joint
Committee staff could not fully explain why Enron made a net $50 million borrowing from
Deutsche Bank on the transaction, but recalled that Deutsche Bank requested that the two
instruments not completely offset each other.

The parties intended for the financing arrangement to remain outstanding for a period of
up to five years, until May 2005.

The diagram on the following page depicts the Project Valhalla structure.

790 This rate was fixed through the use of an interest rate swap. Enron personnel
interviewed by the Joint Committee staff stated that, for reasons unknown to Enron, Deutsche
Bank requested the use of a swap to generate the fixed rate, instead of using a simple fixed rate
note in the first place.

'"! Promissory Note issued by Deutsche Bank AG New York Branch to Enron
Corporation, Ecx000009541.

286

=== PAGE 315 ===
JHa|IALIG JUST.) — AdU10}}W -[eIpUOpIyuO, )

syy6ry
uoyedioued g0'z$

Auewsad
‘yueg ayosinag

Yseo uoIiIL O2$

*aJOU pasNjonsjs ay} ysuleBe }} Jasyjo pue uolUg
fenueyeA 0) SY UOHEdIoNJed $31 3nd
0} payodind yueg eyosjnag ‘L00z Jequiaseg Uy}

Ysed UOI|UW os

sissy. (12) ‘

young <>

diysssuneg V7

uonesodioy [—]

samed pay,
PowepyosoD dvVv5 vom sl

pass]

%S6

uopuo7
‘yueg ayasinag

eypeqe, y2f01g

Haws ‘ele

on
BUAYIEA
uolug

90IS PIMBJOId
ZB | SOUS az'7$

dio9 sjuawysaAuy
PaylsuaAlg UOsUy

yseo 8272S

yse9
A voi 901g

dio Buipesy 2
juswaBeuey; ¥SIYy

eee ee ene ee ee et

310N
uoNU
901$

8}ON POINONUIS GSE l$

duo9 uosug

aINjONAS [esoUsy

EC2 000038067

287

=== PAGE 316 ===
Role of outside advisors

In connection with Project Valhalla, Vinson & Elkins provided a tax opinion discussing
the U.S. Federal tax treatment of the transaction. The specific issues addressed in the opinion
were: (1) the treatment of Valhalla and Rheingold as disregarded entities; (2) the treatment of the
transactions comprising the financing transaction as a loan from Deutsche Bank to Valkyrie
(including the purchase of the participation rights, the put and call agreements, and the purchase
of RMT preferred stock); (3) the continued status of RMT as a member of the Enron group after
the issuance of Series 1 and Series 2 preferred stock; (4) Enron and EDIC’s eligibility for a
dividends-received deduction with respect to dividends from RMT allocated to them under
Valkyrie’s company agreement; (5) the deductibility by Enron and EDIC of their distributive
shares of Valkyrie’s interest expense with respect to the minimum distributions paid on the
participation rights; (6) the applicability of U.S. withholding tax on dividends payments from
RMT to Rheingold; and (7) the applicability of U.S. withholding tax on interest payments made
by Rheingold to Deutsche Bank.

Enron also received a tax opinion from Clifford, Chance and Punder, which addressed a
number of German tax issues.

Appendix C, Part XI to this Report contains the tax opinions that Enron received in
connection with Project Valhalla.

Subsequent developments

Shortly before the filing of Enron’s bankruptcy petition, Deutsche Bank gave notice of
intent to exercise its option to put the Rheingold participation rights to Valhalla, and to treat
Deutsche Bank’s obligations on the promissory note as thereby satisfied. No other steps have
been taken to unwind the structure.”””

Discussion

As explained above, Project Valhalla was structured to provide tax benefits to Deutsche
Bank, by allowing Deutsche Bank to use deductible payments to finance a stream of income that
was tax-exempt under German law. Because the Joint Committee staff’s focus in this report is
on Enron and its U.S. tax issues, the staff was not able to gather detailed information or conduct
a complete analysis of the Deutsche Bank tax benefits at the center of the transaction.”

792 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated Jan. 13, 2003, at 10.

73 Although a complete analysis of Deutsche Bank’s tax benefits is beyond the scope of
this report, it seems clear that the transaction raises significant issues regarding the ability of
taxpayers to exploit differences and inconsistencies between different countries’ tax systems
(e.g., with respect to debt-equity characterization, or entity classification). See, e.g., Joint
Committee on Taxation, Study of the Overall State of the Federal Tax System and
Recommendations for Simplification, Pursuant to Section 8022(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 (JCS-3-01), April 2001, vol. I at p. 96 (noting that the interaction between the tax

288

=== PAGE 317 ===
Enron acted as an accommodation party in Project Valhalla and received a fee for its
participation in the transaction in the form of an interest rate spread in its favor. This fee was
included as net interest income on Enron’s U.S. consolidated tax return. Strictly speaking, from
a U.S. Federal tax perspective, Enron’s benefit from Project Valhalla was a non-tax benefit, as it
originated entirely in pre-tax income and actually increased Enron’s tax liability. Nevertheless,
some may question the appropriateness of Enron’s facilitating, for a fee, the tax-avoidance
arrangements of another party.

Leaving aside the question of the appropriateness of Enron’s serving as an
accommodation party, Enron’s tax issues in the transaction mainly involved ensuring that, apart
from the net increase in taxable income attributable to the accommodation fee, the structure
created a tax-neutral result for Enron. For example, the participation rights had to be
characterized as debt for U.S Federal income tax purposes, the payments on those rights had to
be deductible as interest expense, and the dividend payments received by Rheingold from RMT
had to qualify for the dividends-received deduction, among other issues. These issues are
addressed in the tax opinion letter that Enron received from Vinson & Elkins.” In this regard, it
does not appear that Enron derived any inappropriate U.S. Federal tax benefits in connection
with the transaction -- the sum and substance of Enron’s tax treatment of the transaction was that
the company deducted interest expense that it paid to a third party and included interest income
that it received from a third party.

laws of the United States and those of foreign countries “can lead to tax arbitrage opportunities
for taxpayers, particularly when the foreign laws and the U.S. tax rules yield inconsistent tax
results for the same transaction”).

™4 See Appendix C, Part XI, to this Report.

289

=== PAGE 318 ===
II. COMPANY-OWNED AND TRUST-OWNED LIFE INSURANCE
A. Summary

Enron implemented company-owned life insurance (“COLI”) and trust-owned life
insurance (“TOLI”) programs. The discussion below provides background on the structure of
COLI and TOLI arrangements, summarizes the present law tax treatment, describes Enron's
COLI and TOLI arrangements, and provides discussion and recommendations. COLI generally
has been the subject of considerable publicity due to its Federal income tax and financial
accounting benefits,’”> and Congress has sought to limit its use as a tax arbitrage mechanism in
Federal tax legislation since the 1940's.”

B. Background, Present Law, Discussion and Recommendations

1. Background and present law relating to the tax treatment of company-owned life
insurance

Structure of COLI and TOLI arrangements historically

The term COLI refers to life insurance contracts owned by a business (whether or not the
business is actually in corporate form). The structure of a COLI arrangement generally has been
that a business buys life insurance of a type that has a cash value, and after the cash value has
built up sufficiently, the business borrows some portion of the cash value. The business can
borrow directly from the policy under a loan administered by the insurance company that issued
the policy. In such a case, the amounts borrowed with respect to the contracts may be repaid by
means of a reduction in the death benefits when the person insured under the contract dies.
Alternatively, the business may borrow from a third party lender, perhaps using the life insurance
contract as security for the loan, either formally or informally. The life insurance contract or
contracts in COLI arrangements typically have covered the life or lives of employees, customers,
or other individuals in whom the business has an insurable interest under applicable State law.
The type of life insurance contract used for COLI is a type of contract that has cash value, and is
often referred to generically as whole life insurance. This type of life insurance can be
distinguished from term life insurance, which normally has no cash value. A TOLI arrangement

15. See, e.g., Francis, Bill Seeks Disclosure on Insuring Employees, Wall St. J., Feb. 5,
2003; Francis, Insurance Disclosure of S&Ls May Change, Wall St. J., Jan. 27, 2003; Gettlin,
Tax-Free Earnings: A Life-And-Death Issue, National J., Oct 26, 2002, at 3140; Clark, Better Off
Dead?, U.S. News & World Report, May 6, 2002, at 32; Schultz and Francis, The Economy:
Senator to Target Tax Boon to Firms Insuring Workers, Wall St. J., May 3, 2002; Francis and
Schultz, Big Banks Quietly Pile Up ‘Janitors’ Insurance,’ Wall St. J., May 2, 2002; Francis and
Schultz, Many Banks Boost Earnings with ‘Janitors’ Life Insurance,’ Wall St. J., April 26, 2002;
Francis and Schultz, Why Secret Insurance on Employees Pays Off, Wall St. J., April 25, 2002;
Schultz and Francis, Why Are Workers in the Dark? Most States Don't Force Firms To Disclose
‘Janitors’ Insurance,' But Congress May Change That, Wall St. J., April 24, 2002; Schultz and
Francis. Valued Employees: Worker Dies, Firm Profits, Wall St. J., April 19, 2002.

796 description of Federal tax legislation on this subject is below.

290

=== PAGE 319 ===
is similar to a COLI arrangement, except that the life insurance contracts are held by a trust that
is generally controlled by the business, such as a trust that maintains assets to fund qualified or
nonqualified employee benefits.

Use as funding vehicle

COLI policies have been used as an indirect funding vehicle for employee benefits (or for
any other cash need of the business). Because the policies are not specifically allocated to fund a
particular expenditure, they can be used as a means of providing liquidity when direct funding of
a future obligation is not necessary or is undesirable. For example, borrowings under COLI
policies have been used to pay employers’ obligations under retiree health plans, or to make
payments under unfunded deferred compensation arrangements.

Financial statement benefits

COLI policies provide the financial statement benefit that the increase in the cash
surrender value (including earnings under the contract) and death benefits received under the
policy are treated as income for financial reporting purposes. By contrast, cash value increases
and death benefits generally are not included in income for Federal income tax purposes, thus
generally resulting in a permanent book-tax difference.’””

Borrowing in connection with COLI

Patterns of business borrowings with respect to life insurance contracts the business owns
have changed over the past several decades. These changes have resulted from growth in the
marketing to businesses of life insurance on employees, customers or other individuals, and also
from changes in the tax law, and from other factors.

Borrowing by a business with respect to a life insurance contract is attractive because the
earnings under the policy ("inside buildup") increase tax-free. The loans permit the borrower to
have the current use of income that has not been taxed. Interest paid by the borrower is credited
to the policy, which it owns, so the effect is equivalent to paying interest to itself. The amount of
the loan reduces the death benefit when the insured person dies, if the loan has not yet been
repaid; however, this is not a disadvantage to the borrower if another person (such as an
employee’s spouse) is the recipient of the death benefit. A further advantage of borrowing with
respect to a life insurance policy would arise to the extent the interest on the policy loan is
deductible.

Tax treatment

Pattern of COLI legislation

Provisions of tax legislation designed to limit the tax arbitrage of deducting interest on
borrowings with respect to a life insurance contract date to the 1940's. 8 The deductibility of

797 Premiums and interest associated with the policies, however, are treated as an
expense for financial reporting purposes, and are not deductible for Federal income tax purposes.

291

=== PAGE 320 ===
interest on borrowings that relate to life insurance contracts has been limited most recently by
Federal tax legislation in 1986, 1996, and 1997.

In 1986, deductible interest on borrowings under life insurance contracts was capped at
debt of $50,000 per contract, to combat the use of life insurance loans as an “unlimited tax
shelter”? This provision was effective for contracts purchased on or after June 20, 1986. Life
insurance contracts purchased before that date were grandfathered; the $50,000 cap did not apply
to interest on debt borrowed under such contracts.

A pattern then developed of businesses insuring the lives of thousands of their employees
to increase the amount of interest to deduct on borrowings under the contracts.° In 1996, a
broader limitation on deductibility of interest on debt under a life insurance contract was enacted,
generally replacing the $50,000 cap. That rule provided that no deduction is allowed for interest
paid or accrued on any indebtedness with respect to one or more life insurance, annuity or
endowment contracts owned by the taxpayer, and covering the life of any individual who is or
has been (1) an officer or employee of, or (2) financially interested in, any trade or business
currently or formerly carried on by the taxpayer.*°! A key person insurance exception was
provided. The 1996 legislation applied generally to interest paid or accrued after October 13,
1995, with a phase-in rule. However, the grandfather rule for pre-June 20, 1986 contracts was
preserved, with a new interest rate cap based on a Moody's rate.8?

The interest deduction limitation was further expanded in 1997 when Congress became
aware of the practice of businesses insuring the lives of customers or debtors (for example,
financial institutions insuring the lives of mortgage borrowers while borrowing under the life

78 Section 129 of the Revenue Act of 1942 (Pub. L. No. 753, 77th Cong., 56 Stat. 798)
added Internal Revenue Code section 24(a)(6), which provided that no deduction was allowed
for "any amount paid or accrued on indebtedness incurred or continued to purchase a single
premium life insurance or endowment contract. For the purposes of this paragraph, if
substantially all the premiums on a life insurance or endowment contract are paid within a period
of four years from the date on which such contract is purchased, such contract shall be
considered a single premium life insurance or endowment contract."

799 Joint Committee on Taxation, General Explanation of the Tax Reform Act of 1986
(JCS-10-87), May 4, 1987, at 579. See Tax Reform Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-514, sec. 1003,
100 Stat. 2388 (1986).

800 See Lee Sheppard, ‘Janitor’ Insurance as a Tax Shelter,” Tax Notes, Sept. 25, 1995,
p. 1526.

80! Joint Committee on Taxation, General Explanation of Tax Legislation Enacted in the
104'" Congress (JCS-12-96), Dec. 18, 1996, p. 365. See Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-191, sec. 510, 110 Stat. 2090 (1996).

802 Sec. 264(e)(2).

292

=== PAGE 321 ===
insurance policies, or maintaining other debt, and deducting the interest thereon).*? The 1997
legislation provided that no deduction is allowed for interest paid or accrued on any debt with
respect to a life insurance, annuity or endowment contract covering the life of any individual. It
also provided that, for taxpayers other than natural persons, no deduction is allowed for the
portion of the taxpayer’s interest expense that is allocable to unborrowed policy cash values of a
life insurance, annuity or endowment contract. An exception is provided under this proration
rule for contracts that cover an individual who is a 20 percent owner, officer, director or
employee of the taxpayer’s trade or business.“ The pro rata interest deduction limitation
applied generally to contracts issued after June 8, 1997. Thus, the phase-in rule under the
effective date of the 1996 legislation, and the grandfather rule under the 1986 and 1996
legislation for contracts purchased on or before June 20, 1986, were not affected.

Inside buildup and death benefits under life insurance contracts generally tax-free

No Federal income tax generally is imposed on a policyholder with respect to the
earnings under a life insurance contract®> ("inside buildup").® © Further, an exclusion from

803 See “Fannie Mae Designing a Program to Link Life Insurance, Loans,” Washington
Post, Feb. 8, 1997, p. E3; “Fannie Mae Considers Whether to Bestow Mortgage Insurance,” Wall
St. Journal, April 22, 1997, at C1.

84 This proration rule applies to policies issues after June 8, 1997. See Taxpayer Relief
Act of 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-34, sec. 1084, 111 Stat. 951 (1997), and see Joint Committee on
Taxation, General Explanation of Tax Legislation Enacted in 1997 (JCS-23-97), Dec. 17, 1997,
p. 272.

Ne By contrast to the treatment of life insurance contracts, if an annuity contract is held
by a corporation or by any other person that is not a natural person, the income on the contract is
treated as ordinary income accrued by the contract owner and is subject to current taxation. The
contract is not treated as an annuity contract (sec. 72(u)).

806 This favorable tax treatment is available only if a life insurance contract meets certain
requirements designed to limit the investment character of the contract (sec. 7702). Distributions
from a life insurance contract (other than a modified endowment contract) that are made prior to
the death of the insured generally are includible in income, to the extent that the amounts
distributed exceed the taxpayer's basis in the contract; such distributions generally are treated
first as a tax-free recovery of basis, and then as income (sec. 72(e)). In the case of a modified
endowment contract, however, in general, distributions are treated as income first, loans are
treated as distributions (i.e., income rather than basis recovery first), and an additional 10 percent
tax is imposed on the income portion of distributions made before age 59 1/2 and in certain other
circumstances (secs. 72(e) and (v)). A modified endowment contract is a life insurance contract
that does not meet a statutory "7-pay" test, i.e., generally is funded more rapidly than seven
annual level premiums (sec. 7702A).

293

=== PAGE 322 ===
Federal income tax is provided for amounts received under a life insurance contract paid by
reason of the death of the insured.*”

Premium and interest deduction limitations with respect to life insurance contracts

Premiums.—Under present law, no deduction is permitted for premiums paid on any life
insurance, annuity or endowment contract, if the taxpayer is directly or indirectly a beneficiary
under the contract.*°8

Interest paid or accrued with respect to the contract—In addition, no deduction is allowed
for interest paid or accrued on any debt with respect to a life insurance, annuity or endowment
contract covering the life of any individual,® with a key person insurance exception.®!°

Pro rata interest limitation—A pro rata interest deduction disallowance rule also applies.
Under this rule, in the case of a taxpayer other than a natural person, no deduction is allowed for
the portion of the taxpayer’s interest expense that is allocable to unborrowed policy cash
surrender values.*!' Interest expense is allocable to unborrowed policy cash values based on the
ratio of (1) the taxpayer’s average unborrowed policy cash values of life insurance, annuity and
endowment contracts, to (2) the sum of the average unborrowed cash values (or average adjusted
bases, for other assets) of all the taxpayer’s assets.

Under the pro rata interest disallowance rule, an exception is provided for any contract
owned by an entity engaged in a trade or business, if the contract covers only one individual who
is a 20-percent owner of the entity, or an officer, director, or employee of the trade or business.

807 Sec. 101(a).
808 Sec. 264(a)(1).
809 Sec. 264(a)(4).

810 This provision limits interest deductibility in the case of such a contract covering any
individual in whom the taxpayer has an insurable interest under applicable State law when the
contract is first issued, except as otherwise provided under special rules with respect to key
persons and pre-1986 contracts. Under the key person exception (sec. 264(e)), otherwise
deductible interest may be deductible, so long as it is interest paid or accrued on debt with
respect to a life insurance contract covering an individual who is a key person, to the extent that
the aggregate amount of the debt does not exceed $50,000. The deductible interest may not
exceed the amount determined by applying a rate based on Moody’s Corporate Bond Yield
Average-Monthly Average Corporates. A key person is an individual who is either an officer or
a 20-percent owner of the taxpayer. The number of individuals that can be treated as key persons
may not exceed the greater of (1) five individuals, or (2) the lesser of five percent of the total
number of officers and employees of the taxpayer, or 20 individuals.

811 Sec, 264(f). This applies to any life insurance, annuity or endowment contract issued
after June 8, 1997.

294

=== PAGE 323 ===
The exception also applies to a joint-life contract covering a 20 percent owner and his or her
spouse.

"Single premium" and "4-out-of-7" limitations.—Other interest deduction limitation rules
also apply with respect to life insurance, annuity and endowment contracts. Present law provides
that no deduction is allowed for any amount paid or accrued on debt incurred or continued to
purchase or carry a single premium life insurance, annuity or endowment contract.*? In
addition, present law provides that no deduction is allowed for any amount paid or accrued on
debt incurred or continued to purchase or carry a life insurance, annuity or endowment contract
pursuant to a plan of purchase that contemplates the systematic direct or indirect borrowing of
part or all of the increases in the cash value of the contract (either from the insurer or
otherwise).°!? Under this rule, several exceptions are provided, including an exception if no part
of four of the annual premiums due during the initial seven year period is paid by means of such
debt (known as the “4-out-of-7 rule”).

Judicial decisions relating to COLI

Interest deductions under COLI arrangements have also been limited by recent case law
applying general principles of tax law, including the sham transaction doctrine. These cases
generally cover taxable years of the taxpayers before the recent 1996 and 1997 legislation took
effect. These principles of tax law continue to apply after enactment of the specific interest
deduction limitation rules.

The case of Winn-Dixie Stores, Inc. v. Commissioner*"* involved the application of the
sham transaction doctrine. In 1993, Winn-Dixie entered into a company-owned life insurance
(COLI program on the lives of its 36,000 employees. Under the program, Winn-Dixie
purchased whole life insurance policies and was the sole beneficiary. Winn-Dixie borrowed
periodically against the policies’ account value at interest rates that averaged 11 percent. The 11
percent average interest rate, when coupled with the administrative fees, outweighed the net cash
surrender value and benefits paid on the policy. Thus, although Winn-Dixie lost money on the
program each year, the tax deductibility of the interest and fees yielded a benefit of several
billion dollars over 60 years. In 1997, Winn-Dixie terminated its participation in the COLI
program following the enactment of tax law changes in 1996 that limited the deductibility of
interest on COLI policy loans. On audit, the IRS disallowed the deductions for interest and
administrative fees that Winn-Dixie claimed on its 1993 tax return with respect to its COLI
program and COLI policy loans.

On petition to the Tax Court, Winn-Dixie argued that the deductions relating to its COLI
program were proper because: (1) the COLI program satisfied the business purpose and
economic substance prongs of the sham transaction doctrine, and (2) in any case, the sham

812 Sec. 264(a)(2).
813 Sec. 264(a)(3).

814 Winn-Dixie, 113 T.C. 254 (1999), aff'd 254 F.3d 1313 (11" Cir. 2001), cert. denied,
April 15, 2002.

295

=== PAGE 324 ===
transaction doctrine was inapplicable because Congress explicitly authorized the deductions in
connection with the COLI program. However, the Tax Court sustained the IRS disallowance of
the COLI-related deductions claimed by Winn-Dixie, concluding that the COLI program
(including the associated policy loans) was a sham.

In arguing that its COLI program had a business purpose and economic substance, Winn-
Dixie asserted that it used the earnings from the COLI program to fund the flexible benefits
. . : . 815 -
program that it provided to its full time employees.” However, the Tax Court determined that
the COLI program lost money on a pre-tax basis, and that the program generated positive
earnings and cash flow only on an after-tax basis after taking into account the deductions for
interest and administrative costs. Thus, the court concluded that the COLI program was a sham:

Even if we were to accept [the testimony of Winn-Dixie’s financial vice president] that
he intended to use tax savings to fund [Winn-Dixie’s flexible benefits program], that
would not cause the COLI plan to have economic substance. If this were sufficient to
breathe substance into a transaction whose only purpose was to reduce taxes, every sham
tax shelter device might succeed. Petitioner’s benefit from the COLI plan was dependent
on the projected interest and fee deductions that would offset income from petitioner’s
normal operations. The possibility that such tax benefits could have been used as a
general source of funds for petitioner’s [flexible benefits program] obligations (or any
other business purpose) does not alter the fact that the COLI plan itself had only one
function and that was to generate tax deductions which were to be used to offset income
from its business and thereby reduce petitioner’s income tax liabilities in each year.®16

With regard to whether Congress sanctioned the deductibility of interest and costs
relating to COLI programs, Winn-Dixie argued that the sham transaction doctrine was not
pertinent to its COLI program because Congress has repeatedly addressed the treatment of COLI
plans over the years and has permitted deductions attributable to certain COLI plans that either
satisfied explicit statutory requirements or predated the enactment of legislation to restrict such
deductions.*!” However, the Tax Court concluded that any legislative approval of COLI
programs was premised upon programs that had economic substance and were not shams:

It is clear that Congress and the Treasury Department were aware of the problems
associated with interest deductions on life insurance loans. However, we are not
persuaded that Congress, by enacting and amending section 264 or other related
provisions that restrict the deductibility of interest, intended to allow interest deductions
under section 163 based on transactions that lacked with economic substance or business

815 Winn-Dixie, 113 T.C. at 286.

816 Td. at 287-88 [footnote omitted].

817 7d. at 290.

296

=== PAGE 325 ===
purpose. In Knetsch,®'* the Supreme Court noted that nothing in the legislative history of
section 264 suggests that Congress intended to protect sham transactions. Similarly, we
find nothing in the more recent legislative history of section 264 suggesting that Congress
intended to allow deductions arising from sham transactions that lacked economic
substance and business purpose.®”?

Accordingly, the Tax Court upheld the disallowance by the IRS of the deductions
claimed by Winn-Dixie for interest and administrative costs relating to its COLI program. On
appeal, the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals adopted the reasoning of the Tax Court and
affirmed its decision.*”

Other recent cases have also upheld the disallowance by the IRS of deductions for
interest relating to COLI programs. In Internal Revenue Service v. CM Holdings, Inc.,*'
Camelot Music had purchased COLI policies in 1990 covering the lives of 1,430 employees.
Camelot borrowed under the policies to pay the first three annual premiums and sought to deduct
the interest on the borrowings. Camelot subsequently filed a petition under chapter 11 of the
Bankruptcy Code, and the IRS filed proofs of claim based on disallowance of the interest
deductions. The District Court held that the interest deductions should be disallowed, and also
concluded that the application of accuracy-related penalties was appropriate. The court stated
that there were two rationales for the interest deduction disallowance. First, the interest
deductions were part of a transaction that was in part a factual sham and therefore did not meet
the "4-out-of-7" exception to the interest deduction disallowance rule of Code section 264(a)(3).
In addition, the COLI plan lacked economic substance and business purpose, and was a sham in
substance.®?* On appeal, the Third Circuit affirmed, "based on the . . . reasoning, that the COLI
policies lacked economic substance and therefore were economic shams."*”? The Appellate
Court also affirmed the assessment of penalties.

In American Electric Power, Inc. v. U.S.,°™* the District Court concluded that interest
deductions on policy loans under a COLI program covering the lives of over 20,000 employees
should be disallowed. The court concluded that the "plan as a whole was a sham in

818 Knetsch v. United States, 364 U.S. 361 (1960) (disallowing deduction for prepaid
interest on a nonrecourse, riskless loan used to purchase deferred-annuity savings bonds)
(footnote supplied).

819 Winn-Dixie, at 293-94.

820 954 F.3d 1313 (11" Cir. 2001) (per curiam).

821 Internal Revenue Service v. CM Holdings, Inc., 254 B.R. 578 (D. Del. 2000).

822 Td. at 583, 654.

83 IRS y, CM Holdings, Inc. (In Re: CM Holdings, Inc.), 301 F.3d 96 (3d Cir. 2002), at
06

824 American Electric Power, Inc. v. U.S., 136 F.Supp. 2d 762 (S. D. Ohio 2001).

297

=== PAGE 326 ===
substance,"*”> as well as concluding that first year policy loans, and the first year and fourth
through seventh year loading dividends and corresponding portions of the premiums, were
factual shams. The court stated that it had "independently reached many of the same conclusions
as the [District] court in C.M. Holdings," and that the policies in that case were in all relevant
respects identical to those involved in this case.*6

2. Enron's COLI and TOLI transactions

Brief overview

During the 1980s and early 1990s, Enron bought approximately 1,000 life insurance
contracts covering employees. Approximately $178 million had been borrowed under these life
insurance contracts at the end of 1994, after which Enron stopped purchasing life insurance
contracts covering employees. By late 2001, the amount borrowed under Enron’s life insurance
contracts had grown to approximately $432 million. In addition to its own contracts, Enron
acquired Portland General Electric in 1997, which also owned life insurance contracts covering
its employees. As of 1999, Portland General Electric had approximately $79 million worth of
such life insurance contracts, and its affiliates owned approximately $59 million worth. Policies
covering a total of 2,315 Portland General Electric employees were purchased between 1996 and
1999. Following Enron’s bankruptcy filing on December 2, 2001, Enron surrendered its life
insurance contracts during 2002. Portland General Electric’s life insurance contracts were in the
process of being surrendered as of early 2003.

Company-owned life insurance provides tax benefits and financial statement benefits, in
addition to providing life insurance coverage of persons in whom the company has an insurable
interest (such as officers, managers or other employees). Life insurance is tax favored in that
death benefits paid by reason of the death of the insured person generally are excludable from
income, and also in that earnings on amounts credited to the policy generally are excluded from
the policyholder's income as well. Premiums paid on business-owned life insurance generally
are not deductible.

From a financial statement perspective, the untaxed income earned inside the contract
and the untaxed death benefits received under the contract can generally be credited as income
on the income statement. Accrued interest on borrowings under the contract is treated as an
expense for financial statement purposes.

825 Id. at 795.

826 Td. at 769.

298

=== PAGE 327 ===
Background®”’

Reported tax and financial statement effects

Enron treated premium payments for its COLI policies as nondeductible for Federal
income tax x purposes, and excluded from income the inside buildup and death benefits under the
contracts.*

For financial statement purposes, Enron included the increase of the cash surrender value
of the COLI policies as income, included the death benefits received as income, treated the
premiums for the policies as an expense, and treated the accrued interest on the COLI loans as an

expense. °°

Development and implementation of COLI and TOLI transactions

Enron's COLI and TOLI contracts.--During the 1980s through the mid-1990s, Enron
bought approximately one thousand life insurance contracts on the lives of individuals. 830 eee
contracts were issued by several different life insurance companies, including Great West,*

Mass Mutual (formerly Connecticut Mutual), Pacific Life, Security Life of Denver, and CIGNA.

Approximately half of Enron’s life insurance contracts covering employees (including a
group of 201 contracts purchased June 1, 1986) were purchased before June 20, 1986, the

827 The information regarding Enron’s COLI and TOLI contracts was obtained from a
Joint Committee staff interview of Mr. Hermann, as well as from documents and information
provided by Enron and the IRS.

828 1 etter of Enron's counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, January 13, 2003, answer 142. Enron made adjustments required under the adjusted
current earnings preference of the corporate alternative minimum tax with respect to inclusion of
income on life insurance contracts and deductibility of premiums (sec. 56(g)(4)(B)(ii)). Id.

829 Td. Enron's net book income adjustment for COLL, per the tax return, was -$19
million for 1996, -$24 million for 1997, -$27 million for 1998, -$35 million for 1999, and -$20
million for 2000, as shown on Enron Corp. & Subsidiaries Reconciliation of Net Income per
Annual Report to Taxable Income per Enron's Consolidated Tax Return For the Calendar Years
1996 thru 2000 in Enron Corp. Presentation to Joint Committee on Taxation staff, Washington,
D.C., June 7, 2002, at 20. Appendix B, Part I contains this document.

830 From lists of Enron life insurance contracts as of December 31, 1994, EC2
000038640 - EC2 000038689. One company list shows 1,007 contracts (Sheet 1, Enron Corp.,
Summary of COLI Values @ 12/31/1995, EC2 000038639). Another company list shows 1,046
contracts (Item 11- Attachment A, dated 5/9/2002, 2:11 PM, EC 000768247).

831 Also referred to as Great Western Life.

299

=== PAGE 328 ===
effective date of 1986 legislation limiting the tax deduction for interest on debt under a life
insurance contract.°*

In documents prepared by Clark-Bardes (a COLI broker) for Enron in connection with its
1994 purchase of life insurance contracts from CIGNA, the contracts were described as a
funding vehicle for Enron's obligation to pay deferred compensation under a 1994 nonqualified
deferred compensation arrangement with approximately 300 executives.** The life insurance
contracts were to fund the deferral of approximately $3 million of 1994 compensation by 100 of
the executives, and also to fund deferrals of compensation elected by the executives for the next
seven years. These contracts were held by a trust, rather than directly by the company, and thus
can be described as TOLI (trust-owned life insurance) contracts. Enron stopped purchasing

contracts covering employees after the purchase of this group of contracts on September 24,
1994.54

Enron had borrowed a total of approximately $178 million under its life insurance
contracts as of the end of 1994.®°° At that time, these COLI contracts had a total of
approximately $226 million of gross surrender value.®° A 1999 summary by Clark-Bardes
showed that interest rates charged on loans under some of the contracts -- those issued by
Massachussetts Mutual and Great West -- ranged from 6.75 percent to 11.75 percent during the
period 1983 - 1999.83” As the cash surrender value of the contracts increased, Enron continued
to borrow under the contracts. The summary states, “Enron’s policy blocks retain 100% loan
interest deductibility under current legislation; this deductibility is a commodity that is no longer
available in the insurance marketplace.”**8

832 Ttem 11- Attachment A, dated 5/9/2002, 2:11 PM, EC 000768247. Appendix B
contains this document.

833 Attachment D, Enron Corp. 1994 Deferral Plan, Plan Funding Conclusions and
Recommendations, Prepared by Corporate Compensation, Corporate Treasury, Clark/Bardes,
Inc., EC 000768252. Appendix B contains this document.

834 1 etter from Enron's counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, January 31, 2003, answer 11.

835 Documents listing COLI contracts as of December 31, 1994, EC2 000038640 - EC2
000038689.

836 Tq. Gross surrender value generally is the cash surrender of the contract (the amount
that would be received on surrender of the contract to the insurer that issued it), not taking into
account fees or other charges, or the amount loaned under the contract.

837 Attachment B, Enron Corporation Executive Summary, EC 000768248-9. Appendix
B contains this document.

838 Id.

300

=== PAGE 329 ===
PGE's COLI and TOLI contracts.Enron indirectly acquired COLI and TOLI contracts
through the 1997 acquisition of Portland General Electric Company ("PGE") and its affiliates.
PGE had purchased life insurance on employees in 1986, approximately 10 years before Enron
acquired PGE. The premiums were paid by PGE, and the employees had no interest in the
policies. The life insurance contracts were to fund corporate officers’ and directors’ deferred
compensation and pension plans. Policies covering a total of 2,315 Portland General Electric
employees were purchased between 1996 and 1999.®° PGE had approximately $79 million
worth of insurance contracts on the lives of its employees, and affiliates held another $59 million
worth. These figures represent the contracts’ cash surrender value as of 1999.

In preparation for a sale of PGE to Sierra Pacific that was anticipated for 2000, Enron
planned during 1999 to acquire the life insurance contracts from PGE. This expected transfer of
life insurance contracts from PGE to Enron was named "Project Granite."*° Enron tax
department analysis concluded that transferring the policies would yield an after-tax benefit to
Enron of $129 million.’ The sale of PGE to Sierra Pacific, and the transfer of PGE's life
insurance contracts to Enron, never took place.®?

Role of outside advisors

Clark-Bardes, an insurance broker, was involved with respect to contracts Enron bought
in 1983, 1984, 1985, and 1986 and in 1994. Enron also bought life insurance contracts through
the Management Compensation Group/Silverstone Group. These brokers also provided
management services to Enron, such as preparing statements listing all the life insurance
contracts and showing the contracts’ values and loan balances.

Subsequent developments

Enron's COLI and TOLI contracts._In connection with Enron's bankruptcy filing on
December 2, 2001, the company filed a statement of contingent and non-contingent interests in
certain assets, including life insurance policies.*? Shortly before Enron's bankruptcy filing,

839 1 etter from Enron's counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, January 31, 2003, answer 11.

840 Enron Corp. Project Granite, Executive Compensation/Benefits Trust, October 29,
1999, EC2 000038621 - EC2 000038634.

841 Interoffice memorandum from J. Anthony Jarrett to File, Subject: Sale of PGE:
Options for Trust Owned Life Insurance, August 6, 2002, EC2 000038636 - EC2 000038638.
Appendix B contains this document.

842 J etter from Enron's counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, January 13, 2003, answer 141. The sale of PGE to Sierra Pacific did not take place;
Enron listed PGE among its core assets in its bankruptcy filing (Dec. 2, 2001).

843 "Exhibit B-19, Contingent and non-contingent interests in estate of a decedent, death
benefit plan, life insurance policy, or trust," filed August 14, 2002, in the United States
Bankruptcy Court, S. D. N.Y. The letter from Enron's counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L.

301

=== PAGE 330 ===
Enron held 1,047 life insurance policies, the same number of contracts it had in 1994. The
contracts had a gross cash surrender value of approximately $512 million, of which

approximately $432 million was borrowed (i.e., was included in the loan balance with respect to
the policies). a4

Since the end of 1994, the loans under Enron's COLI contracts had increased by
approximately $254 million (from approximately $178 million to approximately $432 million).
During this period, the gross surrender value of the contracts increased by approximately $286
million (from approximately $226 million to approximately $512 million). Approximately half
(493 of 1,047 contracts) of Enron's COLI contracts were purchased before June 20, 1986, and
were grandfathered under the 1986 and 1996 legislation limiting interest on debt with respect to
life insurance contracts.

Enron’s life insurance contracts on employees were surrendered during the period May
through July, 2002.8

PGE's COLI and TOLI contracts._PGE is listed as a core asset in Enron's December 2,
2001, bankruptcy filing. The sale of PGE to a third party, and the transfer of PGE's life
insurance contracts to Enron, did not take place as anticipated.

The life insurance contracts held by Portland General Electric were in the process of
being surrendered as of January 31, 2003. At that time, some of the contracts had been
surrendered.*“

Discussion

Enron’s COLI and TOLI arrangements were leveraged, showing approximately $432
million of debt on $512 million of life insurance coverage by November, 2001. The purchase of

Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation, January 31, 2003, answer 11, states that the amount
borrowed was approximately $432 million as of November 30, 2001.

844 Td. The values of assets in this filing were required to be stated as of the month-end
prior to the December 2, 2001, petition date, that is, as of November 30, 2001.

845 1 etter from Enron's counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, January 31, 2003, answer 11, and Enron Corp. COLI Policies Surrendered in 2002,
EC2 000057702. The latter document is contained in Appendix B. According to a company
document (Item 11 - Attachment A, EC000768247), by August 9, 2002, 767 of Enron's life
insurance contracts covering the lives of individuals, with annual premiums of approximately
$12.7 million, had been surrendered. Another 279 life insurance contracts held by Enron on
individuals remained in force as of that date, according to the document, and final premium
payments were made in 2000 for 78 of the Enron contracts remaining in force, and annual
premium payments on the other 201 of the contracts totalled approximately $5.8 million.

4° Letter from Enron's counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, January 31, 2003, answer 11.

302

=== PAGE 331 ===
these contracts predated the 1996 and 1997 legislation limiting interest deductions under life
insurance contracts and imposing a pro rata reduction on interest deductions in the case of
taxpayers that have life insurance contracts but do not borrow directly under the contracts.

The grandfather rule under the 1986 COLI legislation would apply to those contracts
Enron purchased on or before June 20, 1986. Under this grandfather rule, neither the 1986
$50,000 per-contract cap on debt, nor the broader 1996 rule disallowing interest on debt under a
life insurance contract, applied to contracts Enron purchased on or before June 20, 1986
(although for interest incurred after the 1996 legislation, those contracts were subject to an
interest rate cap based on a Moody's rate relating to corporate bond yields).

This grandfather rule continues in effect, allowing the continued deduction of interest on
debt under contracts that were purchased on or before June 20, 1986. As years pass from the
1986 date, the value of this tax treatment increases with the growth of the cash surrender value of
the grandfathered contracts (assuming they are not treated as materially changed or otherwise
ceasing to be pre-June 20, 1986 contracts). This result could be viewed as inconsistent with

Congress’ repeated legislation limiting interest deductions with respect to life insurance
contracts.

Recommendations

In light of the growth of interest on debt incurred under Enron's life insurance contracts
that remained deductible due to the grandfather rule applicable to pre-June 20, 1986 contracts,
the Joint Committee staff recommends termination of the grandfather rule for such contracts.
Even though Enron did not purchase any additional life insurance contracts after 1994, Enron's
debt and deductible interest under life insurance contracts continued to increase throughout the
1980s and 1990s (along with the cash surrender value of the contracts). This result is
inconsistent with the legislative limitations imposed by Congress in 1986, 1996 and 1997 on
interest associated with the tax-free inside buildup of life insurance contracts. If the 1986
grandfather rule was intended to provide transition relief to businesses that had purchased life
insurance contracts before the 1986 date, sufficient time has passed that a redeployment of such
businesses’ assets could have been possible. The grandfather rule can no longer serve any
reasonable need for transition relief.

303

=== PAGE 332 ===
Ill. STRUCTURED FINANCING TRANSACTIONS
A. Background and Rationale

During the 1990s, Enron’s rapid growth necessitated significant infusions of new capital.
At tension with its capital requirements, however, was the need for Enron to maintain its credit
rating, particularly as Enron’s creditworthiness had a direct impact on its stock price. As a
consequence of this circumstance, Enron raised nearly $10 billion through various structured
financing transactions, including tiered preferred securities, investment unit securities, and
commodity prepay transactions. The primary advantage to Enron from some of these
transactions was its ability to raise capital without ostensibly incurring additional debt. Thus,
such transactions enabled Enron to maintain its credit rating and, in turn, avoid the downward
pressure on its market valuation that would likely result from additional leverage. In other
transactions, the primary advantage to Enron was its ability to liquidate appreciated equity
investments--and eliminate its risk of loss from future declines in the value of these investments-
-without actually disposing of the investments and incurring immediate recognition of gain for
Federal income tax purposes.

In the case of the tiered preferred securities and investment unit securities, the favorable
tax treatment accorded these transactions was a principal factor in Enron’s decision to raise
additional capital by issuing such securities. In the case of the commodity prepay transactions,
Enron initially engaged in these transactions solely for tax purposes, but in later years used these
transactions to manipulate its reported operating results. Throughout its participation in the
commodity prepay transactions, Enron exercised a significant degree of selectivity in its tax
treatment of these transactions, including the transactions that were carried out primarily for
financial reporting purposes in later years.

304

=== PAGE 333 ===
B. Discussion of Present Law Relating to Certain
Structured Financing Transactions

1. Debt characterization

Whether a financial instrument is treated for tax purposes as debt, equity, or some other
characterization is determined on the basis of the pertinent facts and circumstances. If an
instrument qualifies as equity, the issuer generally does not receive a deduction for dividends
paid and the holder generally includes such dividends in income (although corporate holders
generally may obtain a dividends-received deduction of at least 70 percent of the amount of the
dividend). If an instrument qualifies as debt, the issuer generally receives a deduction for
accrued interest and the holder generally includes such interest in income, subject to certain
limitations.

Under present law, the Treasury Department has the statutory authority to issue
regulations classifying an interest in a corporation as debt or equity.°” In 1989, the Treasury
Department’s authority to issue such regulations was expanded to include classification of an
interest as part equity and part indebtedness.*“* In 1992, Congress enacted additional rules to
require, in certain circumstances, that an issuer's characterization of an interest be binding on the
issuer and the holders.*“? Although the Treasury Department published proposed and final
regulations pursuant to its authority, these regulations have been withdrawn and there are no
currently applicable regulations.

2. Constructive sales

For transactions entered into after June 8, 1997, taxpayers are required to recognize gain
(but not loss) upon entering into a “constructive sale” of any appreciated position in stock, a
partnership interest or certain debt instruments as if such position were sold, assigned or
otherwise terminated at its fair market value on the date of the transaction.® If the requirements
for a constructive sale are met, the taxpayer recognizes gain on a constructive sale as if the
position were sold at its fair market value on the date of the transaction and immediately
repurchased.*°!

847 Sec, 385, enacted in the Tax Reform Act of 1969, Pub. L. No. 91-172, sec. 415(a).
848 Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1989, Pub. L. No. 101-239, sec. 7208(a)(1).

849 Sec. 385(c), enacted in the Energy Policy Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-486, sec.
1936(a).

850 Sec, 1259, enacted in the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-34, sec.

1001(a). A “position” generally is defined as an interest, including a futures or forward contract,
short sale, or option.

851 Sec. 1259(a)(1).

305

=== PAGE 334 ===
In general, a taxpayer is treated as making a constructive sale of an appreciated position if
and when the taxpayer (or, in certain circumstances, a person related to the taxpayer) does one of
the following: (1) enters into a short sale of the same (or substantially identical) property; (2)
enters into an offsetting notional principal contract with respect to the same (or substantially
identical) property; or (3) enters into a futures or forward contract to deliver the same (or
substantially identical) property. 2 In addition, in the case of an appreciated position that itself
is a short sale, a notional principal contract, or a futures or forward contract, the holder is treated
as making a constructive sale when it acquires the same (or substantially identical) property as
the underlying property for the position.® Finally, to the extent provided in Treasury
regulations, a taxpayer is treated as making a constructive sale when it enters into one or more
other transactions, or acquires one or more other positions, that have substantially the same effect
as any of the transactions described.

A forward contract results in a constructive sale of an appreciated position only if the
forward contract provides for delivery, or for cash settlement, of a substantially fixed amount of
property and a substantially fixed price.*°° Thus, a forward contract providing for delivery of
property, such as shares of stock, the amount of which is subject to significant variation under
the contract terms does not result in a constructive sale.®*°

3. Disqualified indebtedness

For most debt instruments issued after June 8, 1997, no deduction is allowed for interest
or original issue discount (“OID”) on a debt instrument issued by a corporation (or issued by a
partnership to the extent of its corporate partners) that is payable in stock of the issuer or a
related party (within the meaning of sections 267(b) and 707(b)), including a debt instrument a
substantial portion of which is mandatorily convertible or convertible at the issuer's option into
stock of the issuer or a related party.®° 7 Tn addition, a debt instrument is treated as payable in
stock if a substantial portion of the principal or interest is required to be determined, or may be
determined at the option of the issuer or related party, by reference to the value of stock of the

852 See. 1259(c)(1).
853 Id. See also Rev. Rul. 2002-44, 2002-28 LR.B. 84.

854 Sec. 1259(c)(1)(E). Future Treasury regulations are anticipated to treat as
constructive sales other financial transactions that, like those specified in section 1259, have the
effect of eliminating substantially all of the taxpayer's risk of loss and opportunity for income
and gain with respect to the appreciated position. H.R. Rep. No. 105-148, at 442-43 (1997).

855 See section 1256(d)(1).

856 HR. Rep. No. 105-148, at 442 (1997). This treatment of forward contracts is
consistent with the anticipated treatment of so-called “collar” transactions under regulations to be
issued by the Treasury Department.

®/ Sec. 163(1), enacted in the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-34, sec.
1005(a).

306

=== PAGE 335 ===
issuer or related party.°°8 A debt instrument also is treated as payable in stock if it is part of an
arrangement that is reasonably expected to result in the payment of the debt instrument with or
by reference to such stock. For example, a debt instrument may be treated as payable in stock of
the issuer or a related party in the case of a forward contract to sell such stock that is entered into
in connection with the issuance of the debt.®?

4. Straddles

A “straddle” generally refers to offsetting positions (sometimes referred to as “legs” of
the straddle) with respect to actively traded personal property. Positions are offsetting if there is
a substantial diminution in the risk of loss from holding one position by reason of holding one or
more other positions in personal property. A “position” is an interest (including a futures or
forward contract or option) in personal property. When a taxpayer realizes a loss with respect to
a position in a straddle, the taxpayer may recognize that loss for any taxable year only to the
extent that the loss exceeds the unrecognized gain (if any) with respect to offsetting positions in
the straddle.8 Deferred losses are carried forward to the succeeding taxable year and are
subject to the same limitation with respect to unrecognized gain in offsetting positions.

In addition to loss deferral, the straddle rules require taxpayers to capitalize certain
otherwise deductible expenditures for personal property if such property is held as part or all of
an offsetting position in a straddle.**! This provision applies to certain specified carrying
charges, as well as interest on indebtedness that is incurred or maintained in order to purchase or
carry the personal property.® On January 18, 2001, the Treasury Department published
proposed regulations that elaborate on the operation of the straddle capitalization rules.° In
addition, the proposed regulations would “clarify” that the straddle rules can apply to a debt
instrument that is an obligation of the taxpayer if the debt instrument provides for one or more
payments that are linked to the value of personal property or a position with respect to personal
property.

The straddle rules generally do not apply to positions in stock. However, the straddle
rules apply if one of the positions is stock and at least one of the offsetting positions is: (1) an
option with respect to the stock; (2) a securities futures contract (as defined in section 1234B)
with respect to the stock; or (3) a position with respect to substantially similar or related property
(other than stock) as defined in Treasury regulations. In addition, the straddle rules apply to

858 Sec. 163(1)(3)(B).
85° Sec. 163(1)(3)(C).
869 Sec. 1092.

86! Sec, 263(g)(1).
862 Sec. 263(g)(2).

863 66 Fed. Reg. 4746 (Jan. 18, 2001).

307

=== PAGE 336 ===
stock of a corporation formed or availed of to take positions in personal property that offset
positions taken by any shareholder.

5. Prepayment transactions

Prepaid sales of goods

A taxpayer generally is required to include an item in income no later than the time of its
actual or constructive receipt, unless the item properly is accounted for in a different period
under the taxpayer’s method of accounting.*** In general, a taxpayer may adopt an accounting
method that is different than the accounting method of an entity that is affiliated with the
taxpayer. *°°

Under an accrual method of accounting, a taxpayer generally is required to include an
item in income when all the events have occurred that fix the right to receive such income and
the amount of the income can be determined with reasonable accuracy. In general, the IRS
has long taken the position that the right to receive income becomes fixed at the earliest of when:
(1) the required performance occurs; (2) payment for such performance becomes due; or (3) such
payment is made.°®

Treasury regulations permit taxpayers to defer the recognition of taxable income in
certain circumstances if the taxpayer receives an advance payment for the sale of goods that are
to be delivered in a later taxable year. In general, such advance payments may be recognized
by the taxpayer as taxable income either: (1) in the taxable year of receipt; or (2) the earlier of
(a) the taxable year in which the payments would otherwise be included in taxable income under
the taxpayer’s method of accounting (provided such method results in the inclusion of advance
payments in taxable income no later than the time such payments are included in income for
financial reporting purposes), or (b) the taxable year in which the payments are included in
income for financial reporting purposes (provided the taxpayer’s method of accounting for
advance payments results in income inclusion earlier for financial reporting purposes than for tax
purposes).*®

864 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.451-1(a).

865 See section 446(d); Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-1(d).
866 Tq

87 Rey. Rul. 74-607, 1974-2 CB. 149.

868 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.451-5. For this purpose, an “advance payment” is defined as any
amount which is received in a taxable year by the taxpayer using an accrual method of
accounting for purchases and sales pursuant to an agreement for the sale or other disposition in a

future taxable year of goods held by the taxpayer primarily for sale to customers in the ordinary
course of the taxpayer's trade or business. Treas. Reg. sev. 1.451-5(a).

86 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.451-5(b)(1).

308

=== PAGE 337 ===
With regard to the deferral of advance payments relating to the sale of inventoriable
goods, Treasury regulations generally provide that, if the taxpayer has on hand (or has available
through the taxpayer’s normal source of supply) inventory in sufficient quantity to satisfy the
contract, then all advance payments that the taxpayer has received for such property by the last
day of the second taxable year following the year in which such substantial advance payments
are received and not previously included in income according to the taxpayer’s accrual method
of accounting, must be included in taxable income of the taxpayer in that second taxable year.8””

Prepaid forward contracts

The gain or loss on a forward contract typically cannot be determined until the settlement
date of the contract (at which time the value of the cash payment or physical delivery of the
underlying property is determined on the basis of the spot price of the underlying property).°”!
Therefore, although there is a paucity of authority that addresses the basic tax consequences of
forward contracts, it is generally understood that the common law tax treatment of a forward
contract is governed by the “open transaction” doctrine, which provides that the recognition of
gain or loss on a transaction is, in effect, “held open” until the transaction is closed and such gain
or loss can be quantified.*”” Absent the application of the constructive sale rules described
above, taxpayers generally take the view that the open transaction doctrine applies to forward
contracts even if a prepayment is made.*”

870 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.451-5(c)(1)(i).

871 4 forward contract is an executory contract that is privately negotiated directly
between the parties (i.e., there is no market or exchange intermediation as with futures contracts),
and generally provides for the delivery of a specified amount of commodities or other property at
a specified price (i.e., the “forward price”) and on a specified future date (i.e., the “settlement
date”). Depending upon the terms agreed to by the parties, a forward contract may be settled by
either physical delivery of the underlying property or by the payment of an amount of cash that is
equal to the difference between the spot price (i.e., current price on the settlement date) of the
underlying property and the forward price specified in the contract. A prepaid forward contract
is a forward contract in which the forward price is payable (generally on a present valued basis)
on a date earlier than the settlement date, typically the date that the contract is executed by the
parties.

872. See Warren, Financial Contract Innovation and Income Tax Policy, Harv. L. Rev.
460, 464 (1993).

873 Cf Virginia Iron Coal & Coke Co., 37 B.T.A. 195 (1938), aff’d., 99 F.2d 919 (4th
Cir. 1938), cert. denied, 307 U.S. 630 (1939) (holding that option premiums are not earned and,

thus, not taxable until the option lapses or is exercised because it is unknown at the time that the
option premium is received whether the option premium will be taxed as ordinary income or
capital gain).

309

=== PAGE 338 ===
6. Notional principal contracts

Pursuant to the statutory authority to prescribe methods of accounting that clearly reflect
income,*”* Treasury regulations provide for the recognition of income and deductions with
respect to payments that are made or received pursuant to a notional principal contract.*”> The
term “notional principal contract” generally describes an agreement between two parties to
exchange payments that are calculated by reference to a notional principal amount.*”° Notional
principal contracts include interest rate swap agreements, commodity swap agreements, interest
rate cap and floor agreements, currency swap agreements, and other similar contracts.°””

In a typical interest rate swap agreement, one party agrees to make periodic payments
based on a fixed rate while the counterparty agrees to make periodic payments based on a
floating rate. Payments are calculated on the basis of an underlying hypothetical or “notional
principal amount”, and payment amounts are typically netted when payments are due on
common dates. A commodity swap is similar to an interest rate swap except that a commodity
price index is used instead of an interest rate index, and the notional principal amount is
measured in units of a specified commodity, rather than in dollars.

The notional principal amount is not actually exchanged by the parties. Therefore, the
payments due under a typical notional principal contract do not constitute compensation for the
use or forbearance of money and therefore are not characterized as “interest.” However, a lump-
sum payment under one of these contracts may be economically identical to a loan and, thus, the
party making the lump-sum payment receives a return, part of which is properly characterized as
interest for tax purposes because it represents compensation for the use or forbearance of money.

The regulations define a notional principal contract as a financial instrument that provides
for payments by one party to another at specified intervals calculated by reference to a specified
index upon a notional principal amount in exchange for specified consideration or a promise to

874 Sec. 446(b).
875 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-3.
876 See Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-3(c)(1).

877 These contracts are examples of a broader family of financial instruments known as
“derivatives”, which generally are defined as contracts or securities the value of which is derived
from the price of an asset, a pool of assets, or (increasingly) anything that can be valued.
Derivatives represent contractual relationships between parties to share the economic benefits
and burdens of owning an asset (or pool of assets) without necessarily owning the asset itself
(hence the “notional” characteristic of such contracts). Because there is no comprehensive
statutory regime for the taxation of derivatives, the tax consequences of derivative contracts are
governed in a piecemeal fashion by specific rules that are scattered throughout the Code. See,
e.g., secs. 1092 (straddles), 1234 (options), 1234A (payments to terminate certain derivatives),
1234B (securities futures contracts), 1256 (certain exchange-traded contracts), and 1259
(constructive sales). As applied to derivatives, these rules are incomplete and often inconsistent
in specific situations.

310

=== PAGE 339 ===
pay similar amounts.*”® The term “specified index” is broadly defined to include almost any
fixed rate or variable rate, price, index, or amount based on current, objectively determinable
financial or economic information.*” Thus, notional principal contracts governed by the
regulations include interest rate swaps, basis swaps, interest rate caps and floors, commodity
swaps, equity swaps, equity index swaps, and similar agreements. However, the regulations
provide that certain contracts do not constitute notional principal contracts, including futures
contracts, forward contracts, and options.**°

The regulations generally provide that net income or deduction from a notional principal
contract for a taxable year is included in or deducted from gross income for that taxable year.
The net income or deduction from a notional principal contract for a taxable year equals the sum
of all of the periodic payments that are recognized from that contract for the taxable year and all
of the nonperiodic payments that are recognized from that contract for the taxable year.*®!

A periodic payment is defined as a payment that generally is payable at fixed periodic
intervals of one year or less during the entire term of a notional principal contract. The ratable
daily portions of periodic payments are included in income or deducted in the taxable year to
which such portions relate.°

A nonperiodic payment is defined as any payment made or received pursuant to a
notional principal contract that is not a periodic payment or a termination payment. Thus, a
nonperiodic payment includes prepayments for all or one leg of aswap. The ratable daily
portions of nonperiodic payments must be included in income or deducted in the taxable year to
which such portions relate such that a nonperiodic payment is recognized over the life of the
notional principal contract in a manner that reflects the economic substance of the payment.
Thus, a nonperiodic payment for a swap generally must be recognized over the term of the
contract by allocating it in accordance with the forward rates (or, in the case of a commodity, the
forward prices) of a series of cash-settled forward contracts that reflect the specified index and
the notional principal amount.*8

A termination payment is defined as any payment made or received to extinguish or
assign all or a proportionate part of the remaining rights and obligations of any party under a
notional principal contract. In general, a party to a notional principal contract must recognize a
termination payment in the taxable year in which the contract is extinguished, assigned, or

878 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-3(c)(1)(i).
879 ‘Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-3(c)(2).
880 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-3(c)(1)(ii).
881 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-3(d).

882 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-3(e).

883 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-3(f). The regulations provide alternative methods of
recognizing nonperiodic payments that primarily affect the rate of amortization.

311

=== PAGE 340 ===
exchanged. The party also must recognize any other peyote that have been made or received
under the contract but have not yet been recognized.® 4

The regulations include a special rule with regard to swaps that provide for “significant”
nonperiodic payments. Under this rule, a swap with significant nonperiodic payments is treated
as two separate transactions, consisting of: (1) an at-the-market swap (i.e., no nonperiodic
payments) with level payments; and (2) a loan. The parties to the contract must account for the
deemed loan independently of the swap. The imputed interest component of the loan is
accounted for as interest for all purposes of the Code.**° The regulations do not define what
amount of nonperiodic payments constitutes “significant”, but examples in the regulations
indicate that a nonperiodic payment that is less than 10 percent of total payments under a swap is

not significant, while a nonperiodic payment that is 40 percent or more of total payments is
significant.%

7. Application of present law to Enron structured financing transactions

Enron raised significant amounts of capital by issuing several different types of structured
financial instruments that implicate a multitude of tax rules. Enron issued tiered preferred
securities, the tax treatment of which primarily involved the application of the rules concerning
debt characterization. Enron also issued investment unit securities, which involved debt
characterization in general, as well as the constructive sale, disqualified indebtedness, and
straddle rules. Enron entered into commodity prepay transactions, which involved debt
characterization in general, as well as the tax treatment of prepayment transactions and notional
principal contracts.

884 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-3(h).
885 Treas, Reg. sec. 1.446-3(g)(4).

886 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.446-3(g)(6), Examples 2 and 3.

312

=== PAGE 341 ===
C. Tiered Preferred Securities

1. Brief overview

Between 1993 and 1997, Enron raised over $800 million through the issuance of hybrid
financial instruments that combined characteristics of both indebtedness and equity (“tiered
preferred securities”). By synthesizing these characteristics into a single financial instrument,
Enron was able to report the financing as indebtedness for Federal income tax purposes, while
reporting the same financing as a minority ownership interest on its financial statements.
Consequently, these transactions enabled Enron to deduct the yield on its financings as interest
expense for tax purposes without increasing the amount of liabilities reported in financial
statements. Although the individual transactions varied in their details, they shared several
common elements, primarily the issuance of securities by a special purpose entity to public or
private investors and the transfer of the proceeds from such issuance to Enron in the form of a
loan.

2. Background
Reported tax and financial statement effects

With regard to its tiered preferred securities, Enron took the position for Federal income
tax purposes that it had issued a debt instrument to the special purpose entity, which Enron
treated as a separate entity that was not part of the Enron consolidated group. Accordingly,
Enron claimed interest expense deductions of the yield payments on the purported debt
instrument.

For financial reporting purposes, Enron disregarded the purported debt instrument
because the special purpose entity was consolidated with Enron on its financial statements.°%”
Instead, Enron reported the preferred securities as though Enron had issued the preferred
securities directly to the outside investors (rather than through the special purpose entity). These
securities received equity credit from rating agencies because the borrowing by Enron from the
special purpose entity that supported the preferred securities exhibited certain equity
characteristics, including a long-term maturity, deep subordination, and an option for Enron to
defer the payment of interest for the first several months (or years) that the borrowing was
outstanding. Thus, Enron denominated the preferred securities as mezzanine equity, rather than
indebtedness, on its balance sheet.°** Enron reported yield payments to the holders of the
preferred securities as “Dividends on Preferred Stock of Subsidiary”.

887 As amended by Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 94, Accounting
Research Bulletin No. 51, requires companies to consolidate majority owned subsidiaries unless
control of the subsidiary is likely to be temporary, or the majority owner does not actually
control the subsidiary. Because of the common ownership interest retained by the ultimate
borrower, special purpose entities that issue tiered preferred securities generally satisfy the
financial accounting requirements for consolidation with the borrower.

aoe Specifically, Enron’s financial statement balance sheets referred to the tiered
preferred securities as “Preferred Stock of Subsidiary” in 1993 and 1994, and thereafter have

313

=== PAGE 342 ===
Development of tiered preferred securities

In 1993, Goldman, Sachs & Co. began marketing a new financial instrument, dubbed
monthly income preferred securities (“MIPS”), that was designed to be treated as a debt
instrument (with deductible interest payments) for Federal income tax purposes, while
simultaneously providing equity treatment for financial reporting and rating agency purposes. *®°
Other investment banks subsequently marketed their own version of MIPS, such as trust
originated preferred securities (“TOPrS”) introduced by Merrill Lynch.” Whereas the special
purpose entity involved in MIPS is characterized as a partnership for Federal income tax
purposes, the special purpose entity involved in TOPrS is characterized as a grantor trust.8?!
Regardless of the particular classification of the special purpose entity, the common feature of
these transactions in this respect is that the special purpose entity is not classified as a taxable
corporation under the entity classification rules.

In general, these financial instruments involve the creation of a special purpose entity by
the ultimate borrower.*”” The special purpose entity is treated as a separate entity from the

referred to the securities as “Company-Obligated Preferred Securities of Subsidiaries”. This is
consistent with the guidance provided in SEC Regulation S-X, Article 5, Rule 5-02.27.

889 The issuance of debt instruments containing certain features that are characteristic of
equity, such as subordination and deferred interest arrangements, allows borrowers to obtain
capital with less impact on their credit rating than straight debt financing because such
instruments receive “equity credit” from rating agencies. In addition, the Federal Reserve Board
has stated that certain tiered preferred securities can quality as Tier 1 equity capital for banks.
See Federal Reserve Press Release, Oct. 21, 1996 (‘To be eligible as Tier 1 capital, such
instruments must provide for a minimum five-year consecutive deferral period on distributions to
preferred shareholders. In addition, the intercompany loan must be subordinated to all
subordinated debt and have the longest feasible maturity.”); Capital Briefs--Rule on Cumulative
Preferred Stock Eased, American Banker, Oct. 22, 1996; Padgett, Surge of New Issues Seen as
Fed Approves Use of Hybrid Security, American Banker, Oct. 24, 1996.

890 Goldman Sachs also began marketing a variation on MIPS, called quarterly income
preferred securities (“QUIPS”), which differ materially from MIPS only in that payments on
QUIPS are made quarterly instead of monthly. See, e.g., BFGoodrich Capital 83% Cumulative
Quarterly Income Preferred Securities (June 30, 1995).

891 By using a grantor trust rather than a tax partnership as the special purpose entity,
TOPrS significantly reduce the SEC reporting burdens associated with the securities. See John
C. Reid, MIPS Besieged--Solutions in Search of a Problem, 76 Tax Notes 1057, 1058 (Dec. 1,
1997).

892 Special purpose entities involved in earlier transactions usually were formed offshore.
However, with the enactment of limited liability company laws in several States and the issuance
by the SEC of “no action” letters exempting the entities from registration under the Investment
Company Act of 1940, special purpose entities involved in more recent transactions have been
formed as domestic pass-through entities.

314

=== PAGE 343 ===
borrower for tax purposes, but is not itself subject to tax. For financial reporting purposes, the
special purpose entity is disregarded as separate from the borrower because it is consolidated
with the borrower. In general, the special purpose entity issues its voting securities (with a
nominal value) to the borrower, and issues nonvoting preferred securities to investors. The
special purpose entity then lends the proceeds from the preferred securities issuance (along with
any cash contributed by the borrower) to the borrower in exchange for a long-term (typically, 30-
year) debt instrument. Distributions on the preferred securities closely correspond to the interest
payments on the debt instrument issued to the entity by the borrower. When the loan from the

special purpose entity to the borrower ultimately matures, the special purpose entity redeems the
MIPS for cash.

For tax purposes, the debt instrument issued to the special purpose entity by the ultimate
borrower is respected because the entity is treated as separate from the borrower. Thus, the
borrower claims interest deductions on the debt instrument. For financial reporting purposes, the
debt instrument is disregarded because the special purpose entity is not treated as separate from
the borrower. Instead, the borrower is considered to have issued preferred securities directly to
the investors. As mentioned earlier, these securities receive equity credit from rating agencies
because the debt instrument issued by the borrower that supports the securities is long term,
deeply subordinated, and provides the borrower an option to defer the payment of interest for an
extended period of time (typically, the first five years) during which the debt instrument is
outstanding. Thus, the preferred securities tend to be denominated as mezzanine equity, rather
than indebtedness, on the financial statements of the borrower.

issuance of Enron tiered preferred securities

As indicated, Enron raised over $800 million through several issuances of tiered
preferred securities, including MIPS, TOPrS, and adjustable-rate trust securities (“ACTS”).2% In
general, the ACTS were substantially similar to TOPrS, except that ACTS provided for a
variable (rather than fixed) yield.

Table 2 on the next page summarizes the tiered preferred securities that Enron entered
into between 1993 and 1997.

893 See, e. g., Minutes, Meeting of the Board of Directors, Enron Corp., December 10,
1996 at 5-6 (approving the 1996 Enron TOPrS issuance), EC 000045039 through EC
000045067; Minutes, Meeting of the Executive Committee of the Board of Directors, Enron
Corp., December 18, 1996 (approving proposed resolution authorizing 1997 Enron TOPrS
issuance), EC 000045073 through EC 000045079; Minutes, Meeting of the Executive

Committee of the Board of Directors, Enron Corp., June 5, 1997 (approving proposed resolution
authorizing 1997 ACTS issuance). EC 000045650 through EC 000045655. The structured
financing materials in Appendix B contain these minutes.

315

=== PAGE 344 ===
“SUONIPUOD JoYIeUL JUDLIND JO SAINDALJOI PIAIA B UtEIGO 0} ssad0Id UOTONe YyoIn e Uodn poseq
PIet4 ayy Jo syosor Ajsoqsenb yuonbasqns yim ‘L661 ‘S soquiaydeg y8nosyy quoosod ¢1g°¢ Jo o7eI [eNIUL UR Je sjUoUAEd PIOIA J0y poptaoid souensst SLOW OUL 5

“gaualuaauod Jo sasodind 105 A[uo SqIIW SP 0} PoLojad St doueNss! sty) ‘sny, “souRNss! STW & 0} JepTUIs Ayjenueisqns sem oouenss!

SIU] ‘JOAOMOPT “OD 2 SYR ‘ULLIP[OD JOU “OD 7p YOUAT [ILA sem JoyLIMIOpUN peg] oY osNedEq S_IIA JO PoueNss} UL Ajjeutsoy Jou sem oouRNss! sty, 5

“AWN QeUL 0} VID) [eNNTUL oY) Surpnyour you ‘uoIUY 0} (DTT jendes uoug “39) Ajnue esodind yerseds oy) wo ueo] oy) Uodn poseg 5

‘uorug 0) (OTT [ede uomg “3*e) Aue asodind yeroods oy) Woy ueo] oy) uodn poseg A

*S]USUNJO]]-JOAO 0} ONp pojedipul jUNoWe oy) WoO JeLMOUIOS
Joyjip Kewl soueNss! yore Wo spoed01d Jo JuNOUre [eMoY “sOURNSS! YORE JO snjoodsoud oy) ut payeorpul yunowe ay) uodn paseq si spaaooid jo unoury ;

:S9JON]

09 eu 6P lee 00¢ L661 SLOV
81 e/u 0@ STL'8 Osl L661 SidOL
81 eu 4 0¢'8 00¢ 9661 SidOL
09 6l Oe 00°6 SL y66l »SdIIN
81 os os 00°8 00z$ C66! SdIIN

(syyuour) (saa) ,(saeTlop

poliod [e..1ajap -Avanyeur (savah) (quad) jo suol|[Iu) aouenss!
juourfed 0} W118} Avanyeul pres aouenss! jo 19x aouenss]
so.10jUy poepuayxyq =| 0} W418} [eT poye1s Jo Spoa001g

SadURNSS] SALINIEG pasiajaig pase], woruq—Z qe L

316

=== PAGE 345 ===
1993 Enron MIPS

On September 27, 1993, Enron convened a special meeting of its Board of Directors
primarily for the purpose of hearing a management presentation concerning the issuance of
perpetual preferred stock.®™* In its presentation, management stated that Enron would continue
to require cash infusions because of its ongoing growth and expansion. However, management
also indicated that maintaining Enron’s credit quality was a high priority. Management then
presented two options that had been proposed to Enron: (1) issuance of standard perpetual
preferred stock underwritten by Merrill Lynch & Co.; and (2) issuance of tax deductible
perpetual preferred stock underwritten by Goldman, Sachs & Co. According to management,
Arthur Andersen & Co. had indicated to Enron that neither option would be treated as
indebtedness for financial accounting purposes. In addition, the credit rating agencies had
indicated that they would reach the same conclusion. Management also said that the law firm
Sullivan & Cromwell had issued a letter confirming the tax deductibility of the option proposed
by Goldman, Sachs & Co., but noting that future tax law changes could negate deductibility.
Based upon the presentation by management, the Board adopted a resolution that authorized the
registration, issuance and sale of up to $250 million of either standard or tax deductible perpetual
preferred stock, and authorized the appointment of a special preferred stock committee to
determine the terms of the issuance.

On October 12, 1993, the Finance Committee of the Enron Board of Directors met to
discuss further the issuance of perpetual preferred stock by Enron.®° At this meeting,
management indicated to the committee that the “determination of the question of whether or not
the preferred stock offering would be tax deductible was key to management’s decision to
proceed.”8°° The committee concluded its consideration of perpetual preferred stock by agreeing
to recommend that the Board restate its previous resolution and authorize the registration,
issuance and sale of: (1) up to $575 million of perpetual preferred stock if the yield on the stock
was determined to be tax deductible and the credit rating agencies would treat the stock as equity
for debt rating purposes; or (2) up to $350 million of perpetual preferred stock if the yield on the
stock was not determined to be tax deductible.*””

On October 13, 1993, the Enron Board of Directors heard the recommendation of the
Finance Committee and approved a resolution authorizing a shelf registration of fixed rate

ae Minutes, Special Meeting of the Board of Directors, Enron Corp., September 27,
1993 at 1. EC2 000055435 through EC2 000055450. The structured financing materials in
Appendix B contain these minutes.

Ee) Minutes, Meeting of the Finance Committee of the Board of Directors, Enron Corp.,
October 12, 1993. EC2 000055452 through EC2 000055456. The structured financing materials
in Appendix B contain these minutes.

8°6 Id. at 2.

897 Id.

317

=== PAGE 346 ===
perpetual preferred stock in the amount of either $575 million (if tax deductible and rated as
equity) or $350 million (if not tax deductible).°”*

Pursuant to the resolution, Enron formed Enron Capital LLC under the law of Turks and
Caicos Islands for the sole purpose of issuing shares and lending the net proceeds to Enron.®”?
Enron acquired the common shares of Enron Capital LLC for approximately $53.165 million.”

In November 1993, Enron Capital LLC authorized the issuance of $9.2 million shares of
cumulative guaranteed MIPS with a cumulative preferred dividend rate of 8 percent (“1993
MIPS”).-”! The MIPS became redeemable (at the option of Enron Capital LLC) on or after
November 30, 1998, at a redemption price of $25.00 per share plus accumulated and unpaid
dividends. Following the issuance of the shares and as part of the prearranged transaction, Enron
Capital LLC loaned to Enron both the $53.165 million proceeds from the issuance of its common
shares to Enron, and the $200 million proceeds from the sale of the MIPS, for an aggregate
principal amount of $253.165 million. 2 The loan from Enron Capital LLC to Enron provided a
stated interest rate of 8 percent until maturity, payable on the last day of each calendar month of
each year beginning on November 30, 1993.°

Under the terms of the loan from Enron Capital LLC to Enron, Enron was permitted to
defer payment of the monthly interest up to 18 months (provided Enron was not in default on the
loan), during which time Enron would not be permitted to declare dividends on any of its capital
stock. During any such period of interest payment deferment, Enron Capital LLC would
continue to accrue the interest income being deferred, and the deferred interest income would be
allocated (but not distributed) to the holders of the MIps.2™%

The loan provided a maturity date of November 30, 2043 for repayment of the entire
principal amount, together with any accrued and unpaid interest, or on any earlier date if Enron

898 Minutes, Meeting of the Board of Directors, Enron Corp., October 13, 1993. The
structured financing materials in Appendix B contain these minutes.

8° Prospectus Supplement, Enron Capital LLC 8% Cumulative Guaranteed Monthly
Income Preferred Shares (Nov. 4, 1993) at S-6 [hereinafter “1993 Prospectus”].

90 1993 Prospectus at S-14.

90! Terms of the 8% Cumulative Guaranteed Monthly Income Preferred Shares of Enron
Capital LLC (Nov. 4, 1993) at 1. Of the total authorized MIPS, Enron Capital LLC issued
8,000,000 shares at $25.00 per share, for a total of $200 million. The remaining unissued
1,200,000 shares of MIPS were reserved for the underwriters’ over-allotment option. 1993
Prospectus at S-6.

902 1993 Prospectus at S-14.
°93 1993 Prospectus at S-15.

94 1993 Prospectus at S-20.

318

=== PAGE 347 ===
or Enron Capital LLC was dissolved, wound up or liquidated. The loan could not be prepaid
prior to November 30, 1998. Upon repayment by Enron, the loan provided that the repaid
principal could be reloaned to Enron under certain conditions, with a final maturity date of the
new loan not later than the 100th anniversary of the issuance of the MIPS. The loan was
subordinate to all present and future senior indebtedness of Enron.

Enron guaranteed the payment of dividends by Enron Capital LLC to the holders of the
MIPS. However, the guarantee agreement constituted an unsecured obligation of Enron and
ranked: (1) subordinate and junior in right of payment to all liabilities of Enron; (2) pari passu
with the most senior preferred or preference stock of Enron; and (3) senior to Enron’s common
stock. In the event of the bankruptcy of Enron (among other events), Enron Capital LLC
automatically would dissolve and be liquidated.” In the event of the bankruptcy of Enron
(among other events), the holders of a majority in liquidation preference of the outstanding MIPS
were entitled to appoint and authorize a trustee to enforce the creditor rights of Enron Capital
LLC against Enron, and to declare and pay dividends on the MIPS oo

Enron evidently used the loan proceeds to repay other indebtedness, and for general
corporate purposes.” In its filings with the SEC, Enron stated that “the average cost of long-
term debt declined to 8.2 percent at December 31, 1993 from 8.9 percent at December 31, 1992.
The decline was accomplished primarily through the retirement of additional higher coupon
long-term debt which was subject to call provisions during [1993].

Role of outside advisers

In the case of the 1993 MIPS, Goldman, Sachs & Co. was the lead underwriter, while
Merrill Lynch & Co. was the lead underwriter for the 1994 Enron tiered preferred securities and

the 1996 and 1997 TOPrS. The lead underwriter for the 1997 ACTS was Deutsche Morgan
Grenfell.

For each transaction except the ACTS transaction, Vinson & Elkins LLP provided a tax
opinion letter that analyzed the tax implications of the transaction. For the ACTS transaction,
Skadden, Arps, Meagher & Flom LLP provided a tax opinion letter that analyzed the tax
implications of the transaction.

With regard to the 1993 MIPS, Vinson & Elkins LLP concluded that:

995 1993 Prospectus at S-7. The repaid principal may not be reloaned to Enron if (among
other things) Enron is in bankruptcy.

998 1993 Prospectus at S-8.
9°7 1993 Prospectus at S-8 to S-9.
98 1993 Prospectus at S-5.

°°) 1993 Enron Form 10-K at 32.

319

=== PAGE 348 ===
(63) the proceeds received by Enron from Enron Capital LLC “should” be classified as
loans for Federal income tax purposes;

(2) Enron Capital LLC “would” be treated as a partnership rather than a corporation
or taxable mortgage pool for Federal income tax purposes; and

(3) interest paid by Enron on the proceeds received from Enron Capital LLC “would”
qualify as portfolio interest within the meaning of section 1441(c)(9) and, thus,
Enron “would” not be required to deduct and withhold tax with respect to such
interest.?!°

Vinson & Elkins LLP subsequently issued a second tax opinion letter concerning the
1993 MIPS, in which the law firm concluded that:

(63) Enron “would” be liable for any tax that should have been withheld to the extent
such tax is not paid by the holders of the Enron Capital LLC preferred shares;

(2) because of the “reasonable cause” exception, Enron “should not” be liable for
penalties or additions to tax by. reason of any failure to withhold in respect of a
payment (of interest) on the proceeds received by Enron from Enron Capital LLC;
and

(3) Enron “would” be liable for interest on any tax that should have been withheld
during any calendar year, but that such interest “should not” start to accrue until
March 15 of the following year and “should” cease to accrue upon payment of the
tax against which such withholding tax may be credited by the holders of the
preferred shares issued to investors by Enron Capital LLC (which may be as early
as April 15 of such following year).”"!

Arthur Andersen provided an accounting opinion letter that analyzed the financial
accounting implications of a hypothetical MIPS transaction and concluded that: (1) the special
purpose entity issuing the securities (i.e., the MIPS) should be consolidated with the company
that formed the entity; and (2) the securities should be reflected in the company’s financial
statements as minority interests.”!

910 Vinson & Elkins LLP tax opinion letter to Enron, dated November 4, 1993. EC2
000036276 through EC2 000036289. The structured financing materials in Appendix B contain
this opinion letter.

°11 Vinson & Elkins LLP tax opinion letter to Robert J. Hermann, Vice President - Tax,
Enron, dated December 17, 1993. EC2 000036290 through EC2 000036302. The structured
financing materials in Appendix B contain this opinion letter.

°12 Arthur Andersen opinion letter to Goldman Sachs & Co., dated September 13, 1993.
With regard to the accounting treatment of the outside investors as minority interests, the opinion

letter states that “[w]hile some may argue that where [sic] a subsidiary’s only role is to loan
funds to others in the consolidated group and the non affiliated stockholders of the subsidiary can

320

=== PAGE 349 ===
Table 3 summarizes that amounts of fees and expenses that Enron paid in connection
with the tiered preferred share issuances:?!3

Table 3.-Enron Tiered Preferred Securities Issuance Fees and Expenses

Issuance Year of Lead Lead Other

issuance underwriter underwriter estimated

fees expenses

MIPS 1993 Goldman, Sachs & Co. $14,390,000 $300,000
MIPS 1994 Merrill Lynch & Co. $11,800,000 $400,000
TOPrS 1996 Merrill Lynch & Co. $37,500,000 $400,000
TOPrS 1997 Merrill Lynch & Co. $22,000,000 $400,000
ACTS 1997 Deutsche Morgan Grenfell | Not available $200,000

IRS review of Enron tiered preferred shares

Based upon its audit of Enron’s tax returns for the 1993 and 1994 tax years, the IRS
issued a statutory notice of deficiency, dated March 4, 1998, in which the IRS determined that
Enron improperly deducted interest expense relating to the 1993 MIPS and the 1994 MIPS.?"* In
response, Enron filed a petition with the Tax Court on April 1, 1998 contesting the deficiency.?°
Enron also requested consideration of the deficiency determination by the Appeals Division of
the IRS, and the IRS assigned the case to the Appeals Division on June 17, 1998.

On May 6, 1998, IRS District Counsel (Midstates Region) sent a memorandum to the IRS
National Office requesting technical assistance concerning the proper tax treatment of the 1993
MIPS and 1994 MIPS transactions. On August 12, 1998, the IRS National Office responded
with a field service advice memorandum in which the National Office addressed three issues:

(1) whether the MIPS securities constituted equity, rather than debt, for tax purposes; (2) whether

gain control of [the company’s] Board in the event of default on the loan [from the special
purpose entity to the company], the non affiliate stockholders of the subsidiary should be treated
as creditors in the consolidated financial statements of the [company], this is not practice.” The
structured financing materials in Appendix B contain this opinion letter.

°13 ‘This information is based upon a review of the prospectus for each issuance and
information provided to the Joint Committee staff by Enron. Letter from Enron’s counsel
(Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation, dated January 13, 2003.

914 The assessment disallowed interest expenses claimed by Enron in the amounts of: (1)
$2,137,497 in 1993 with respect to the 1993 MIPS; (2) $21,645,569 in 1994 with respect to the
1993 MIPS; and (3) $3,512,658 in 1994 with respect to the 1994 MIPS.

915 Enron Corp. v. Commissioner. Docket No. 6149-98. The petition also contested
several other deficiencies asserted by the IRS for the 1992-1994 audit cycle, all of which were
settled shortly after the filing of the petition.

321

=== PAGE 350 ===
the MIPS transactions overall lacked economic substance; and (3) whether the special purpose
entities issuing the MIPS securities should be treated as taxable corporations, rather than
partnerships, for tax purposes.”'

With regard to whether the MIPS constituted debt or equity, the IRS National Office
analyzed the issue by applying the debt-equity characterization factors listed in Notice 94-477"
to the securities, and concluded that “we do not recommend recharacterizing the debt as equity.”
The National Office acknowledged that its analysis focused on the proper characterization of the
loans from the special purpose entities to Enron, rather than the proper characterization of the
MIPS securities themselves as debt or equity. However, the National Office stated that, even if
the special purpose entities were not respected as partnerships for tax purposes, “the conclusions

would not be different, and the [MIPS] instruments would still be properly characterized as
debt.”

In determining whether the MIPS transactions overall lacked economic substance, the
IRS National Office noted that the transactions decreased the average cost of Enron’s long-term
debt and decreased Enron’s debt-to-equity ratio from 1.2:1 to 1:1. Consequently, the National
Office concluded that, “[iJn the balance, it appears from the available information that [Enron]
entered into the transactions to obtain loans at lower interest rates and at lower costs generally
and, therefore the underlying transactions possess economic substance. Thus, the interest
deduction should not be disallowed.”

With regard to whether the special purpose entities should be treated as taxable
corporations, rather than partnerships, for tax purposes, the IRS National Office determined that
the entities appeared to have a “reasonable basis” for their classification as partnerships under the
entity classification regulations that were in place at the time of the transactions.”'® Therefore,
IRS National Office concluded that the partnership treatment of the entities should be respected.

After receiving and reviewing the field service advice memorandum, the Appeals officer
assigned to the case drafted an Appeals Transmittal and Case Memorandum. In the
memorandum, the Appeals officer voiced strong disagreement with the analysis and conclusions
set forth in the field service advice memorandum. Specifically, the Appeals officer indicated his
view that the field service advice memorandum should have analyzed the proper characterization
of the MIPS securities as debt or equity. In addition, the Appeals officer argued that the field
service advice memorandum “addressed what Enron’s business purpose (a partner) was for the
MIPS transaction but fail[ed] to provide a business purpose for the partnership itself.”

Contrary to the conclusion reached in the field service advice memorandum, the Appeals
officer argued strenuously that the special purpose entities should not be respected as

16 The structured financing materials in Appendix B contain the field service advice that
the IRS National Office provided to the IRS District Counsel in connection with the 1993 MIPS
and 1994 MIPS issued by Enron.

917 1994-1 C.B. 357.

918 See Treas. Reg. sec. 301.7701 (f)(2).

322

=== PAGE 351 ===
partnerships on economic substance grounds, and that disregarding these entities as partnerships
and treating the MIPS as having been issued directly by Enron would require the MIPS to be
characterized as equity, rather than debt, for tax purposes. Finally, the Appeals officer raised a
non-tax public policy concern that, in a more general context, would become central to Enron’s
bankruptcy a few years later:

Here the taxpayer is admitting that they [sic] are skirting well regulated areas by
designing a transaction to avoid the standard investor/creditors warning signals:
Too much debt and dilution of their ownership rights.

The taxpayer has designed a transaction that avoids both indicators by becoming
debt that comes from equity. That is, this is in the bottom of the debt tier, but it
takes its payment source from the top of the dividend class of securities. A
bottom feeder if you will. Thus, there appears to be a public policy issue as to
whether or not IRS should allow a deduction on a payment that is designed to
frustrate some clear combination of GAAP, SEC regulations and regulators, and
the regulated debt which is relied on by creditors in indicating too much debt.

Notwithstanding the conclusions reached by the National Office in the field service
advice memorandum, the Appeals officer recommended litigating the validity of the interest
deductions claimed by Enron in 1993 and 1994 with regard to the MIPS transactions.

On October 20, 1998, representatives from Enron and IRS Appeals met in a conference to
discuss the MIPS issue. Notes of the conference taken by the Appeals officer indicate that Enron
acknowledged “the MIPS were finely crafted to walk that fine line that does exist between debt
and equity,” but also argued that the mezzanine treatment of MIPS for financial reporting
purposes allowed Enron to raise capital for expansion without eroding its credit rating (because
the MIPS were not reported as indebtedness) or earnings per share (because the MIPS were not
reported as shareholder equity). Thus, according to Enron, issuing the MIPS served a business
purpose that was independent of tax considerations. In a revised version of his Appeals case
memorandum, the Appeals officer responded to this point as follows:

Should the IRS condone this treatment of debt to “fool” both GAAP and SEC
reporting where both consider the MIPS as having substantial equity features?

Look at it this way: No debt treatment fools creditors, [n]o equity treatment fools
the market investors, the extendibility of the LLC and notes in the years at issue
allow gradual conversion to actual equity (it seems to me), the continued drain on
cash flow without disclosure to the public seems to set up, in [m]acroeconomic
terms, a lot of corporations with debt/equity not displayed on they’re [sic] books.

If things turn south and payments are suspended:
(9) A lot of investors will be unhappy
(2) A lot of corporations may be required to make mandatory

payments after 18 or so months (in the depths of a recession)
which will endanger shareholders rights and

323

=== PAGE 352 ===
(3) If enough corporations are required to do this it could materially
affect the nation[’]s economy by reducing corporate capital
available for operations.

This entire matter seems to be “leveraging” just like buying stocks on margin or
leveraging your way to success... . [I]t works great in good times but in
economic recessions it leads to bankruptcy. Potential non-tax shareholder
derivative questions present in both years...should be considered in a public
policy review by counsel. This is beyond IRS jurisdiction but important public
policy implications may be present if the MIPS structure violates the [Enron]
Board’s duty to its shareholders to maximize shareholder value.

Nevertheless, Enron and the IRS subsequently reached a settlement of the issues
concerning the 1993 and 1994 MIPS. In the settlement, the IRS conceded the deductibility of the
stated interest payments made by Enron. Specifically, the IRS conceded that: (1) the loan from
the special purpose entity to Enron in each transaction constituted indebtedness of Enron for
Federal income tax purposes; (2) Enron was entitled to deduct stated interest accrued on such
indebtedness; and (3) the special purpose entity was a valid entity that was separate and distinct
from Enron for Federal income tax purposes.”

Because the settlement of the case (including settlement of the other asserted
deficiencies) would result in refunds of overpaid taxes to Enron in excess of $1 million, the IRS
referred the settlement to the Joint Committee on Taxation on July 26, 1999 for review as
required under the Code.” On September 28, 1999, the Joint Committee staff reviewed the
settlement and did not raise an objection to it.

The Tax Court approved the settlement on October 1, 1999.72!

Subsequent developments

Although the offering materials for the tiered preferred securities issued by Enron
provided for the dissolution and liquidation of the special purpose entity in the event of the
bankruptcy of Enron, the tiered preferred securities remain outstanding except for the securities
issued as part of the ACTS transaction.-”” However, the outstanding tiered preferred securities

919 First Supplemental Stipulation of Settled Issues, Enron Corp. v. Commissioner,
Docket No. 6149-98, filed Dec. 24, 1998. See also Counsel Settlement Memorandum, MIPS
Issues, In re: Enron Corporation & Consolidated Subsidiaries, Docket Number 6149-98,
approved July 26, 1999. The structured financing materials in Appendix B contain the counsel
settlement memorandum.

920 Sec. 6405, as in effect at the time of the settlement.
921 Decision, Enron Corp. v. Commissioner, Docket No. 6149-98, entered Oct. 1, 1999.

922 ¥ etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003. EC2 000055434.

324

=== PAGE 353 ===
currently trade over the counter for under $1 per share, down significantly from their $25 initial
offering price and liquidation preference per share.

3. Discussion

In general

Under present law, taxpayers have significant flexibility in structuring a financial
instrument as debt or equity. Frequently, taxpayers may characterize instruments with very
similar economic terms selectively either as equity (for example, if the issuer intends to market
them to corporate holders that would benefit from a dividends received deduction) or as debt (if
the issuer intends to claim a corporate interest deduction or achieve certain other benefits of debt
status).

In general, the characterization of a financial instrument as debt can be based on a
number of factors, including the presence (or absence) of an enforceable and unconditional
promise to pay a specified amount on a specified date,””’ and the length of the term to maturity
of an instrument.”

Tiered preferred securities

Tiered preferred share transactions such as MIPS and TOPrS have their genesis in the
fundamental principle that leverage generally is favored for tax purposes (because of the
deductibility of interest and the non-deductibility of dividends) but disfavored for financial
accounting purposes (because reported debt tends to depress marginal share price and credit
ratings relative to outstanding equity). Thus, companies generally prefer to obtain equity
financing for financial accounting purposes, but prefer to obtain debt financing for tax purposes.
Because the financial accounting rules for characterizing financing as either debt or equity do not
correspond with the tax rules for determining such characterization, companies have taken
advantage of opportunities to arbitrage the financial accounting and tax rules in order to achieve

93 See, e.g., John Kelley Co. v. Commissioner, 326 U.S. 521 (1946); Estate of Mixon v.
United States, 464 F.2d 394 (5th Cir. 1972); United States v. Title Guarantee & Trust Co., 133
F.2d 990 (6th Cir. 1943).

4 See, e.g., Reef Corp. v. Commissioner, 24 T.C.M. 379 (1965), aff'd, 368 F.2d 125
(5th Cir. 1966); United States v. Snyder Bros. Co., 367 F.2d 980 (Sth Cir. 1966). Other factors
may include (but are not limited to) a fixed maturity or mandatory redemption date, priority over
general creditors of the issuer, rights to participate in the management of the issuer (including
voting rights), the level of capitalization of the issuer, and the intent of the parties (although this
last “factor” arguably is actually the fundamental question that the other factors attempt to
answer as to the characterization of a financial instrument). However, the IRS has indicated that
the right to receive a sum certain at maturity “is a sine qua non of debt treatment under the
Code.” Field Service Advice 199940007 (June 15, 1999). See also Gilbert v. Commissioner,
248 F.2d 399 (2nd Cir. 1957); Johnson v. Commissioner, 108 F.2d 104 (8th Cir. 1939). Section
385(b) provides a non-exclusive list of several traditional factors that Treasury regulations might
take into account in determining the classification of an interest in a corporation.

325

=== PAGE 354 ===
an ideal objective--financing that can be reported on financial statements as equity and on tax
returns as indebtedness. Tiered preferred shares are the financial instruments with which many
companies have accomplished this result.?”

Absent more definitive guidance concerning the characterization of the tiered preferred
securities themselves, it generally has been believed that certain conditions must be satisfied in
order for the tax benefits of tiered preferred share transactions to be realized by the ultimate
borrower. Specifically, the special purpose entity that is used in such transactions must be
respected for tax purposes as an entity separate from the borrower, and the debt instrument
issued by the borrower to the entity in exchange for the proceeds from the issuance of preferred
securities by the entity must be respected as indebtedness for tax purposes.

Because the special purpose entity issues two separate classes of securities to two
different parties (i.e., the voting securities issued to the borrower and the nonvoting preferred
securities to the investors), borrowers take the position that the entity cannot be disregarded as
separate from the borrower for tax purposes. With regard to whether the debt instrument issued
by the borrower to the special purpose entity should be respected as indebtedness for tax
purposes, borrowers take the position that the debt characteristics (in particular, the repayment of
a sum certain on a fixed maturity date) of the instrument outweighs its equity characteristics (i.e.,
long term to maturity, subordination, and the option to defer interest payments) and, thus, it
should properly be characterized as indebtedness for tax purposes.

In response to the growth of hybrid financial instruments “that combine long maturities
(greater than 50 years) with substantial equity characteristics” (including MIPS and other similar
securities), the IRS issued Notice 94-47 °° Tn the notice, the IRS listed eight factors to.be taken
into account in determining whether a security constitutes debt or equity for tax purposes:

225 The tax benefits of tiered preferred securities can permit companies to offer securities
with a higher yield to investors than they might otherwise offer for comparable conventional
preferred securities with non-deductible dividend yield payments. For example, General Motors
Corporation (“GM”) announced a tender offer in June 1997 to exchange certain classes of its
outstanding preferred stock for a new issue of TOPrS. In exchange for an outstanding class of
preferred stock that yielded a 7.92 percent dividend, GM issued a class of TOPrS that yielded
8.67 percent to tendering shareholders. In exchange for an outstanding class of preferred stock
that yielded a 9.12 percent dividend, GM issued a class of TOPrS that yielded 9.87 percent to
tendering shareholders. See General Motors Amendment No. 4 to Form S-4, filed June 2, 1997.
Although the 75 basis point increase in the yield paid to the tendering shareholders of each class
of preferred stock reportedly cost GM an additional $2.7 million per year before taxes, the
deductibility of the TOPrS yield payments (as opposed to the nondeductible dividends paid on
the tendered preferred stock) reportedly provided GM a tax savings of approximately $9 million
per year. Interestingly, the rating agencies gave the GM TOPrS the same equity credit rating as
they had given to the preferred stock that TOPrS replaced. See Lee A. Sheppard, GM’s Tax-
Deductible Preferred Exchange Offer, 75 Tax Notes 1458 (June 16, 1997).

926 1994-1 C.B. 357.

326

=== PAGE 355 ===
(1) whether there is an unconditional promise to pay a sum certain on demand or at a
fixed maturity date that is in the reasonably foreseeable future;

(2) whether holders of the securities possess the right to enforce the payment of
principal and interest;

(3) whether the rights of the holders of the securities are subordinate to the rights of
general creditors of the issuer;

(4) whether the securities give the holder the right to participate in the management
of the issuer of the securities;

(5) whether the issuer of the securities is thinly capitalized;

(6) whether there is identity between holders of the securities and stockholders of the
issuer;

(7) __ the labels placed on the securities by the parties; and

(8) whether the securities are intended to be treated as debt or equity for non-tax
purposes, including regulatory, rating agency, or financial purposes.

In the notice, the IRS warned that it “will scrutinize [instruments that combine both debt
and equity characteristics] to determine if their purported status as debt for federal income tax
purposes is appropriate.” However, the notice did not specifically mention MIPS.

Notice 94-47 did not appear to have any discernible impact on the appetite of taxpayers
to obtain financing through the issuance of MIPS. In response, the Treasury Department in 1996
proposed an amendment to section 385(c) that would have required an issuer to treat an
instrument as equity if the instrument: (1) has a maximum term of more than 20 years; and (2) is
not shown as indebtedness on the separate balance sheet of the issuer. In the case of an
instrument with a maximum term of more than 20 years issued to a related party (other than a
corporation) that is eliminated in a consolidated balance sheet that includes the issuer and the
holder, the proposal would have treated the issuer as having characterized the instrument as
equity if the holder or some other related party issues a related instrument that is not shown as
indebtedness on the consolidated balance sheet. For this purpose, an instrument would not have
been treated as shown as indebtedness on a balance sheet merely because it is described as such
in financial statement footnotes or other such narrative disclosures. The proposal would have
applied only to corporations that file annual financial statements (or are included in financial
statements filed) with the SEC.” The proposal generally was interpreted as an effort by the
Treasury Department to combat tiered preferred securities such as MIPS and TOPrS.

7 See Department of the Treasury, General Explanations of the Administration’s
Revenue Proposals, March 1996; Office of Management and Budget, Budget of the United States
Government, Fiscal Year 1997: Analytical Perspectives, H. Doc. 104-162/Vol. 3, at 35-48; Joint
Committee on Taxation, Description of Revenue Provisions Contained in the President’s Fiscal
Year 1997 Budget Proposal (Released March 19, 1996) (JCS-2-96), March 27, 1996 at 65.

327

=== PAGE 356 ===
In 1997, the Treasury Department again proposed amending section 385(c) to foreclose
debt characterization of tiered preferred securities.”"> The 1997 proposal was the same as the
1996 proposal, except that the 20 year term that would have triggered the application of the 1996
proposal was reduced to 15 years in the 1997 proposal. Proponents of this proposal took the
view that corporations should not be permitted to characterize a financial instrument as
indebtedness for tax purposes but not for financial reporting purposes. Furthermore, the extent to
which tiered preferred securities such as MIPS and TOPrS have displaced preferred stock may
suggest that the securities are viewed in the marketplace as having features closely similar to
those of preferred stock.°”? However, others point out that financial statement characterization
has not traditionally governed the characterization of items for tax purposes because the goals of
generally accepted accounting principles and income tax rules are often different.°°° Indeed,
many believe that the purported characterization of tiered preferred securities as indebtedness by
the tax rules--not the characterization of such securities for financial statement purposes as
equity--is the correct characterization.”

Congress did not enact either version of the Treasury proposal and, in fact, the IRS later
issued a 1998 technical advice memorandum concluding that a taxpayer that issued tiered
preferred securities (apparently, a MIPS transaction) was entitled to the interest deductions
claimed in connection with the securities.°°? Specifically, the IRS applied the factors initially set
forth in Notice 94-47 and ruled that: (1) loans made to the taxpayer by a foreign limited liability
company (“LLC”) that it formed constituted debt (rather than equity) for tax purposes; and (2) in
any case, the preferred securities issued by the LLC to fund the loans constituted debt, even if the

8 See Department of the Treasury, General Explanations of the Administration's
Revenue Proposals, February 1997; Office of Management and Budget, Budget of the United
States Government, Fiscal Year 1998: Analytical Perspectives, at 45-60.

°° Joint Committee on Taxation, Description and Analysis of Certain Revenue-Raising
Provisions Contained in the President’s Fiscal Year 1998 Budget Proposal (JCS-10-97), April
16, 1997 at 7.

930 Id.

3! See, e. g., John C. Reid, MIPS Besieged--Solutions in Search of a Problem, 76 Tax
Notes 1057, 1068 (Dec. 1, 1997) (“In an all-or-nothing world of the tax law, where an instrument
must be debt or equity, MIPS must come down on the debt side of the scale. If an error has been
committed in analyzing MIPS, it was committed by the rating agencies, not the tax lawyers.”);
Victor Fleischer, Enron’s Dirty Tax Secret: Waiting For the Other Shoe to Drop, 94 Tax Notes
1045, 1046 (Feb. 25, 2002) (“It’s never easy to draw a coherent line between debt and equity, but
most people agree that the IRS was right to concede, and that MIPS should be treated as debt.”).
However, Mr. Fleischer also observes that, during the bankruptcy of Enron, the Enron MIPS
have been trading significantly lower than Enron traditional debt. Consequently, “now that
Enron is in trouble, the deep subordination of MIPS means that the market is treating MIPS more
like common stock than debt.” Id.

932 Priv. Ltr. Rul. 199910046 (Nov. 16, 1998).

328

=== PAGE 357 ===
transaction was recast or the separate existence of the LLC was disregarded for tax purposes
such that the preferred securities were treated as having been issued directly by the corporation.

The IRS also concluded that the LLC’s issuance of the preferred securities and the
subsequent loans to the corporation had economic substance because the transaction served non-
tax business purposes, including: (1) the provision of funds for working capital and general
corporate purposes, including the repayment of outstanding indebtedness; (2) a reduction in the
corporation's overall cost of capital; and (3) a reduction in the corporation's debt/equity ratio. In
spite of the statutory requirement that partnerships must be formed for the purpose of sharing
business profits,” the tax transparency of the LLC (which the taxpayer treated as a partnership
for tax purposes) apparently did not particularly concern the IRS, which stated:

The fact that LLC earns no profit on the issuance of the Preferred Securities and
the subsequent loans made to Corporation A does not imply the transactions lack
economic substance. Although LLC is a "tax-transparent” investment vehicle that
acts to pass through the interest earned on the loans to the Preferred Securities
holders, the underlying transactions have economic substance.

The remarkable evolution in the reaction of the IRS and the Treasury Department to
tiered preferred securities such as MIPS. and TOPrS highlights the longstanding and pervasive
tax policy dilemma of distinguishing between debt and equity--a problem that one Supreme
Court justice presciently identified almost sixty years ago:

Tax liability should depend upon the subtle refinement of corporate finance no
more than it does upon the niceties of conveyancing. Sheer technicalities should
have no more weight to control federal tax consequences in one instance than in
the other. The taxing statute draws the line broadly between “interest” and
“dividend”. This requires one who would claim the interest deduction to bring
himself clearly within the class for which it was intended. That is not done when
the usual signposts between bonds and stock are so obliterated that they become
invisible or point equally in both directions at the same time.

Dividend” and “interest,” “stock” and “bond,” “debenture” or “note,” are
correlative and clearly identifiable conceptions in their simple and more
traditional exemplifications. But their distinguishing features vanish when astute
manipulations of the broad permissions of modern incorporation acts results in a
“security device” which is in truth neither stock nor bond, but the half-breed
offspring of both. At times only the label enables one to ascertain what the
manipulator intended to bring forth. But intention clarified by label alone is not
always legally effective for the purpose in mind. And there is scarcely any limit
to the extent or variety to which this kind of intermingling of the traditional
features of stock and bonds or other forms of debt may go, as the books
abundantly testify. The taxpayer should show more than a label or a hybrid

33 Sec. 761(a).

329

=== PAGE 358 ===
security to escape his liability. He should show at the least a substantial
preponderance of facts pointing to “interest” rather than “dividends. 7934

The either/or approach taken by the present-law tax rules (i.e., a financial instrument
generally must be characterized in its entirety as either equity or indebtedness) is a principal
contributor to the difficulties that have long plagued the tax rules concerning the characterization
of financial instruments.” This rigidity in the tax rules stands in contrast to the analysis of
financial instruments undertaken by credit rating agencies, which employs a more flexible scaled
approach that can accommodate and give recognition to the presence of both equity and debt
characteristics in the same instrument.*°

With regard to companies that choose to finance their activities with tiered preferred
securities rather than traditional indebtedness (or, as in Enron’s case, replace existing
indebtedness with newly issued tiered preferred securities), it may be argued that such securities
do not raise tax policy issues surrounding the distinction between debt and equity,” at least to
the extent that questions of corporate governance do not fall within the purview of tax policy.
On the other hand, it may be the case that companies more commonly have used tiered preferred
securities to largely supplant preferred stock (rather than debt) financing, which more directly
implicates tax policy concerns to the extent that the tax rules influence the behavior of corporate
taxpayers and the financial markets. 938

934 John Kelley Co. v. Commissioner, 326 U.S. 521, 534-35 (1945) (Rutledge, J.,
dissenting) (citations omitted).

°33 Although section 385(a) permits Treasury to issue regulations that characterize
certain interests in a corporation as “‘in part stock and in part indebtedness,” no such regulations
exist currently.

936 See John C. Reid, MIPS Besieged--Solutions in Search of a Problem, 76 Tax Notes
1057, 1065 n.70 (Dec. 1, 1997) (“T]he tax administrators are making a binary inquiry; an
instrument is either debt or it is equity. The rating agencies on the other hand, are placing the
instruments somewhere in the range between pure debt and pure equity.”).

937 Td. at 1059 (“To the extent that corporations issue MIPS when they would otherwise

issue debt, Treasury has no reason to be concerned with the tax treatment of MIPS because
interest paid on conventional debt is deductible.”).

938 See Joint Committee on Taxation, Description and Analysis of Certain Revenue-
Raising Provisions Contained in the President’s Fiscal Year 1998 Budget Proposal (JCS-10-97),
April 16, 1997, at 6 (noting that tiered preferred securities such as MIPS and TOPrS “are
reportedly largely replacing regular preferred stock issuances in today’s market,” and citing
Bary, Preferred Vehicle--How Goldman, Merrill Altered an Entire Market, Barron’s, August 21,
1995, at 13); Norris, Bush’s Plan Taxes Certain Dividends, Fine Print Reveals, New York
Times, January 9, 2003, at Al (noting that 72 percent of existing preferred stock is actually
comprised of hybrid securities that are treated as equity for financial statement purposes but as
indebtedness for tax purposes, according to a Merrill Lynch analyst).

330

=== PAGE 359 ===
The hindsight that the Enron bankruptcy provides may be useful in further evaluating the
role that the tax rules play in fostering the development and marketing of tiered preferred
securities and other similar hybrid financial instruments that are treated as equity for financial
reporting purposes but indebtedness for tax purposes. Consequently, Congress may wish to
consider whether such a role raises policy concerns that should outweigh the supposed

importance of ensuring that the tax rules in isolation provide the appropriate characterization of
such instruments.

4. Recommendations

The proper characterization of financial instruments for Federal income tax purposes as
either debt or equity has been a longstanding problem. This problem has been exacerbated in
recent years by the escalation in the amount and variety of hybrid financial instruments that have
characteristics of both debt and equity. Therefore, the Joint Committee staff recommends the
rules concerning the Federal income tax characterization of financial instruments as either debt
or equity should be reviewed in a comprehensive way. There are several possible alternative
approaches that are available in considering such changes to present law, including:

qd) Conform the tax characterization of hybrid financial instruments to the
characterization that is used for other reporting purposes, such as financial
accounting, so that the non-tax characterization determines the tax
characterization. This approach would largely eliminate opportunities to arbitrage
the various tax and non-tax criteria for determining the character of hybrid
financial instruments.

(2) Strengthen the requirements for debt characterization, similar to the approaches
proposed by the Treasury Department in 1996 and 1997, which may include
altering or more precisely articulating the debt-equity factors listed in section 385.
This approach also could involve changing the manner in which such factors are
applied so that certain financial instruments that exhibit (or lack) certain features
are presumptively characterized as equity rather than indebtedness. While more
definite debt-equity factors ideally would be self-executing (rather than executed
through Treasury regulations), developing an appropriate statutory framework for
the application of such factors may be exceedingly difficult?

(3) Provide restrictions on the proportionate amount of yield payments on hybrid
financial instruments that may be deducted as interest. The proportionate amount
of deductible yield payments could be determined under such an approach by
reference to one or more key factors (or some combination thereof), such as the
length of the term to maturity of the instrument or the number of months that the
issuer could defer yield payments. Similar to the approach used by credit rating
agencies in evaluating hybrid financial instruments, this approach would provide

°° Tn any event, section 385 should be amended to apply more broadly to interests in
non-corporate entities, as well as corporations.

331

=== PAGE 360 ===
an alternative to the existing binary debt-equity characterization of financial
instruments in appropriate circumstances.

(4) Reduce or eliminate the disparate taxation of interest and dividends (for both
issuers and holders of financial instruments) that creates the market for hybrid
financial instruments.” By providing more equivalence in the tax consequences
of debt and equity, this approach would eliminate tax considerations from the
process by which corporate taxpayers decide to obtain financing. This approach
also recognizes the diminishing usefulness of the continuing debate among
commentators concerning which regulatory or statutory regime provides the so-
called “correct” characterization of financial instruments as debt or equity.

94° Th fact, it has been observed that tiered preferred securities may already achieve
effective equivalence in the tax treatment of interest and dividends under present law, which may
explain the apparent preference of issuers for such securities over conventional preferred stock.
See Victor Fleischer, Enron’s Dirty Tax Secret: Waiting For the Other Shoe to Drop, 94 Tax
Notes 1045, 1046 (Feb. 25, 2002) (noting that “Enron has engaged in a sort of self-help
corporate integration, getting the equivalent of a dividends-paid deduction, which some
reformers would want to give out anyway”).

332

=== PAGE 361 ===
D. Investment Unit Securities

1. Brief overview

In 1995 and 1999, Enron raised over $470 million through the issuance of a different
series of hybrid financial instruments. Whereas the tiered preferred securities combined features
of both indebtedness and equity, these transactions combined characteristics of indebtedness and
a forward contract for the sale of common stock in Enron Oil & Gas Company (“EOG”). By
synthesizing these characteristics into a single financial instrument, Enron effectively was able to
liquidate its investment in EOG common stock--and eliminate its risk of loss from future
depreciation in the stock (along with reducing its opportunity for gain from future appreciation in
the stock) -- without actually disposing of the stock.

2. Background

Reported tax and financial statement effects

For Federal income tax purposes, Enron treated the investment unit securities consistently
with the terms of the indenture that was part of the securities offering. The indenture required
Enron (as well as investors in the securities) to treat the investment unit securities as a
combination of an undiscounted debt instrument with stated periodic interest and a forward
purchase contract pursuant to which the holder was obligated to use the proceeds from the
repayment of the debt instrument upon maturity to purchase EOG common stock based upon a
specified exchange rate. Accordingly, Enron deducted the periodic yield payments on the
investment unit securities as interest.

For financial accounting purposes, Enron reported the investment unit securities as long-
term debt instruments. In addition, Enron reported as income or expense changes in the value of
the investment unit securities based upon corresponding changes in the value of the underlying
EOG common stock.”

As with several of the structured transactions entered into by Enron (e.g., Projects Teresa
and Tomas), Enron reported the difference between the tax and financial statement effects of the
investment unit securities as a component of its effective tax rate reconciliation under the caption
“Asset[s] [or Basis] and Stock Sale Differences”. Thus, when the 1995 investment unit
securities issued by Enron matured in 1998, Enron reported an increase in financial statement

°4! Specifically, increases in the value of the underlying EOG common stock would
decrease the value of the investment unit securities (in particular, the imbedded forward contract
on the EOG common stock) to Enron, and result in financial accounting expense. Conversely,
decreases in the value of the underlying EOG common stock would increase the value of the
investment unit securities to Enron, and result in financial accounting income. These
adjustments produced differences between the financial reporting and tax reporting of the
investment unit securities because the tax treatment of the securities did not take into account
such changes in value until maturity.

333

=== PAGE 362 ===
earnings (i.e., earnings through a reduction in the provision for income tax expense) in the
amount of $61 million.”

Development of investment unit securities

Over the past decade, several corporate taxpayers have issued certain financial
instruments that are debt in form and provide regular, periodic payments of interest at a market
rate. However, these instruments provide investors with a repayment at maturity that is not fixed
in amount. Instead, the amount of the repayment at maturity varies based upon the value of
stock other than stock of the issuing corporation (referred to as “reference stock”). Often, but not
always, the issuing corporation owns the reference stock and issues the instrument in order to
protect against a decline in the value of the reference stock.° In such cases, the financial
instrument has the effect of monetizing the issuer’s investment in the reference stock.“

In 1993, American Express Company issued the first such instruments, which are often
referred to as debt exchangeable for common stock (“DECS”)." In their original incarnation,
DECS were structured as short-term or medium-term interest-bearing unitary debt instruments

°# Enron Corp. and Subs, 1998 Footnote, Detail of Assets and Stock Sales (Enron tax
rate reconciliation workpaper). EC2 000036393.

943 Typically, the issuing corporation issues one unit of the instrument for each unit of
reference stock.

°44 More specifically, the investor bears the full risk of loss in the reference stock, but
only limited opportunity for gain in such stock because the financial instrument typically
provides that the investor is entitled to only a specified percentage of the appreciation in the
stock upon maturity and only to the extent that the stock appreciation has exceeded a specified
threshold amount. Because of this payout formula, some commentators have referred to these
financial instruments as “kinky forward contracts”. See Edward Kleinbard & Erika Nijenhuis,
Everything I Know About New Financial Products I Learned from DECS, reprinted in 12 P.LL.
Tax Strategies 1171 (1999).

45 American Express Company 6.25% exchangeable notes due October 15, 1996 (Oct.
7, 1993). The reference stock in the American Express DECS issuance was common stock of
First Data Corporation. DECS is the service mark given these instruments by Salomon, Inc.
(now Salomon Smith Barney, Inc.), which underwrote the American Express issuance. Similar
instruments offered by other investment banks include yield enhanced equity linked debt
securities (““YEELDS”) offered by Lehman Brothers Holdings, Inc., stock appreciation income
linked securities (“SAILS”) offered by Credit Suisse First Boston Corporation, premium
exchangeable participating shares (“PEPS”) offered by Morgan Stanley & Co., Inc.,
provisionally redeemable income debt exchangeable for stock (“PRIDES”) offered by Merrill
Lynch & Co., and common-linked higher income participation securities (“CHIPS”) offered by
The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc. In general, the reference stock involved in DECS and their
counterparts has been comprised of stock issued by a corporation in which the company issuing
the DECS-type securities has only a so-called “portfolio”, or non-controlling, ownership interest.

334

=== PAGE 363 ===
that the issuing corporation could repay either in cash (the amount of which was based upon the
_ value of the reference stock) or by delivery of the reference stock itself. In general, DECS are
offered at a price that is equal to the fair market value of the reference stock on the offering date.

Although DECS are offered as a single instrument, the economic substance of DECS is
akin to a combination of a forward contract on the reference stock (i.e., a financial contract for
the issuing corporation to sell the reference stock to the investor) and a conventional debt
instrument.°*° However, these components are not independent as a practical matter because an
investor in DECS is under an obligation to tender the securities in exchange for the reference
stock (or its cash equivalent) upon maturity of the DECS. The tax treatment assigned to DECS
by the market generally has been consistent with their substance -- a combination of a forward
contract on the reference stock and a debt instrument.”

1995 issuance of Enron investment unit securities

In December 1995, Enron issued 10 million investment unit securities at an offering price
of $21.75 each.“ The Enron investment unit securities provided a stated interest rate of 6.25
percent payable quarterly. The stated maturity of the securities was December 13, 1998 and,
upon maturity, the principal amount of the securities was to be mandatorily exchanged by Enron
into common stock of EOG (or its cash equivalent) at a specified exchange rate. ° Concurrently
with the offering of the investment unit securities, Enron offered approximately 30 million shares
of EOG common stock into the public U.S. and international stock markets in a separate public

946 Tn effect, an investor in DECS purchases a right to receive a series of noncontingent
periodic payments (designated as stated interest under the terms of the DECS) and a “long”
position in the reference stock, while the company issuing the DECS undertakes an obligation to
make the periodic payments to the investor and acquires a “short” position in the reference stock.

°47 Tn the vernacular of a typical DECS prospectus or supplement tax disclosure,
investors are “obligated (in the absence of contrary authority) to treat the DECS as a forward
purchase contract that requires the holder to deposit the purchase price with the counterparty and
to receive interest on that deposit.”

°48 Enron Corp. 6.25 percent Exchangeable Notes due December 13, 1998 (December 8,
1995) [hereinafter “1995 Prospectus”]. The investment unit securities were approved for listing
on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “EXG”. 1995 Prospectus at 1. Enron
referred internally to the 1995 investment unit securities as “ACES”, presumably in reference to
another structured finance product offered by Goldman, Sachs & Co. known as “automatic
common exchange securities”. In general, ACES are similar to DECS and the investment unit
securities issued by Enron, except that the reference stock in ACES is the stock of the company
issuing the securities rather than the stock of another company.

°4° The specified closing price of EOG common stock on the New York Stock Exchange

at the time that Enron issued the investment unit securities was $21.75 per share, which also
determined the $21.75 offering price of the investment units.

335

=== PAGE 364 ===
offering. This offering reduced Enron’s stock ownership of EOG from 80 percent to
approximately 54 percent.”

Typical of DECS offerings in general, the exchange rate specified by the Enron
investment unit securities was equal to: (1) .8264 shares of EOG common stock (or the cash
equivalent) per investment unit if the EOG common stock at maturity of the investment unit
securities had appreciated to a value of $26.32 or more per share; (2) fractional shares of EOG
common stock equal in value to $21.75 (or $21.75 in cash) per investment unit if the EOG
common stock at maturity of the investment unit securities had appreciated up to $26.31 per
share; or (3) one share of EOG common stock (or the cash equivalent) per investment unit if the
EOG common stock had either not appreciated or had depreciated from a value of $21.75 per
share?! Thus, whereas an actual purchaser of EOG common stock would bear the entire risk of
loss and opportunity for gain, a purchaser of the Enron investment unit securities would bear the
entire risk of loss but only a limited opportunity for gain from EOG common stock.°* However,
the 6.25 percent stated interest rate on the investment unit securities significantly exceeded the
anticipated 0.6 percent anticipated dividend yield on the EOG common stock.”

The Enron investment unit securities were unsecured and ranked pari passu with all other
unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness of Enron. In addition, the securities did not restrict
the ability of Enron to sell, pledge or otherwise dispose all or any portion of the EOG common
held by it, and no shares of EOG common stock were pledged or otherwise held in escrow for
use in satisfying Enron’s obligations upon maturity of the investment unit securities. In the event
of the bankruptcy of Enron, the investment unit securities provided for the acceleration of
maturity upon the declaration of at least 25 percent of the holders of the securities.

The indenture for the Enron investment unit securities required both Enron and the
holders of the securities to treat the securities as a combination of an undiscounted debt
instrument with stated periodic interest and a forward purchase contract pursuant to which the
holder agreed to use the proceeds from the repayment of the debt instrument Bye maturity to
purchase EOG common stock based upon the exchange rate described above.”

950 1995 Prospectus at 1.

951 1995 Prospectus at 16. The price of the EOG common stock at maturity was based
upon the average closing price per share of the stock for the 20 trading days immediately prior to
(but not including) the maturity date. Id.

952 To the extent that the closing price of the EOG common stock at maturity of the
investment unit securities was $26.32 or more, the holders of the securities would be entitled to
receive only 82.64 percent of the appreciation in the stock. 1995 Prospectus at 4.

953 1995 Prospectus at 4.

°54 1995 Prospectus at 24.

336

=== PAGE 365 ===
Subsequent developments

Upon maturity of the 1995 Enron investment unit securities on December 13, 1998, the
EOG common stock had depreciated to a price of 15.56 per share.” Pursuant to the terms of the
securities and in accordance with the terms of the exchange rate specified by the securities,
Enron retired the securities on December 14, 1998 by delivering one share of EOG common
stock in exchange for each unit of the securities.

1999 issuance of Enron investment unit securities

In August 1999, Enron completed a new issuance of 10 million investment unit securities
at an offering price of $22.25 each. 56 Structurally, these investment unit securities are similar to
the 1995 Enron investment unit securities. The 1999 Enron investment unit securities provide a
stated interest rate of seven percent payable quarterly. The stated maturity of the securities was
July 31, 2002 and, upon maturity, the principal amount of the securities was to be mandatorily
exchanged by Enron into common stock of EOG (or its cash equivalent) at a specified exchange
rate.” Concurrently with the offering of the investment unit securities, Enron and EOG offered
four million shares and 27 million shares, respectively, of EOG common stock in a separate
public offering.” 8 In conjunction with a separate split-off of a subsidiary of EOG to Enron
occurring contemporaneously with the offering of the investment unit securities, this offering
reduced Enron’s stock ownership of EOG from approximately 53.5 percent (82.27 million
shares) to approximately 9.7 percent (16 million shares).”°?

The exchange rate specified by the 1999 investment unit securities was equal to: (1)
8475 shares of EOG common stock (or the cash equivalent) per investment unit if the EOG
common stock at maturity of the investment unit securities had appreciated to a value of more
than $26.255 per share; (2) fractional shares of EOG common stock equal in value to $22.25 (or
$22.25 in cash) per investment unit if the EOG common stock at maturity of the investment unit

955 As noted above, the price of the EOG common stock at maturity was based upon the
average closing price per share of the stock for the twenty trading days immediately prior to (but
not including) the maturity date.

°56 Enron Corp. 7 percent Exchangeable Notes due July 31, 2002 (Aug. 10, 1999)
{hereinafter “1999 Prospectus”]. The investment unit securities were approved for listing on the
New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “EXG.” 1999 Prospectus at 1. As with its 1995

investment unit securities, Enron referred internally to the 1999 investment unit securities as
“ACES.”

°57 The specified closing price of EOG common stock at the time that Enron issued the
1999 investment unit securities was $22.25 per share, which also determined the $22.25 offering

price of the investment units.

958 Th addition, the underwriters of the offering had an option to purchase from Enron up
to an additional 4.5 million shares of EOG common stock solely to cover over-allotments.

°59 1999 Prospectus at 5-6.

337

=== PAGE 366 ===
securities had appreciated up to $26.255 per share; or (3) one share of EOG common stock (or
the cash equivalent) per investment unit if the EOG common stock had either not appreciated or
had depreciated from a value of $22.25 per share.” Again, whereas an actual purchaser of EOG
common stock would bear the entire risk of loss and opportunity for gain, a purchaser of the
Enron investment unit securities would bear the entire risk of loss but only a limited opportunity
for gain from EOG common stock.*°! However, the seven percent stated interest rate on the
investment unit securities significantly exceeded the anticipated 0.5 percent anticipated dividend
yield on the EOG common stock.°

Subsequent developments

Upon the original maturity of the 1999 Enron investment unit securities on July 31, 2002,
the EOG common stock had appreciated to a price of $34.88 per share.° However, the
securities remain outstanding and in default because of the bankruptcy of Enron,” with the
holders of the securities representing unsecured creditors of the bankruptcy estate pursuant to the
terms of the securities. The New York Stock Exchange suspended public trading of the 1999
investment unit securities on January 15, 2002, and moved to delist the securities from the
exchange.”°

Role of outside advisers

Goldman, Sachs & Co. was the lead underwriter for both the 1995 and 1999 issuances of
the Enron investment unit securities. For each transaction, Vinson & Elkins LLP provided an
analysis of the tax consequences of the transaction but, because of the absence of direct authority
addressing the characterization of the investment unit securities and the resulting uncertainty
concerning their tax treatment, stated that it could not quae an opinion with respect to the tax
consequences of owning or disposing the securities. However, in order to bolster the
characterization of the 1999 investment unit securities as a combination of a debt instrument and

96 1999 Prospectus at 4.

6! To the extent that the closing price of the EOG common stock at maturity of the
investment unit securities was more than $26.255, the holders of the securities would be entitled
to receive only 84.75 percent of the appreciation in the stock. 1999 Prospectus at 5.

962 1999 Prospectus at 5.

963 As with the 1995 issuance, the price of the EOG common stock at maturity of the
1999 issuance was based upon the average closing price per share of the stock for the 20 trading
days immediately prior to (but not including) the maturity date.

964 BC2 000055434.

965 New York Stock Exchange, NYSE Suspends Trading in Enron Corp. and Related
Securities and Moves to Remove from the List, press release dated January 15, 2002.

966 1995 Prospectus at 24; 1999 Prospectus at 28.

338

=== PAGE 367 ===
a forward contract on EOG common stock, the discussion of Federal income tax considerations
also specified certain terms of the ostensible forward contract:

(1) At the time of issuance of the investment unit securities, the holder of the
securities irrevocably deposited with Enron a fixed amount of cash equal to the
initial price of the securities to assure the fulfillment of the holder’s purchase
obligation at maturity of the securities;

(2) until maturity of the investment unit securities, Enron was obligated to pay
interest at seven percent as compensation to the holder of the securities for
Enron’s use of the cash deposit during the term of the securities; and

(3) at maturity of the investment unit securities, the cash deposit unconditionally and
irrevocably would be applied by Enron in full satisfaction of the holder’s
obligation under the forward contract, and Enron would deliver to the holder the
number of shares of EOG common stock that the holder is entitled to receive at
maturity of the securities.°”

In addition, the discussion stated that Enron would not segregate the cash proceeds of the
investment unit securities offering during the term of the securities but, instead, would
commingle the cash with its other assets for use in retiring existing short-term debt of Enron with
a weighted average interest rate of 5.15 percent per year.”

In connection with its 1995 and 1999 issuances of the investment unit securities, Enron
paid fees in the amounts of $6.6 million and $6.675 million, respectively, to Goldman, Sachs &
Co. as lead underwriter in the transactions. Enron also paid expenses in the amount of $425,000
in connection with the 1995 issuance. The Joint Committee staff was unable to determine the
actual amount of expenses paid by Enron in connection with the 1999 issuance.”

3. Discussion

In general

While the tax consequences of tiered preferred securities transactions depend primarily
upon whether the loan by the special purpose entity to the taxpayer (or, in the alternative, the
preferred securities issued to investors by the special purpose entity) is respected as indebtedness
for tax purposes, the intended tax treatment of investment unit securities, such as those issued by
Enron, fundamentally hinges upon whether the imbedded components of the transaction -- the

967 1999 Prospectus at 29. It is important to note that these terms actually do not change
the structure or the economic substance of the investment unit securities.

°68 1999 Prospectus at 14 (use of proceeds) and 29.

969 This information is based upon a review of the prospectus for each issuance and
information provided to the Joint Committee staff by Enron. Letter from Enron’s counsel
(Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on Taxation, dated January 13, 2003.

339

=== PAGE 368 ===
undiscounted conventional debt instrument and the forward contract for the purchase of stock
held by the issuer -- are respected as having independent economic substance.

The discussion of Federal income tax considerations that was included as part of the
offering materials for the 1999 issuance of investment unit securities by Enron demonstrated a
attempt to cosmetically reinforce the independence of the purported components of the
securities. In similar transactions by other companies, structural variations on the basic DECS
transaction primarily have involved the addition of features that are designed to ensure this
intended tax result by incrementally de-linking the forward contract component from the debt
instrument component. Such features have included, for example, acceleration and cancellation
rights pertaining to the forward contract component, as well as resets on the stated overall yield
and separation between the maturity dates of the forward contract and the rest of the transaction.

Investment unit characterization

In the absence of any definitive guidance concerning the tax treatment of DECS and other
similar investment unit securities such as those issued by Enron in 1995 and 1999, it generally is
believed that there are three potential alternative tax characterizations of such securities: (1)
unitary contingent payment debt instruments; (2) unitary prepaid forward contracts; or (3)
investment units consisting of a non-prepaid forward contract and a conventional undiscounted
debt instrument with periodic stated interest.°’”° The first two options view the securities as
single instruments rather than investment units comprised of multiple components, while the
third option views the securities as consisting of a combination of a debt instrument component
and a forward contract component, each with independent significance. In this regard, the
characterization of these financial instruments is critical because the alternative characterizations
can result in drastically different tax consequences to both the issuer and holder of the financial
instruments. However, each alternative characterization has shortcomings that preclude any of
them from being the obvious candidate for the proper characterization of this genre of financial
instruments.””!

For instance, the unitary contingent payment debt instrument characterization is
inadequate because DECS and other similar securities lack the quintessential feature of a debt
instrument--an unconditional promise to pay a sum certain upon maturity--and, thus, cannot
properly be characterized as a contingent payment debt instrument.” The prepaid forward

97° See Garlock, Federal Income Taxation of Debt Instruments (2002) at sec. 9.09[A];
Schizer, Debt Exchangeable for Common Stock: Electivity and the Tax Treatment of Issuers and
Holders, 13 J. Bank Tax’n 167 (Summer 2000).

9°71 “The fact is that DECS simply do not fit as a whole into any of the traditional
‘pigeonholes’ of financial instruments, nor even into any of the modern categories that have been
created to deal with more recent financial innovation (such as notional principal contracts).”
Garlock, Federal Income Taxation of Debt Instruments (2002) at sec. 9.09[A].

°7 Tn two rulings concerning such financial instruments, the IRS has taken this view.

Field Service Advice 199940007 (June 15, 1999); Field Service Advice 200131015 (May 2,
2001).

340

=== PAGE 369 ===
contract characterization is similarly deficient because, although it does not necessitate that such
financial instruments be treated as indebtedness, it fails to account clearly for the periodic
“interest” payments made to the holder by the issuer and the fact that (unlike true prepaid
forward contracts) the initial investment by the holder is not discounted for present value to take
into account the time value of money.” The investment unit characterization, although it
perhaps most clearly reflects the underlying economics of the transaction and is the
characterization that generally has been settled on by taxpayers, suffers from a general lack of
authority for bifurcating a single financial instrument into its constituent components for tax

purposes.”

Constructive sale treatment

Arguably, investment unit securities such as DECS and those issued by Enron properly
should be treated as a taxable sale of the reference stock because the issuer of such securities has
effectively liquidated or monetized its holdings in the reference stock and transferred substantial
benefits and burdens of owning the reference stock to the holder of the securities.” In fact, the
statutory constructive sale rules were enacted for the purpose of treating similar transactions as

973 “Were it not for the periodic payments, one might call the DECS a prepaid forward
contract but, since the amount invested is not discounted to present value and the investor is paid
a periodic return, the investor is clearly paying for something more than the right to receive the
reference stock (or cash measured by the value of that stock).” Garlock, Federal Income
Taxation of Debt Instruments (2002) at sec. 9.09[A]. However, it might be possible to view
DECS as prepaid forward contracts by ignoring the specific cash flows and comparing the
overall yield of an undiscounted prepayment with periodic payments over the term of the
instrument to the overall yield of a discounted prepayment without such periodic payments.

974 Tn discussing structural complexity relating to the taxation of financial products, the
Joint Committee staff has stated that “[dJeveloping component-based rules would likely involve
a considerable expansion of bifurcation principles that have previously been applied only in very
narrow circumstances. See, e.g., sec. 163(e)(5) (applicable high yield discount obligations),
Treas. Reg. Sec. 1.1273-2(h) (investment units); Farley Realty Corp. v. Commissioner, 279 F.2d
701 (2d Cir. 1960) (debt instrument with equity rights); Richmond, F. redericksburg & Potomac
RR. Co. v. Commissioner, 529 F.2d 917 (4th Cir. 1975) (‘guaranteed stock’).” Joint Committee
on Taxation, Study of the Overall State of the Federal Tax System and Recommendations for
Simplification, Pursuant to Section 8022(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (JCS-3-01),
April 2001 (vol. II at 338 n. 583).

975 Tn fact, the 1995 and 1999 issuances of investment unit securities by Enron appear to
have been part of an overall strategy to liquidate shares of EOG common stock. In late 1996, the
Enron Board of Directors approved the monetization of 13 million shares of EOG common stock
in a separate transaction involving an equity swap. Minutes, Meeting of the Board of Directors,
Enron Corp., December 10, 1996, at 5-6 (approving “the monetization of [Enron’s] ownership of
[EOG] stock in the form of an economic equity swap which would entail [Enron’s] sale of up to
13,000,000 shares of EOG”). EC 000045043 through EC 000045044.

341

=== PAGE 370 ===
taxable sales.°”° However, these rules only apply to forward contracts that provide for delivery
(or cash settlement) of a substantially fixed amount of property and a substantially fixed price.
The rules do not apply to forward contracts that provide for delivery of an amount of property
that is subject to significant variation under the terms of the contract. Therefore, the payout
pattern of a typical DECS transaction -- in which the amount of the repayment at maturity varies
based upon the value of stock reference stock -- generally precludes such transactions from being
treated as statutory constructive sales.

Nevertheless, the Treasury Department has the authority to define more precisely the
circumstances under which a variable forward contract in general--and, thus, an issuance of
investment unit securities such as DECS in particular--does result in a statutory constructive sale.
Ideally, the Treasury Department will align the constructive sale treatment of investment unit
securities with that of other transactions that transfer the economic risk of loss and opportunity
for gain (such as collar transactions). However, the Treasury Department to date has not
published such guidance.”

Disqualified indebtedness treatment

As noted above, treating investment unit securities such as DECS and those issued by
Enron in 1995 and 1999 as unitary (contingent payment) debt instruments is probably
inappropriate under general tax principles concerning the characterization of indebtedness
because such securities lack the classic feature of a debt instrument -- an unconditional promise
to pay a sum certain upon maturity. Consequently, taxpayers have taken the position that
investment unit securities should not be subject to the interest disallowance rules for disqualified
indebtedness because the securities, as a whole, do not constitute indebtedness and the debt
instrument component (as opposed to the forward contract component) of such securities is not
payable in equity. However, provided the issuer of investment unit securities owns more than 50
percent of the outstanding stock (in vote or value) that constitutes the reference stock, these
interest disallowance rules can be applied to certain investment unit securities to the extent that
the Treasury Department determines that the ostensibly imbedded debt instrument in such

9 Sec. 1259.

°77 Th recent guidance relating to a particular taxpayer audit, the IRS National Office
concluded that a transaction similar to DECS resulted in a constructive sale under common law
tax ownership principles. However, the transaction at issue in the audit differed from DECS in
that actual shares of the reference stock were pledged for delivery upon maturity of the
instruments that the taxpayer issued in the transaction. Field Service Advice 200111011 (Dec. 6,
2000). In addition, the IRS recently issued generally applicable guidance in which it concluded
that an unsecured prepaid forward sale of stock with a variable payout formula similar to DECS
did not constitute either a common law constructive sale or a statutory constructive sale under
section 1259. Rev. Rul. 2003-7, 2003-5 LR.B. 1. However, while the ruling concluded that
section 1259 did not apply because the number of shares to be delivered to close the transaction
varied significantly, it did not provide a general framework for determining when a variable
forward contract is subject to section 1259 by virtue of the amount payable at settlement not
being subject to significant variation.

342

=== PAGE 371 ===
securities is part of an arrangement that is reasonably expected to result in the repayment of the
debt instrument with or by reference to the reference stock underlying the accompanying forward
contract.°’*® To date, neither the Treasury Department nor the IRS has published guidance or
rulings with precedent that would adopt this position.””

The 1995 issuance of investment-unit securities by Enron predated the effective date of
the disqualified indebtedness rules but, had these rules been in effect at the time of the issuance,
it is possible that the issuance could have been considered an arrangement that was reasonably
expected to result in the repayment of the securities with or by reference to the EOG common
stock and, thus, treated as disqualified indebtedness.”

By contrast, the 1999 investment unit securities issued by Enron followed the effective
date of the disqualified indebtedness rules. However, Enron apparently took into account the
contemporaneous EOG subsidiary split-off transaction and/or the issuance of EOG common
stock into the public stock markets, and thereby concluded that the disqualified indebtedness
rules did not apply because Enron’s stock ownership of EOG common stock had fallen below the
50-percent ownership threshold specified for Enron and EOG to be considered related parties
under the disqualified indebtedness rules. Otherwise, it is possible that the 1999 issuance also
could have been considered an arrangement that was reasonably expected to result in the
repayment of the securities with or by reference to the EOG common stock and, thus, treated as
disqualified indebtedness.

Straddle treatment

In recent years, it appears that the IRS position has been evolving toward a broader
application of the straddle rules to investment unit securities such as DECS and those issued by
Enron. In 1999, the IRS National Office issued guidance relating to an audit of a taxpayer that
had issued equity-linked securities, and determined that the securities in question were not debt
instruments but, rather, constituted a combination of put options and a call options (i.e., collars).
Therefore, the National Office concluded that the taxpayer was subject to loss deferral under the
straddle rules with regard to the reference stock underlying the securities because the issuance of

8 Sec. 163(1)(3)(C).

979 As noted above, the reference stock involved in DECS and their counterparts
generally has been comprised of stock issued by a corporation in which the company issuing the
DECS-type securities has only a so-called “portfolio”, or non-controlling, ownership interest.
Therefore, the disqualified indebtedness rules do not apply to such transactions because the
company and the corporation issuing the reference stock are not considered to be related parties
under those rules.

°80 Even taking into account the concurrent issuance of EOG common stock into the
public stock markets by Enron (which reduced Enron’s stock ownership of EOG from 80 percent
to approximately 54 percent), EOG would have been treated as a related party under the
disqualified indebtedness rules because Enron would have held more than 50 percent of the
outstanding stock of EOG.

343

=== PAGE 372 ===
the securities resulted in a substantial diminution of risk of loss attributable to the reference
stock.°*! However, the National Office did not indicate in its guidance whether the taxpayer also
was required to capitalize interest and carrying costs of the transaction under the straddle rules.
Therefore, the guidance did not serve to either dispel or confirm the general view of taxpayers
that the interest and carrying cost capitalization requirements of the straddle rules do not apply to
payments of stated interest on DECS and similar securities because the debt component of such
securities is not incurred to purchase or carry the reference stock.

With regard to applying the capitalization requirements of the straddle rules to DECS and
similar securities, proposed regulations that the Treasury Department published in January 2001
would “clarify” its broad authority to require issuers of such securities to capitalize the stated
interest payments that they make with respect to the securities. Under these rules, the IRS
generally would have the authority to require issuers of DECS and similar financial instruments
to capitalize (rather than deduct currently) the stated interest payments on the financial
instruments.

Shortly after the publication of the proposed regulations, the IRS National Office
provided guidance concerning a particular taxpayer audit that involved a financial instrument
which appeared in all materials respects to be identical to DECS.”®* In this guidance, the
National Office determined that the financial instrument in question did not provide for
repayment of a sum certain upon maturity because the principal amount payable at maturity was
contingent upon the value of the reference stock (as paid either in actual shares or their cash
equivalent). Consequently, the National Office concluded that the financial instruments did not
constitute indebtedness for tax purposes.” Instead, the National Office determined that the
financial instruments constituted either: (1) a combination of put and call options comprising a
“collar” on the reference stock; (2) a notional principal contract on the reference stock with the
stated interest payments representing periodic payments; (3) a prepaid forward contract on the
reference stock; or (4) a sui generis financial instrument subject to its own unique set of tax
rules. In any case, the National Office concluded that the financial instruments in question were
subject to the loss deferral provisions of the straddle rules because they provided the issuer with
a substantial diminution in the risk of loss from holding an existing “long” position in the
reference stock by reason of holding the “short” position in the reference stock through the
issuance of the financial instruments in question.

In addition, the National Office concluded that, even though the issuer of the financial
instruments did not actually pledge the reference stock to its obligation to deliver the reference
stock (or its cash equivalent) to the investors upon maturity of the financial instruments, the
issuer nevertheless intended to continue carrying (rather than actually disposing) the reference

981 Field Service Advice 199940007 (June 15, 1999).

982 Field Service Advice 200131015 (May 2, 2001).
°83 ‘The guidance stated that the taxpayer reported the financial instruments as a forward

sale of the reference stock for (unspecified) regulatory purposes, but reported the instruments as
indebtedness for financial accounting purposes.

344

=== PAGE 373 ===
stock by monetizing a significant portion of its economic interest in the reference stock through
the issuance of instruments that included an obligation tied to the performance of the reference
stock. Therefore, the National Office concluded that the financial instruments (and, in particular,
the stated interest payments on the instruments) were subject to the capitalization requirements
of the straddle rules.”**

The recent guidance issued by the National Office suggests the IRS believes that, even if
the deduction of stated interest payments on DECS and similar financial instruments is not
disallowed altogether by the disqualified indebtedness rules (e.g., because the issuer does not
have the requisite 50 percent stock ownership to be considered a “related party” to the issuer of
the reference stock), such payments nevertheless must be capitalized under the present law
straddle capitalization rules.

4. Recommendations

Unlike the constructive sale rules, the disqualified indebtedness rules apply to
transactions involving stock in another corporation only if the taxpayer controls the other
corporation by virtue of owning more than 5O percent (by vote or value) of the outstanding stock
of such corporation.*®° It may be argued that the financing activities undertaken by Enron in
1995 and 1999 cast doubt upon the tax policy rationale for excluding from the application of
these rules so-called “portfolio,” or non-controlling, stock ownership interests of 50 percent or
less. With regard to the investment unit securities issued by Enron during these years, the fact
that Enron owned more than 50 percent of the EOG common stock at the time of the 1995
issuance but owned less than 50 percent of the EOG common stock at the time of the 1999
issuance (or shortly thereafter) had no discernible bearing on the intent or economic
consequences of either transaction. In each instance, the securities had the purpose and effect of
carrying out an equity transaction that involved the monetization of EOG common stock.

Therefore, the Joint Committee staff recommends that Congress eliminate the 50 percent
related party threshold under the interest expense disallowance rules for disqualified
indebtedness.

°84 Because the straddle capitalization regulations remain in proposed form and, in any
case, would not apply to straddles created prior to January 17, 2001 (such as the financial
instruments apparently at issue in the guidance), the National Office reached its conclusion
without actually applying the proposed regulations. However, the National Office did apply
principles similar to those set forth in the proposed regulations, thus confirming the view of the
National Office that the proposed regulations would merely “clarify” the present-law application
of the straddle capitalization rules.

°85 Tn this regard, the disqualified indebtedness rules also stand in contrast to the rules
under section 1032 (providing for the non-recognition of gain or loss by a corporation with
respect to certain transactions involving its own stock), which only apply to the taxpayer’s own
stock and not to any stock held by the taxpayer.

345

=== PAGE 374 ===
E. Commodity Prepay Transactions

1. Brief overview

Beginning in 1992, Enron entered into several structured financial transactions arranged
by various financial institutions wherein Enron received upfront payments in exchange for the
future delivery of a specified commodity such as crude oil or natural gas (“commodity prepay
transactions”). Although such transactions are common in the energy industry in general, the
Enron commodity prepay transactions were unique in that they involved a circular cash flow
arrangement among Enron, the arranging financial institution, and a special purpose entity. The
parties devised this circularity by engaging in multiple commodity transactions that involved a
substantially identical amount of the underlying commodity. Upon termination of the overall
transaction, no amount of the underlying commodity actually would be transferred. Rather, the
initial cash flow to Enron that originated with the financial institution (or, in the case of some
later transactions, outside investors) when the transaction was initiated essentially would be
reversed when the transaction was terminated (i.e., Enron would return the funds to the financial
institution or outside investors).

In general, the overall economic effect of the transactions was that Enron enjoyed the use
of money provided to it during the pendency of the transactions, and returned the money (along
with a premium) at the conclusion of the transactions. However, because of the way in which
the transactions were structured, Enron portrayed its financial condition in a more favorable light
-- from the standpoint of its credit rating and market valuation -- by reporting the transactions as
part of its trading operations rather than as debt for financial accounting purposes.

The purposes for entering into most of these transactions apparently were twofold: (1) to
accelerate the recognition of taxable income in order to utilize section 29 credits (relating to fuel
production from nonconventional sources);°°” or (2) to generate cash flow, often immediately

Ess September 22, 1999 memorandum from Morris R. Clark to Jordan Mintz, “Federal
Income Tax Treatment of Prepayments” [hereinafter “Clark memorandum”]. EC2 000033005
through EC2 000033021. The structured financing materials in Appendix B contain the Clark
memorandum. See also The Role of the Financial Institutions in Enron’s Collapse: Hearings
Before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Senate Comm. on Governmental
Affairs (July 23, 2002) (testimony of Robert Roach, Chief Investigator) [hereinafter “Roach
testimony’”].

987 Clark memorandum (noting that Enron entered into three prepayment transactions in
1992 and 1993 “primarily as a means for generating taxable income in order to take advantage of
[section] 29 credits generated by [Enron Oil and Gas] which, at that time, was part of Enron’s
consolidated group”). Section 29 credits may only be used against regular tax liability (secs.
29(b)(6)), and cannot be carried forward except as additional alternative minimum tax
carryforward credits (sec. 53(d)(1)(B)). Consequently, Enron would not have been able to utilize
its section 29 credits in 1992 and 1993 without the taxable income generated by the prepayment
transactions because it otherwise would have been in an alternative minimum tax position.

346

=== PAGE 375 ===
preceding the close of a financial statement reporting period, that could be reported for financial
accounting purposes as cash from trading operations rather than proceeds from debt financing.”**

Enron entered into one or two commodity prepay transactions per year between 1992 and
1997, but entered into several more per year between 1998 and September 2001. Over this
period of time, Enron entered at least 12 commodity prepay transactions with J.P. Morgan Chase
& Co. (J.P. Morgan”),” for an aggregate notional amount of approximately $3.7 billion, and at
least 12 such transactions with Citigroup, Inc.,”” for an aggregate notional amount of
approximately $4.9 billion."

2. Background”
Reported tax and financial statement effects
For financial accounting purposes, Enron treated the commodity prepay transactions as

trading contracts."*? Accordingly, Enron reported the proceeds from the transactions as cash
flow from trading (or price risk management) operations and the obligation to close the

988 With regard to enhancing cash flow (as opposed to generating taxable income in
order to utilize section 29 credits), the Roach testimony states that “Enron had two major reasons
to reduce its balance sheet debt and increase cash flow from operations: 1) to improve Enron’s
credit rating and 2) to support and even boost Enron’s share price.” Roach testimony at A-2.
Apparently, Enron entered into only one commodity prepay transaction for actual commercial
purposes, which occurred in 1992 and involved a notional amount that was “considerably smaller
than any of the other...prepayments.” Clark memorandum.

989 On December 31, 2000, The Chase Manhattan Corporation, the bank nolding
company of The Chase Manhattan Bank, N.A., merged with J.P. Morgan & Co., Inc. to become
J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. All references herein to J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. include relevant
constituent and predecessor firms.

° On October 8, 1998, Citicorp, the bank holding company of Citibank, N.A., merged
with Traveler’s Salomon-Smith Barney to become Citigroup. All references herein to Citigroup
include relevant constituent and predecessor firms.

°°! Roach testimony at A-8. See Roach testimony at Appendix E for more details
concerning the individual transactions (e.g., dates of the transactions, dollar amounts of the
transactions, underlying commodities, and status at bankruptcy).

°°? ‘The following description of the development and implementation of Enron’s
commodity prepay transactions is based in substantial part upon the Roach testimony, which
provides a more comprehensive description and non-tax analysis of the transactions.

993 Apparently, the commodity prepay contracts were treated in a similar fashion by the
credit rating agencies. Clark memorandum (“The transaction is not treated as traditional debt for
accounting and credit rating purposes, but rather, the prepayment is viewed as a part of Enron’s
overall price risk management activity.”).

347

=== PAGE 376 ===
transactions as trading (or price risk management) liabilities." In reporting its financial
accounting income, Enron treated the proceeds from the transactions as deferred revenue, with
income recognized over time as the underlying commodity was (or the cash proceeds from
selling the commodity on behalf of the counterparty financial institution were) delivered by
Enron pursuant to its obligations under the contract between Enron and the financial institution.

The Federal income tax treatment of the commodity prepay transactions by Enron
depended upon Enron’s objective for entering into the transaction. If Enron’s objective was to
generate immediate taxable income in order to utilize section 29 credits, Enron would treat the
transaction as a sale of inventoriable goods under the applicable tax rules and would recognize
the prepayment as taxable income in the year of receipt. °5 Tn order to characterize these
transactions as a sale of goods for tax purposes, Enron structured the prepaid forward contracts to
provide for settlement of the contracts by physical delivery of the underlying commodity (rather
than non-physical cash settlement based upon the spot price of the underlying commodity on the
settlement date of the contracts). However, because the counterparty financial institution
presumably did not desire to take physical delivery of the underlying commodity, the parties
structured the transactions to achieve the same practical effect as cash settlement by committing
Enron to market or sell the underlying physical commodity at the spot price on behalf of the
financial institution and remit the cash proceeds from such sale to the institution.”

By contrast, if Enron’s intention was to generate cash flow for financial reporting
purposes, but not recognize taxable income immediately, Enron initially relied upon the tax rules
that provide for limited deferral of taxable income recognition with respect to inventoriable
goods.°”” However, because such deferral constitutes a method of tax accounting, Enron had to

94 Roach testimony at A-2 to A-3; Clark memorandum. The decision by Enron to report
these transactions as part of its trading activities, rather than as loan proceeds, has generated
intense controversy and scrutiny. The Roach testimony concludes that “the basic transaction
fails as a prepay and what remains is a loan to Enron using a bank and an obligation on Enron’s
part to repay the principal plus interest.” Roach testimony at 1.

°°5 Clark memorandum. Apparently, the need to utilize section 29 credits existed
primarily during the time that Enron Oil & Gas was consolidated with Enron. See The Role of
the Financial Institutions in Enron’s Collapse: Hearings Before the Permanent Subcommittee
on Investigations of the Senate Comm. on Governmental Affairs (July 23, 2002) (testimony of
Jeffrey Dellapina, Managing Director, Credit and Rates Group, J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.:
“Chase understood that the transactions originally had tax benefits to Enron. Later, Chase
learned, Enron no longer received tax benefits from the transactions but chose to continue to
engage in prepaid forward transactions for other corporation purposes.”). However,
consideration was given to using these transactions to generate immediate taxable income in
order to absorb Enron’s extensive and growing net operating losses. Clark memorandum.

996 Id.

°°7 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.451-5.

348

=== PAGE 377 ===
execute these transactions using entities that had not previously entered into transactions for the
purpose of generating immediate taxable income to utilize section 29 credits.°”®

In later commodity prepay transactions, Enron structured the transactions with cash
settled commodity contracts rather than physically settled contracts. Because Enron would
market or sell the underlying commodity on behalf of the counterparty financial institution in the
earlier transactions involving physical settlement, the use of cash settled contracts in the later
transactions did not alter meaningfully the economic substance of the overall transaction.
However, the change from physical settled contracts to cash settled contracts meant that the tax
rules governing prepaid sales of goods no longer applied to the transactions. In addition, some of
the commodity prepay transactions were funded by outside investors (rather than the financial
institution arranging the transaction) through the issuance of so-called “credit-linked” notes.
With regard to these transactions, Enron changed its characterization of the commodity prepay
transactions for Federal income tax purposes and treated the transactions as loans for Federal
income tax purposes, with the prepayment to Enron upon entering into the transaction treated as
nontaxable loan proceeds and the termination of the transaction treated as a repayment of the
loan.

°°8 Id. The Enron entities that entered into the transactions for the purpose of generating
immediate taxable income (and, thus, could not defer the recognition of taxable income from
prepayments in subsequent transactions) included Enron Reserve Acquisition Corp., Enron
Power Services, and EGS Hydrocarbon Corp. Enron Capital & Trade Resources Corp. (“ECT”),
the predecessor to Enron North America, similarly was required to recognize immediate taxable
income from these transactions because it had merged with some of the foregoing entities (and,
thus, adopted their method of accounting for these transactions). Consequently, “although ECT
may be the preferred entity to effectuate prepayment transactions from a commercial or legal
perspective (since the counterparty may already have a master swap agreement in place with
ECT or because the counterparty otherwise has familiarity with ECT from other commercial
deals), ECT may not be the preferred entity from a tax perspective.” Id. The Enron entities that
entered into the transactions for the purpose of generating cash flow for financial reporting
purposes without the immediate recognition of taxable income included Enron Hydrocarbons
Marketing Corp., Enron Cushing Oil Marketing, Inc., and Enron Natural Gas Marketing. Jd.
Apparently, Enron formed a new entity every year from 1993 to 1996 in order execute new
prepayment transactions that could achieve the desired tax results. Id.

999 Id.; Roach testimony at 2; April 10, 2001 memorandum from AnnMarie Tiller and
Brent Vasconcellos to Jim Sandt, “Enron Credit Linked Notes Due 2005” (“For book purposes,
Enron will record the upfront payment under the Prepaid Swap in income and record Enron’s
obligation under the Prepaid Swap as a price risk management expense and liability. For tax
purposes, these income and expense entries will be reversed with an M-1 adjustment.”)
[hereinafter “Tiller memorandum”]. EC 000850722 through EC 000850726. The structured
financing materials in Appendix B contain this memorandum. The later commodity prepay
transactions may have been restructured using cash settled contracts for tax purposes because it
appears that the limited two-year deferral available for the recognition in taxable income of
advance payments relating to inventoriable goods was considered insufficient for Enron’s
purposes inasmuch as the transactions (including the forward contracts) were structured to be

349

=== PAGE 378 ===
Development and implementation of Enron commodity prepay transactions

Basic structure

In general, these transactions involved a special purpose entity created by the financial
institution that was arranging the transaction.!©° The special purpose entity would enter into a
prepaid forward contract with the financial institution providing for a cash payment by the
financial institution to the special purpose entity in exchange for a promise by the special
purpose entity to deliver to the financial institution a fixed quantity of a commodity (typically,
crude oil or natural gas) on a specified future date.!°' The amount of the cash payment made by
the financial institution to the special purpose entity would equal the estimated future price
(“forward price”) of the reference commodity on the future delivery date.

Simultaneously, the special purpose entity would enter into an identical prepaid forward
contract with Enron providing for a cash payment by the special purpose entity to Enron in
exchange for a promise by Enron to deliver to the special purpose entity a fixed quantity of a

: a 1002 F
commodity on a specified future date. The terms of this contract (e.g., the amount of the cash

outstanding for three to six years. Clark memorandum (“[S]ince both natural gas and oil are
carried in Enron’s inventory, these prepayments fall under the inventoriable goods exception
and, as such, gain recognition may only be deferred for a period of two years after the year of
receipt.”).

1000 With regard to the transactions that Enron entered into with J.P. Morgan, the special
purpose entity (“Mahonia Ltd.”) was directly owned by the Eastmoss Charitable Trust, which
J.P. Morgan formed in Jersey for the purpose of owning special purpose entities that J.P. Morgan
would utilize in arranging financing transactions for its clients. Roach testimony at C-5. The
Roach testimony concludes that, notwithstanding its formal ownership by a purportedly
independent charitable trust, Mahonia Ltd. was controlled by J.P. Morgan to the point that it was
“a non-substantive entity established for the benefit of [J.P. Morgan].” Jd. at C-6. The Enron
commodity prepay transactions that were arranged by Citigroup utilized a special purpose entity
(“Delta Energy Corporation”) that was incorporated in the Cayman Islands. Id. at D-6, fn. 9.

1001 Although various media reports and congressional testimony have used the terms
“forward contract” and “swap contract” somewhat interchangeably to describe Enron’s
commodity prepay transactions (perhaps to distinguish between physically and financially settled
contracts), references herein to forward contracts refer only to contracts that do not provide for
periodic payments, and references herein to swap contracts refer only to contracts that do provide
for period payments.

1002 Clark memorandum (“The [prepayment transactions intended to accelerate taxable
income] were typically structured as forward oil sale contracts with a counterparty arranged by a
financial institution (Chase Manhattan or Citibank), whereby the counterparty would make a
significant upfront payment in exchange for Enron’s obligation to deliver oil on a monthly basis
over a3 to 4 year period.”), noting that the financial institution would not actually receive
physical oil or gas from Enron pursuant to the transaction but, rather, Enron would sell the oil or
gas on behalf of the financial institution and remit the proceeds from the sale to the institution.

350

=== PAGE 379 ===
payment by the special purpose entity to Enron, the quantity and type of the reference
commodity, and the delivery date (and location) involved in the contract between the special
purpose entity and Enron) all would mirror the terms of the contract between the special purpose
entity and the financial institution.

Simultaneous with the execution of these prepaid forward contracts, Enron and the
financial institution would enter into a commodity swap contract providing for the periodic
payment of a fixed cash amount by Enron to the financial institution in exchange for the periodic
payment of a variable, or floating, cash amount by the financial institution to Enron. The swap
had the effect of eliminating the residual price risk that otherwise would be incurred by Enron
from the transaction.

At the conclusion of the transaction, the special purpose entity would close the forward
contract with Enron by taking delivery of the reference commodity from Enron, the financial
institution would close the forward contract with the special purpose entity by taking delivery of
the reference commodity from the special purpose entity (i.e., the same commodity delivered by
Enron to the special purpose entity pursuant to their forward contract), and the financial
institution would sell the commodity on the spot market (often to an Enron-affiliated entity). !°
However, while some of the transactions provided for physical settlement through actual
delivery of the reference commodity, many of the transactions provided for financial (or non-
physical) settlement!

The diagram on the following page partially depicts a commodity prepay transaction that
Enron entered into with Citigroup in August 2000 as an example of the basic structure of Enron’s
commodity prepay transactions. '°°

1093 The particulars of the individual transactions often varied somewhat from the basic
transactional structure. For example, prior to 1996 the special purpose entity and the financial
institution would enter into a swap contract (rather than a forward contract), the special purpose
entity (rather than the financial institution) would take ultimate delivery of the commodity
pursuant to closing the forward contract with Enron and sell the commodity on the spot market,
and the special purpose entity would hedge its price risk by entering into a futures contract.
Roach testimony at C-3, fn. 3. In addition, the final commodity prepay transaction that Enron

entered into involved three swaps rather than two prepaid forward contracts and one swap. Id. at
C-9.

1004 41] but one of the transactions between Enron and J.P. Morgan involved physical
settlement, while all but one of the transactions between Enron and Citigroup involved financial
settlement. Roach testimony at A-8, fn. 33.

1005 The diagram is only partial because it does not include the external financing
obtained for this particular transaction from outside investors through the issuance of Enron
credit-linked notes by an off-balance sheet trust (discussed below). See Diagram [2] below fora
complete illustration of this particular transaction, including the issuance of Enron credit-linked
notes.

351

=== PAGE 380 ===
‘demg yuequio/eyaq pur dems ejaq/yNd eu} uo juowAed jeuy v Yysnomp
dn opeur st yueqniD 01 juauAed peuly oy) UO UOTTIU SLPS MOTOQ [TeJWOYS AUV x4»

786'S99'91$ Sem
quouiked paxy o1potiad ysazy ay) ou) ‘ayep BuISOD $Z/g YI JO [NSAI v SV x4

S194 ZIE'EES Sem uWAEd Buoy sIpotred
ISJ OY} JOJ JUNOUTE eUOLOU dy} ‘aye BUISO]D CZ/g OU} JO IINSaI U SV»

oae=-= yuourkeg [euly
—_——_— syuourheg paxiy dI1polted
tse syusurdeg Suneoy spooled
seeesessensesces squsuideg [entuy

puossy Aedoig

+x4S0/L UO UOT! C/p$ 10 edu yods
XAWAN © SI99 8hL'8E7'EZ JO JOSSI]

#SO/L YBNOM PI/L 7B PI/T Yous
uo aud yods XKAWAN + S199 Z0°89S

UOT S7$

diyssouyred V
uoneiodioy [7]

sonred PUL Ea

pareptfosuoD dVVO volUy Ey

(ueaseig [ensed)

0002 ‘sz Jsnsny
uonovsuesy Aedaig Wont SL’$ VWNA

352

=== PAGE 381 ===
Credit-linked financial transactions

Whereas J.P. Morgan itself provided the funding for its commodity prepay transactions
with Enron, several of the later commodity prepay transactions that Citigroup entered into with
Enron were funded with the proceeds of notes that were issued through an off-balance sheet
trust.!0% Apparently, the financing of these transactions through the issuance of notes to
investors who were otherwise external to the transaction was necessary because the internal
credit policy of Citigroup precluded the extension of any additional credit to Enron.'%” These
transactions have become known publicly as the “Yosemite” transactions.

In the Citigroup transactions that involved external financing (i.e., the Yosemite
transactions), the proceeds from the note issuances were loaned by the trust to the special
purpose entity, which used the funds to make the prepayment as part of the prepaid forward
contract entered into between the special purpose entity and Enron. The repayment of the notes
by the trust was contingent upon (or “linked to”) the credit rating of Enron. 08 By issuing notes
that were linked to Enron’s creditworthiness, the exposure to a default by Enron on its

1006 Roach Testimony at D-1.

oa anuary 12, 2001 memorandum from AnnMarie Tiller to Dave Maxey, “Enron
Credit Linked Notes Due 2005”. EC 000850727 through EC 000850728. The structured
financing materials in Appendix B contain this memorandum. According to an Enron internal
communication, “Yosemite accomplished the following:

e Released bank capacity for future Enron deals by effectively refinancing the prepay
structures into the bond market.

e Provided a longer-term financing option for our prepay structures (bond coupon could
extend out to 10+ years)

e Provides for the ability to substitute transactions within Yosemite without having to
prepay the bonds

e Provides for the ability to amend transactions within Yosemite through which is
typically difficult in a bond transaction. Versus a bank deal, the Yosemite transaction
allows for easier execution of an amendment because we only have to deal with
Citibank versus a syndicate group.

e Retain the flexibility to sell Enron credit default swaps to the banks as an alternative
method for freeing up their lending capacity.”

Electronic mail message from Doug McDowell to Brent Vasconcellos, dated April 18,
2000. EC2 000033469.

1008 These notes were designed to provide credit quality that was comparable to Enron
senior unsecured obligations, and were referred to as Enron Linked Obligations (“LEOs”).
Undated PowerPoint presentation, “Yosemite Securities Trust I: $750,000,000 Linked Enron
Obligations (LEOs™)”. EC2 000033095 through EC2 000033108.

353

=== PAGE 382 ===
obligations in the underlying commodity prepay transaction (i.e., the “credit risk”) would be
borne ultimately by the outside investors in the notes.!0

Yosemite transactions.Between 1999 and 2001, Enron issued credit-linked notes for
some of its commodity prepay transactions through four trusts known as Yosemite I, Yosemite
II, Yosemite III, and Yosemite Iv.!°!° tn these transactions, Enron would enter into cash-settled
commodity contracts (including the large initial premium payments to Enron) with Citigroup and
a special purpose entity, similar to the basic commodity prepay transactions described above.!7!!
In addition, Citigroup (through its special purpose entity) and the trust would enter into a credit
default swap transaction whereby, in the absence of a credit event on the part of Enron (such as
default of its obligations in the transaction or bankruptcy), the trust would make periodic (semi-
annual) payments to Citigroup in an amount equal to the yield received by the trust on the loan to
the special purpose entity that it made with the proceeds of credit-linked obligations that were
issued by the trust to outside investors. In return, Citigroup would make periodic (semi-annual)

payments sufficient for the trust to make yield payments on the credit-linked obligations and the
trust certificates.

In the Yosemite transactions, the circular commodity prepay transactions among Enron,
Citigroup, and the special purpose entity involved cash-settled commodity swaps, whereby
Enron received an upfront payment from Citigroup (in the case of the swap between Enron and
Citigroup) in exchange for an obligation to make periodic (semi-annual) floating payments
(based upon the spot price for a notional amount of the underlying commodity) and a final
payment at the end of the swap. !01?

1009 January 12, 2001 memorandum from AnnMarie Tiller to Dave Maxey, “Enron
Credit Linked Notes Due 2005”. EC 000850727 through EC 00085078.

1010 Tq. In general, credit-linked financial transactions typically involve some form of
derivative, such as a total return swap, default swap, credit risk option, or credit-linked notes.
Credit-linked notes generally are comprised of fixed or variable interest rate debt instruments
issued by a party that is unrelated to the issuer of the underlying obligation(s) the repayment of
which determines the repayment of the credit-linked notes. If no default (or other specified
similar credit event) occurs with regard to the underlying obligation(s), the credit-linked notes
are repaid at maturity. However, if a default (or other specified similar credit event) does occur
with regard to the underlying obligation(s), the maturity of the credit-linked notes is accelerated
but no amount is required to be repaid or a reduced amount is repaid by reference to the fair
market value of the underlying obligations. See Nirenberg and Kopp, Credit derivatives: Tax

Treatment of Total Return Swaps, Default Swaps, and Credit-Linked Notes, 87 J. Tax’n 82, 94
(August 1997).

1011 March 27, 2001 Electronic mail message from AnnMarie Tiller to Ryan Siurek
(describing Yosemite III commodity prepay transaction). EC2 000033031. The structured

financing materials in Appendix B contain this electronic mail message.

1012 Roach testimony at D-3; Tiller memorandum. Because the funding for the
commodity prepay transactions was channeled from the trust to Citigroup through its special

354

=== PAGE 383 ===
Initially, Enron and Citigroup owned equal shares of the equity certificates in Yosemite I
in order to avoid financial statement disclosure of the trust (and the debt issued by the trust) by
Enron and Citigroup.!°% After Enron determined that its percentage of equity ownership in the
trust would exceed the amount permissible to avoid financial statement disclosure, Enron sold
the necessary portion of its equity ownership through LJM2 to a related entity, Whitewing.!°!*
Similar events occurred with regard to Yosemite 1.'0!

The following describes, in general, the cash flows involved in some of these
transactions:!°!°

Yosemite Trust Cash Flows

The Yosemite trust receives $X billion from offering credit-linked notes.

e The trust loans the offering proceeds to the special purpose entity (which, in turn,
transfers the proceeds to Citigroup through a prepaid commodity swap)./°!7

e The Yosemite trust pays the interest on the credit-linked notes from the yield on the
loans made by the trust to the special purpose entity and the premium received from
Citigroup for entering into the credit default swap.

e The Yosemite trust repays principal on the credit-linked notes from the proceeds of
the repayment upon maturity of the loans made by the trust to the special purpose
entity.

purpose entity, Enron entered into the commodity contract directly with Citigroup rather than
through the special purpose entity.

1013 Roach testimony at D-10, fn. 39.
1014 Id.
1015 Td. at D-11, fn. 41.

1016 Citibank/Salomon Smith Barney presentation to Enron, “The ‘Next’ Yosemite,”
dated May 2, 2000. EC2 000033439 through EC2 000033468.

1017 With regard to the Yosemite III and IV transactions, the trust used the proceeds of
the offering to acquire Citigroup certificates of deposit from the special purpose entity (rather
than loaning the proceeds to the special purpose entity) as collateral for the funding provided by
Citigroup to Enron through the contract between Citigroup and Enron. Roach testimony at D-11,
fn. 41. As part of the collateral arrangement, the trust and Citigroup entered into a credit default
swap that effectively permitted Citigroup to repay the certificates of deposit by delivering to the
trust so-called “Enron Deliverable Obligations” in the event that Enron defaulted on its contract
with Citigroup or became insolvent or bankrupt. The Enron Deliverable Obligations would be
senior unsecured obligations of Enron and any amounts recovered by the trust from these
obligations would be used to repay principal on the credit-linked notes issued by the trust. Tiller
memorandum.

355

=== PAGE 384 ===
Credit Default Swap Cash Flows

The Yosemite trust receives a premium from entering into the credit default swap
with Citigroup.

If acredit event on the part of Enron occurs (such as default on its obligations in the
transaction or bankruptcy), the Yosemite trust transfers to Citigroup the notes on the
loans that it has made to the special purpose entity and, in exchange, receives senior,
unsecured obligations of Enron; in turn, the trust repays the credit-linked notes out of
any proceeds received by the trust from the sale or workout of the Enron obligations
received from Citigroup.

Enron Cash Flows

Citigroup enters into a commodity swap contract with Enron that provides a
prepayment by Citigroup to Enron in the amount of $X billion.

Enron makes periodic (semi-annual) payments to Citigroup pursuant to the
commodity swap contract.

The diagram on the following page depicts the commodity prepay transaction that Enron
entered into with Citigroup in August 2000 as an example of an Enron commodity prepay
transaction that included the issuance of credit-linked notes.

356

=== PAGE 385 ===
“dems yueqnig/eyjaq pue dems eyjaq/WNq oy) uo juswAed Jeuy v ysnomy
dn apeut st yueqni 01 Juourded [euYy ou UO MOTT CL yg MOTO [TEFHOYS AUY x44

786'S99‘91$ SEM
juaurXed paxy stpouiad sry oy aup ‘ayep Butsopo ¢Z/g OY) JO INSAI e SV ex

S199 ZIE'EES SUM JUSWIAEd BuNLOY oIpoued
JSIJ OYJ JOJ JUNOUTE FeUOTOU ay} ‘aJEp BuISO{D ¢7Z/g DY} JO INSAI v SV,

e—_—_e = quaurfeg [euly
——_—— syusuAed Pexty SIpoleg
— +. sjusmAeg Suneopy dIpolieg
cecececcseescoes syuourdeg [entuy

puosey Aedarg

sxxSO/L UO WONT CL$ 10 eoud yods
XAWAN © S199 8PL'8EZ‘EZ JO J8SSOT

#SO/L UBNOMN PI/L F PI/T youve
uo aoud ods XAWAN « S199 ¥Z0'89S

si9ploH
3ION VPPT FINA.

COTLLO‘6EP$
ayeoyysteg

uOTTIM S7$

dryssourreg
uonviodio_

ys, popresaisiq

(od

somred PAIL,
pareprfosuod dVVO vorUg

0002 ‘sz JsnSsnYy
uonoesuery Aedaig UOT SLb$ VNA

JeHUSplJuOD

357

=== PAGE 386 ===
Role of outside advisors

The roles of J.P. Morgan and Citigroup in these transactions have been chronicled
extensively.'!® In general, it appears that Enron compensated these financial institutions for
their involvement in the transactions primarily through spreads built into the circular contracts
that were used in the transactions (rather than through explicit fees). For example, in a
commodity prepay transaction entered into with Citigroup in June 1999, Enron essentially
received approximately $250 million in net up-front payments upon entering into the transaction,
and paid approximately $253 million in net payments when the transaction closed.'° Similarly,
the Yosemite III transaction provided for Enron to receive net up-front payments in the amount
of approximately $483 million at the initiation of the transaction, and provided for Enron to
make a payment of approximately $492 million when the transaction terminated, thus resulting
in compensation to Citibank in the approximate amount of approximately $9 million.!°”°

Enron apparently did not receive tax opinion letters in connection with the basic
commodity prepay transactions. Rather, it appears that Enron tax personnel primarily developed
the tax analysis of these transactions with some legal assistance provided by Vinson & Elkins
LLP.

3. Discussion

In general

The primary tax policy issue surrounding the basic structure of the Enron commodity
prepay transactions involves the selectivity that Enron exercised in determining the tax
consequences of substantially similar transactions based upon the underlying objectives of Enron
in executing the transactions.!©”! In earlier commodity prepay transactions, Enron treated the
transactions as prepaid sales of goods. Within the tax rules governing the treatment of prepaid

1018 See, e.g., The Role of the Financial Institutions in Enron’s Collapse: Hearings
Before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Senate Comm. on Governmental
Affairs (July 23, 2002); Peter Behr and Ben White, J.P. Morgan Had Many Ties With Enron, The
Washington Post (Feb. 23, 2002) at E1; Kurt Eichenwald, Questions Raised on Enron Offshore
Gas Trades, The New York Times (Feb. 19, 2002) at C1.

1019 July 8, 1999 Memorandum from Michael L. Herman to R. Davis Maxey, “US$ 500
million Prepaid Forward and Swap Contracts with respect to Crude Oil, dated June 29, 1999”.
EC2 000033290 through EC2 000033294. Apparently, Enron also paid Citigroup a stated fee of
$1 million in connection with the transaction. Id.

1020 March 27, 2001 Electronic mail message from AnnMarie Tiller to Brent
Vasconcellos (describing Yosemite III commodity prepay transaction). EC2 000033031.

1021 For example, see RMTC Liquids (Prepay) 1999 and 2000 tax workpapers providing
the tax return treatment of certain commodity prepay transactions entered into by Enron affiliate
RMTC Liquids. EC2 000033554, EC2 000033529 and EC2 000033568. The structured
financing materials in Appendix B contain these workpapers.

358

=== PAGE 387 ===
sales of goods, Enron essentially elected its tax treatment of these transactions (i.e., current
recognition of prepayments from some transactions and limited deferral of prepayments from
other transactions) by selecting the entity within the Enron consolidated group to execute the
transaction based upon the entity’s tax accounting method for prepaid sales of goods.

In later years, Enron exercised selectivity in the tax treatment of its commodity prepay
transactions through the characterization of the transaction as a loan (resulting in no recognition
of taxable income or subsequent offsetting deduction).!°” Although these later transactions
involved cash settled contracts (rather than physically settled contracts) and were funded by
outside investors (rather than the arranging financial institution), they were no different
economically from the earlier transactions in any material respect. However, their
characterization as loans (specifically, loans from the Yosemite trusts to Enron) apparently
provided certain timing and withholding tax advantages over alternative characterizations.'°*

Because the commodity prepay transactions would generate an offsetting deduction when
they closed (or would produce no deductions in the case of loan characterization), the
transactions generally did not produce a permanent tax benefit. Rather, the selectivity that Enron
exercised in the tax treatment of the transactions affected the timing of the recognition by Enron
of taxable income.

Yosemite transactions

Enron’s reliance upon credit-linked notes in the Yosemite transactions to effectively
create credit capacity for additional commodity prepay transactions raises questions that are
pertinent primarily to corporate governance and financial accounting. From the perspective of
tax policy, the Yosemite transactions involve issues that are common to most credit-linked
financial transactions. Because of their fairly recent advent, the overall tax treatment of the
various types of credit-linked financial transactions remains uncertain. In substance, such
transactions have been depicted in terms similar to the following description:

In such transactions, a counterparty seeks to purchase protection against the
default of a particular issuer. This protection can be most simply thought of as
default insurance. This type of credit derivative is also most commonly thought

1022 Electronic mail message from AnnMarie Tiller to Jill Erwin, Danny Wilson, and
Kerrie Smith, dated January 11, 2000 (“Although [Yosemite I’s] current investments are a
complicated set of interests in debt and swaps, we are taking the position for tax purposes (given
[Yosemite I’s] current investments, at least), that [Yosemite I] owns a debt instrument issued by
Enron with terms that match the aggregate payments due to the [Yosemite I] Certificateholders
and the holders of the [credit-linked] Notes”). EC2 000033045 through EC2 000033047.

1023 y anuary 14, 2000 memorandum from Brent Vasconcellos to AnnMarie Tiller,
“Yosemite I Withholding”. EC2 000033237 through EC2 000033244. The structured financing
materials in Appendix B contain this memorandum. October 28, 1999 Yosemite Financing
outline of various tax issues. EC 000850764 through EC 000850773. The structured financing
materials in Appendix B contain this outline.

359

=== PAGE 388 ===
of as a default or credit put option in which the holder of the put option holds the
right to transfer obligations of the Reference Entity [i.e., the entity for which
protection against default is being sought] to the credit derivative protection seller
in exchange for either money or other value.'°*

In effect, a credit-linked financial transaction brings together a party that desires to lend
money without undertaking the associated credit risk and a counterparty that desires to undertake
credit risk without lending money. Economically, these transactions can be described as
synthetic loans in which the party that assumes the credit risk from the ostensible lender becomes
the actual lender.

In characterizing a credit-linked note for Federal income tax purposes, it is not certain
that repayment conditioned upon the non-occurrence of a credit event (such as default)
constitutes the requisite promise to pay a specified amount at maturity that is necessary for a
financial instrument to properly be characterized as indebtedness for Federal income tax
purposes. ©” In most transactions involving credit-linked notes, the classification of the notes as
indebtedness for Federal income tax purposes can be critical because the loss of interest
deductions that is occasioned by the loss of debt classification can destroy the economic rationale
of the overall transaction. '°”°

1024 The Role of the Financial Institutions in Enron’s Collapse: Hearings Before the
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Senate Comm. on Governmental Affairs (July
23, 2002) (testimony of Ronald M. Barone, Managing Director, Standard & Poor’s Ratings
Services). Actual default is only one of a variety of types of events (e.g., changes in credit
ratings) that can be incorporated as a triggering event into the terms of a credit-linked obligation.
See Kayle, Will the Real Lender Please Stand Up? The Federal Income Tax Treatment of Credit
Derivative Transactions, 50 Tax Lawyer 569, 577 (Spring 1997) (citing imposition of exchange
controls by borrower’s home country as another example of “quasi-credit risks” that can be
embedded into a credit-linked obligation or other security) [hereinafter “Kayle”].

1025 But see Nirenberg and Kopp, Credit derivatives: Tax Treatment of Total Return
Swaps, Default Swaps, and Credit-Linked Notes, 87 J. Tax’n 82, 95 (August 1997) (arguing that
credit-linked notes can be treated as indebtedness for tax purposes). As with many types of
financial instruments for which questions concerning the proper tax treatment remain largely
unanswered, commentators generally have analyzed credit-linked notes by analogy to other types
of transactions of which the tax treatment is more clear, particularly with regard to the
fundamental tax issues of timing, character, and source of payments and receipts pursuant to a
financial transaction. See Kayle, at 577-578 (noting the resemblance of credit-linked notes to
guarantees and letters of credit).

1026 To the extent that the credit-linked notes are marketed to foreign investors, the loss
of debt classification could upend further the overall economics of the transaction because the
interest income that generally otherwise would be exempt from U.S. withholding tax under the
portfolio interest exemption would also be recharacterized (e.g., as dividends on an equity
interest) in a manner that would result in the imposition of U.S. withholding tax.

360

=== PAGE 389 ===
Even if credit-linked notes appropriately can be classified as indebtedness to some extent
for tax purposes, questions similar to those involving DECS can be raised concerning the precise
nature of credit-linked notes as indebtedness. Some commentators believe that credit-linked
notes, like DECS, can be viewed as a combination of a standard noncontingent debt instrument
and a swap that provides for payments based upon the specified credit events underlying the
credit-linked notes (e.g., a credit default swap).'°?” However, this analysis merely shifts the
unanswered questions regarding appropriate tax treatment to those involving credit default swaps
and, more generally, the ability to “componentize” a financial instrument for tax purposes. ©8
The unsatisfactory state of affairs discussed above with regard to the tax treatment of hybrid
financial instruments in general is particularly detrimental with regard to credit-linked
transactions, as one commentator has described:

Credit derivatives have proven themselves in the marketplace to be powerful and
versatile tools for market participants to manage credit risk. Like other powerful
tools, they have their dangers. In no small part, those dangers relate to their tax
consequences. The dangers...are those for potential users of credit derivatives,
but there are dangers for the Treasury as well, as taxpayers may resolve doubts in
their own favor using the benefit of hindsight. Thus, uncertainty surrounding the
tax treatment of credit derivative transactions is in the interest neither of the
Treasury nor the public.'©”

In the case of the Yosemite transactions, Enron evidently employed an economic
substance analysis to arrive at a conclusion that these transactions constituted lending
transactions for tax purposes, rather than prepaid sales of goods (as in the previous commodity
prepay transactions). Beyond the characterization of the transactions as loans, determining
which party should be treated as the lender was crucial to the feasibility of these transactions.
Enron was concerned that treating the off-shore special purpose entity in the Yosemite
transactions as the lender could have given rise to tax withholding obligations that would have
made the transactions uneconomic. Therefore, Enron took advantage of this aspect of
uncertainty in the treatment of credit-linked notes and treated the Yosemite trusts as the lender in
these transactions.

Selective tax treatment of Enron commodity prepay transactions

The questions surrounding the Enron commodity prepay transactions can be analogized
to the problems discussed above with regard to DECS financing transactions. Specifically,
drastically different tax consequences can arise on the basis of different characterization of the
same or substantially similar economic transactions. The sole reason that such a circumstance --
and the characterization selectivity that stems from it -- is even possible can be attributed to the

1027 Kayle, at 609-611.

1028 Tq. at 591 (“[T]he credit default swap is in many respects the most difficult of the
genre [of credit-linked financial transactions] to analyze.”’).

1029 Kayle, at 613.

361

=== PAGE 390 ===
fact that the tax consequences of a financial transaction are dictated largely by tax rules that
traditionally have assigned labels to transactions that may not reflect in all cases the underlying
economics of the transaction in question.

The effort that has been expended to differentiate among various types of financial
transactions, and the analytical techniques (such as analogy, integration and bifurcation) that
have been employed in such efforts, suggests that any structural differences among these
transactions have largely been eliminated through modern financial engineering. The
convergence of financial transactions -- and even some transactions that traditionally have been
thought of a non-financial, such as prepaid sales of goods--suggests that the tax consequences of
such transactions no longer can be based upon their assigned labels.

4. Recommendations

The commodity prepay transactions entered into by Enron demonstrate the convergence
of traditionally dissimilar transactions that has occurred in recent years through financial
engineering. This convergence presents increasing challenges to the rationality of certain tax
rules that have been developed on the basis of categorical distinctions that may no longer reflect
meaningful economic distinctions. In general, the tax rules should endeavor to reduce or
eliminate the extent to which the tax consequences of economically similar transactions are
impacted by their characterization.

Given the inherent complexity and customization of structured financial transactions such
as those in which Enron engaged, the opportunities for tax-advantaged characterization of such
transactions are particularly great and, to a certain extent, unavoidable. Nevertheless, in
developing any new rules concerning the tax treatment of financial transaction and products,
careful attention should be given to the potential for unintentionally creating new opportunities
for de facto taxpayer electivity that, once recognized, might be considered unwarranted.'°° For
example, notional principal contracts with significant upfront nonperiodic payments, prepaid
forward contracts, and secured lending transactions should all have the same or similar tax
consequences to the extent that they all yield the same or similar economic results.

Similarly, greater attention should be paid to coordinating the tax rules governing
financial transactions with those governing what have traditionally been thought of as non-
financial (or physical) transactions, so that financial transactions cannot be restructured as
economically similar non-financial transactions (and vice versa) simply for the purpose of
accessing more favorable tax rules. For example, prepaid sales of goods should have the same or
similar tax consequences as prepaid forward contracts and secured lending transactions to the
extent that they yield the same or similar economic results.

1030 See Notice 2001-44, 2001-30 LR.B. 77 (noting that, “in the financial products area, it
is particularly important to pay attention to the neutrality principle, i.e., consistent treatment of
difference instruments with similar economic characteristics”).

362

=== PAGE 391 ===
IV. USE OF FOREIGN ENTITIES BY ENRON

Enron owned interests in several hundred entities established in foreign jurisdictions that
imposed no tax on such entities. Press reports have raised questions about the number and
purposes of such entities. The discussion below begins with an overview of the relevant Federal
international tax rules. The discussion then explains Enron’s general posture under these rules
and addresses Enron’s use of the foreign entities. The discussion concludes with a Joint
Committee staff recommendation.

A. Overview of Selected International Tax Rules

1. In general

The United States employs a “worldwide” tax system, under which domestic corporations
generally are taxed on all income, whether derived in the United States or abroad. Income
earned by a domestic parent corporation from foreign operations conducted by foreign corporate
subsidiaries generally is subject to U.S. tax when the income is distributed as a dividend to the
domestic corporation. Until such repatriation, the U.S. tax on such income generally is deferred.
However, certain anti-deferral regimes may cause the domestic parent corporation to be taxed on
a current basis in the United States with respect to certain categories of passive or highly mobile
income earned by its foreign subsidiaries, regardless of whether the income has been distributed
as a dividend to the domestic parent corporation. The main anti-deferral regimes in this context
are the controlled foreign corporation rules of subpart F!%! and the passive foreign investment
company rules.'°? A foreign tax credit generally is available to offset, in whole or in part, the
U.S. tax owed on foreign-source income, whether earned directly by the domestic corporation,
repatriated as an actual dividend, or included under one of the anti-deferral tegimes.’° 3

2. Foreign tax credit

The United States generally provides a credit for foreign income taxes paid or
accrued.'°* In the case of foreign income taxes paid or accrued by a foreign subsidiary, a U.S.
parent corporation is generally entitled to a “deemed paid” credit for such taxes when it receives
an actual or deemed distribution of the underlying earnings from the foreign subsidiary.!°> The
foreign tax credit generally is limited to the U.S. tax liability on a taxpayer’s foreign-source

1031 Secs, 951-964.

1032 Secs, 1291-1298.

1033 Secs. 901, 902, 960, 1291(g).
1034 Sec. O01.

1035 Secs. 902, 960.

363

=== PAGE 392 ===
income, in order to ensure that the credit serves its purpose of mitigating double taxation of
foreign-source income without offsetting the U.S. tax on U.S.-source income.'°°°

Due to this limitation, a taxpayer must allocate gross income and expenses between U.S.
and foreign sources in order to determine the amount of allowable foreign tax credits. Under
present law, interest expense that a U.S.-based multinational corporate group incurs in the United
States is allocated to U.S. and foreign sources based on the gross assets located in the United
States relative to those located abroad (measured either by basis or by fair market value).!°37
Thus, a U.S.-based multinational with a significant portion of its assets overseas must allocate a
significant portion of its U.S. interest expense to foreign-source income, which reduces the
foreign tax credits allowable (even though the interest expense incurred in the United States is
not deductible in computing the actual tax liability under applicable foreign law).

The foreign tax credit limitation is applied separately to different types of foreign-source
income, in order to reduce the extent to which excess foreign taxes paid in a high-tax foreign -
jurisdiction can be “cross-credited” against the residual U.S. tax on low-taxed foreign-source
income. For example, if a taxpayer pays foreign tax at an effective rate of 45 percent on certain
active income earned in a high-tax jurisdiction, and pays little or no foreign tax on certain
passive income earned in a low-tax jurisdiction, then the earning of the untaxed (or low-taxed)
passive income could expand the taxpayer’s ability to claim a credit for the otherwise
uncreditable excess foreign taxes paid to the high-tax jurisdiction, by increasing the foreign tax
credit limitation without increasing the amount of foreign taxes paid. This sort of cross-crediting
is constrained by rules that require the computation of the foreign tax credit limitation on a
category-by-category basis.'°°* Thus, in the example above, the rules would place the passive
income and the active income into separate limitation categories (or “baskets”), and the low-
taxed passive income would not be allowed to increase the foreign tax credit limitation
applicable to the credits arising from the high-taxed active income. Present law provides nine
separate baskets as a general matter, and effectively many more in situations in which various
special rules apply.'°?

If a taxpayer generates an overall foreign loss (“OFL”) for the year -- whether as the
result of business losses or expense allocations under U.S. tax rules -- it will not be able to claim
foreign tax credits for that year, since it will have no foreign-source income and thus will have a
foreign tax credit limitation of zero. Moreover, if the taxpayer does generate foreign-source
income in later years, some portion of such income will be “recaptured,” or recharacterized as
U.S.-source, thus reducing the foreign tax credit limitation in later years. The rationale for
OFL recapture is that the foreign-source losses offset U.S.-source income in the year generated,

1036 Secs. 901, 904.

1037 Sec, 864(e); Temp. Reg. sec. 1.861-11T.
18 Sec. 904(d).

1039 Id.

1040 Sec. 904(f). These rules also operate on a category-by-category basis.

364

=== PAGE 393 ===
thereby reducing the U.S. tax collected with respect to U.S.-source income. The U.S. fisc would
not be made whole when the taxpayer subsequently earns foreign-source income if the U.S. tax
on such income were completely offset by foreign tax credits.

3. Anti-deferral regimes

In general

Generally, income earned indirectly by a domestic corporation through a foreign
corporation is subject to U.S. tax only when the income is distributed to the domestic
corporation, because corporations generally are treated as separate taxable persons for Federal
tax purposes. However, this deferral of U.S. tax is limited by anti-deferral regimes that impose
current U.S. tax on certain types of income earned by certain corporations, in order to prevent
taxpayers from avoiding U.S. tax by shifting passive or other highly mobile income into low-tax
jurisdictions. Deferral of U.S. tax is considered appropriate, on the other hand, with respect to
most types of active business income earned abroad.

Subpart F

Subpart F,'™! applicable to controlled foreign corporations and their shareholders, is the
main anti-deferral regime of relevance to a U.S.-based multinational corporate group. A
controlled foreign corporation generally is defined as any foreign corporation if U.S. persons
own (directly, indirectly, or constructively) more than 50 percent of the corporation’s stock
(measured by vote or value), taking into account only those U.S. persons that own at least 10
percent of the stock (measured by vote only).! Under the subpart F rules, the United States
generally taxes the U.S. 10-percent shareholders of a controlled foreign corporation on their pro
rata shares of certain income of the controlled foreign corporation (referred to as “subpart F
income”), without regard to whether the income is distributed to the shareholders!"

Subpart F income generally includes passive income and other income that is readily
movable from one taxing jurisdiction to another. Subpart F income consists of foreign base
company income; insurance income, !° and certain income relating to international boycotts
and other violations of public policy.'“° Foreign base company income consists of foreign
personal holding company income, which includes passive income (e.g., dividends, interest,
rents, and royalties), as well as a number of categories of non-passive income, including foreign

1041 Secs. 951-964.

1042 Secs. 951(b), 957, 958.
1043 Sec. 951(a).

1044 Sec, 954.

1045 Sec, 953.

1046 Sec. 952(a)(3)-(5).

365

=== PAGE 394 ===
base company sales income, foreign base company services income, foreign base company
ere : : : 1047
shipping income and foreign base company oil-related income.

In effect, the United States treats the U.S. 10-percent shareholders of a controlled foreign
corporation as having received a current distribution out of the corporation's subpart F income.
In addition, the U.S. 10-percent shareholders of a controlled foreign corporation are required to
include currently in income for U.S. tax purposes their pro rata shares of the corporation's
earnings invested in U.S. property.!°

Passive foreign investment companies

The Tax Reform Act of 1986 established an anti-deferral regime for passive foreign
investment companies. A passive foreign investment company generally is defined as any
foreign corporation if 75 percent or more of its gross income for the taxable year consists of
passive income, or 50 percent or more of its assets consists of assets that produce, or are held for
the production of, passive income.” Alternative sets of income inclusion rules apply to U.S.
persons that are shareholders in a passive foreign investment company, regardless of their
percentage ownership in the company. One set of rules applies to passive foreign investment
companies that are “qualified electing funds,” under which electing U.S. shareholders currently
include in gross income their respective shares of the company’s earnings, with a separate
election to defer payment of tax, subject to an interest charge, on income not currently
received.) A second set of rules applies to passive foreign investment companies that are not
qualified electing funds, under which U.S. shareholders pay tax on certain income or gain
realized through the company, plus an interest charge that is attributable to the value of
deferral.'°' A third set of rules applies to passive foreign investment company stock that is
marketable, under which electing U.S. shareholders currently take into account as income (or
loss) the difference between the fair market value of the stock as of the close of the taxable year
and their adjusted basis in such stock (subject to certain limitations), often referred to as
“marking to market.”10?

Coordination

Detailed rules for coordination among the anti-deferral regimes are provided to prevent
U.S. persons from being subject to U.S. tax on the same item of income under multiple regimes.
For example, a corporation generally is not treated as a passive foreign investment company with

1047 Sec. 954.

1048 Secs. 951(a)(1)(B), 956.
1049 Sec. 1297.

1050 Sec. 1293-1295.

1051 Sec. 1291.

1052 Sec. 1296.

366

=== PAGE 395 ===
respect to a particular shareholder if the corporation is also a controlled foreign corporation, and
the shareholder is a “U.S. shareholder” as defined in section 951(b). Thus, subpart F is allowed
to trump the passive foreign investment company rules.

4. Transfer pricing

In general

Due to the variation in tax rates and tax systems among countries, a multinational
enterprise may have an incentive to shift income, deductions, or tax credits among commonly
controlled entities in order to arrive at a reduced overall tax burden. Such a shifting of items
between commonly controlled entities could be accomplished by establishing artificial, non-
arm’s-length prices for transactions between group members.

Under section 482, the Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to redetermine the income
of an entity subject to U.S. taxation when necessary to prevent an improper shifting of income
between that entity and a commonly controlled entity. The statute generally does not prescribe
any specific reallocation rules that must be followed, other than establishing the general
standards of preventing tax evasion and clearly reflecting income. Treasury regulations adopt
the concept of an arm's length standard as the method for determining whether reallocations are
appropriate. Thus, the regulations generally attempt to identify the respective amounts of taxable
income of the related parties that would have resulted if the parties had been uncontrolled parties
dealing at arm's length. :

Special transfer pricing rules apply to transactions involving intangible property and
services. These transactions present particular challenges to the administration of the arm’s
length standard, since intangibles and services may be unique, thus rendering a comparison with
third-party market transactions difficult or impossible.

Transactions involving intangible property

In the case of a related-party sale or license of an intangible, section 482 requires that the
income with respect to such transfer or license be “commensurate with the income” generated by
the intangible. Similarly, section 367(d) provides that, if an intangible is transferred to a related
foreign corporation in a nonrecognition transaction (e.g., a transfer under section 351), the
transaction is treated as a sale for contingent payments, resulting in the inclusion by the
transferor of income “commensurate with the income” generated by the intangible. This
approach seeks to avoid some of the difficulties of determining a single arm’s length price at the
time of the transaction by instead determining the appropriate income attributable to the
intangible on an ongoing basis, as the intangible generates income.

In view of the uncertainty that this method may impose on taxpayers, regulations under
section 482 provide an alternative method for allocating the income attributable to intangibles
among the members of a group of related companies, in the form of “qualified cost-sharing
arrangements.”!°° 3 Under such an arrangement, if the parties share the costs of developing the

1053 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.482-7.

367

=== PAGE 396 ===
intangible in proportion to their reasonably anticipated benefits, make arm’s length buy-in
payments with respect to any previously developed intangibles contributed to the arrangement,
and otherwise comply with the terms of the regulation, then the IRS will not seek to make
reallocations under the general rules of section 482.’

Transactions involving services

In the case of services, the regulations under section 482 generally seek to distinguish
between services that provide only incidental, or indirect and remote, benefits to a related party,
in which case no arm’s length charge is normally required, and services that provide more
meaningful and direct benefits to a related party, in which case an arm’s length charge is
required.!°° 5 Even in the latter case, however, the requirement of an arm’s length charge is
generally considered met if the recipient of the services pays the provider’s costs, unless the
services constitute an “integral part” of the business of either the provider or the recipient of the
services.!°°° Services are regarded as “integral” under this test if: (1) either the renderer or the
recipient is in the trade or business of rendering the same or similar services to third parties; (2)
providing services to related parties is one of the principal activities of the renderer; (3) the
renderer is “peculiarly capable” of providing the services, the services are a principal element in
the operations of the recipient, and the value of the services is substantially greater than the costs
or deductions of the renderer; or (4) the recipient has received the benefit of a substantial amount
of services from a related party or parties during the year, 10° 7

5. Entity classification

Prior to 1997, entity classification for Federal tax purposes was determined on the basis
of a multi-factor test provided in regulations under section 7701. In distinguishing between a
corporation and a partnership, these regulations set forth four characteristics indicative of a
corporation: continuity of life, centralization of management, limited liability, and free
transferability of interests. If a business entity possessed three or more of these characteristics,
then it was treated as a corporation; if it possessed two or fewer, then it was treated as a
partnership. 0 Thus, in order to achieve characterization as a partnership under this system,
taxpayers needed to arrange the governing instruments of an entity in such a way as to eliminate
two of these characteristics. For example, a taxpayer desiring partnership classification for an
entity might include transferability restrictions and dissolution provisions in order to eliminate
the characteristics of free transferability and continuity of life. Partnerships also needed to have
at least two members, as the term suggests.

1054 Id.

1055 See Treas. Reg. sec. 1.482-2(b).

1058 py
1057
Treas. Reg. sec. 1.482-2(b)(7).

1058 Treas. Reg. sec. 301.7701 -2, as in effect prior to 1997.

368

=== PAGE 397 ===
Since January 1, 1997, new entity classification regulations have been in effect that
generally allow taxpayers simply to elect the desired classification for many types of entities,
including certain limited-liability entities available under the laws of many State and foreign
jurisdictions.'°° These regulations are commonly referred to as the “check the box” regulations.
The regulations generally eliminate the need for modifications to the terms of governing
documents in order to secure a particular entity classification, and they make it possible for a
taxpayer to elect branch treatment for a single-member limited-liability entity, thus enabling the
taxpayer to achieve both flow-through taxation and limited liability with respect to a foreign
entity without adding a second member.

6. Treaties

In addition to the U.S. and foreign statutory rules for the taxation of foreign income of
U.S. persons and U.S. income of foreign persons, bilateral income tax treaties limit the amount
of income tax that may be imposed by one treaty partner on residents of the other treaty partner.
For example, treaties often reduce or eliminate withholding taxes imposed by a treaty country on
certain types of income (e.g., dividends, interest and royalties) paid to residents of the other
treaty country. Treaties also contain provisions governing the creditability of taxes imposed by
the treaty country in which income was earned in computing the amount of tax owed to the other
country by its residents with respect to such income. Treaties further provide procedures under
which inconsistent positions taken by the treaty countries with respect to a single item of income
or deduction may be mutually resolved by the two countries.

1059 ‘Treas. Reg. sec. 301.7701-1, et seq.

369

=== PAGE 398 ===
B. Enron’s General International Tax Posture’

1. Foreign tax credit problems arising from interest allocation rules

From the time that Enron began significant foreign expansion in the early 1990s, its tax
posture in the international area was defined in large part by one major problem: as a result of
large allocations of U.S. interest expense against foreign source income under section 864(e),
Enron was persistently unable to use foreign tax credits. The company thus faced the possibility
of significant double taxation of its foreign source income. This potential for unmitigated double
taxation was of paramount concern in Enron’s international tax planning and significantly
influenced the structures of Enron’s international operations and transactions.

Enron was not unique among companies of comparable size in facing foreign tax credit
utilization problems arising from the interest allocation rules of section 864(e). U.S.-based
multinational corporations have long complained about the impact of these rules on their
capacity to use foreign tax credits, and legislation has been considered by Congress from time to
time addressing this concern.!°! In Enron’s case, the adverse impact of the interest allocation
rules was particularly acute as it expanded its activities abroad, due to Enron’s high level of
investment in foreign assets (e.g., power plants in foreign countries) and comparatively low level
of foreign income. The high levels of foreign assets generated a large allocation of interest
expense against relatively low levels of foreign source income, thus generating an ever
expanding, and eventually nearly insurmountable, overall foreign loss account.'©?

Enron’s overall foreign loss account first arose in 1992 and grew at a rate of $20 million
to $25 million per year, !06 As early as 1993, Enron appears to have concluded that it would not
be able to claim foreign tax credits at any time in the foreseeable future. !°*

1060 The information in this section of the report is based on documents provided by
Enron and the IRS, and on interviews with Robert Hermann, James A. Ginty, Cullen A. Duke,
Edward R. Coats, Leesa M. White, and Stephen H. Douglas.

1061 See, e.¢., H.R. 285, 108" Cong., 1 Sess., sec. 310 (2003); H.R. 5095, 107" Cong.,
2d Sess., sec. 311 (2002); Taxpayer Refund and Relief Act of 1999, H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 106-
289, sec. 901 (1999) (vetoed by President Clinton).

1062 For example, according to a company memorandum, EOG Canada’s asset basis of
$86 million attracted an allocation of U.S. interest expense of $7 million against income of only
$400,000 for 1992. Memorandum, “Enron FTC Position,” June 26, 1992, at EC2 000036091.

1063 Enron Foreign Operations White Paper, June 28, 1996, at EC2 000036150.

1064 Memorandum, “Structuring for Enron’s Foreign Operations,” Mar. 11, 1993, at EC2
000036120.

370

=== PAGE 399 ===
2. Planning techniques addressing the foreign tax credit problem

In general

Enron determined relatively early in its international expansion that it would not be
feasible to attempt to eliminate the overall foreign loss account and thereby regain the ability to
use foreign tax credits. Instead, the company accepted the fact that it would not be able to use
foreign tax credits and sought to structure its international investments and activities in such a
way as to minimize the impact of this problem. The company employed two main strategies in
this regard: deferral and deconsolidation.

Deferral strategy

Under the deferral strategy, Enron conducted many of its international operations under a
holding company and planned never to repatriate the earnings from a foreign project back to the
United States. As long as the subpart F and passive foreign investment company rules did not
apply to the earnings, U.S. tax on the foreign earnings generally could be deferred indefinitely,
and double taxation would be avoided, albeit at the cost of losing the flexibility to repatriate
funds to the United States.

Under applicable financial accounting standards, deferred U.S. taxes on foreign earnings
need not be accrued for book purposes if the company has plans for permanently reinvesting the
earnings offshore.!°° In other words, to the extent that Enron could avoid actual or deemed
repatriations of its foreign earnings, the company’s inability to claim foreign tax credits would
have no direct financial statement impact.

Thus, in Enron’s case, the U.S. international tax rules (particularly the interest expense
allocation rules), combined with the relevant financial accounting standards, created a significant
incentive for the company not to repatriate foreign earnings to the United States. It is impossible
to determine the extent to which this incentive may have caused the company to invest more
heavily in foreign assets, and less heavily in U.S. assets, than its non-tax business strategy
otherwise would have dictated. In this regard, it appears that the company anticipated major
growth opportunities abroad, and that the foreign reinvestment encouraged by this incentive may
not have been inconsistent with the company’s non-tax business strategy -- indeed, it appears
that the company’s foreign investment plans called for more funds than the company was
generating in its international operations.'°°” In addition, in cases in which the repatriation of
funds was considered desirable, the company had the option of using the deconsolidation
strategy.

1065 Id.

1066 See Accounting Principles Board (APB) Opinion No. 23; Statement of Financial
Accounting Standards (FAS) 109.

1067 J etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, Jan. 13, 2003, answer 133.

371

=== PAGE 400 ===
Deconsolidation strategy

Under the deconsolidation strategy, Enron was able in some cases to circumvent its
foreign tax credit limitation problem by investing in a foreign project through a U.S. entity that
was not a member of the Enron consolidated group. The interest allocation problem, large
overall foreign loss account, and resulting inability to use foreign tax credits pertained only to the
Enron consolidated group. In cases in which Enron was willing to allow an unrelated party to
take an ownership interest exceeding 20 percent in the U.S. entity through which a foreign
project was conducted, the entity’s ability to use foreign tax credits would not be affected by the
foreign tax credit problems of the Enron consolidated group."

The deconsolidation strategy entailed a number of costs to the company, however, which
rendered the strategy unsuitable in many cases. First, it required significant equity participation
on the part of an unrelated investor, which Enron may not have considered desirable from a non-
tax perspective. Second, the strategy caused dividends paid by the deconsolidated entity to
Enron to qualify for only the 80-percent dividends-received deduction under section 243, instead
of the 100-percent deduction that would apply to dividends from an 80-percent-or-greater-owned
company. Finally, the strategy involved greater transaction and compliance costs than
comparable investments made in a more straightforward manner through the Enron consolidated
group. In light of these considerations, Enron employed this strategy only in a few situations in
which repatriation of earnings was considered highly desirable -- i.e., in connection with high-
income projects in high-tax foreign jurisdictions, in which case substantial foreign tax credits
would be generated, and any benefit of deferral would be small. Generally, however, the
deconsolidation strategy was regarded as too costly and cumbersome, and thus the deferral
strategy was by far more commonly employed. !%*

1068 For example, Enron held its interests in certain projects that were subject to higher
rates of foreign tax through Enron Equity Corp. Enron held all of the common stock of Enron
Equity Corp., and an institutional investor (John Hancock Insurance Co.) held all of the preferred
stock, which carried sufficient voting power and value that the company was not a member of
the Enron consolidated group for tax purposes. Enron Tax Deconsolidation and Foreign Tax
Credit Planning Discussion Paper, April 30, 1998, at EC2 000036194.

1069 Joint Committee staff interviews.

372

=== PAGE 401 ===
C. Proliferation of Foreign Entities in Enron’s Ownership Structure’?

1. Background

Press reports have suggested that Enron employed an unusually large number of offshore
entities, particularly in countries that impose no tax on such entities, in an effort to avoid
taxes.!°7 Enron did in fact establish a complex entity structure that included a large number of
foreign entities, including many entities in countries that imposed no tax on such entities. It is
important to note, however, that the mere existence of a large number of entities, even entities
formed in jurisdictions that do not impose an income tax, does not necessarily indicate that
Enron was using these entities inappropriately from a U.S. Federal tax perspective. Moreover,
the number of foreign entities established by a company does not necessarily bear a significant
relationship to the amount of any reduction in U.S. Federal tax that the company might have
achieved through the structuring of the company’s international activities. In order to evaluate
Enron’s practices in this regard, the reasons behind its complex entity structure must be
examined.

2. General reasons for complex entity structures

It is not uncommon for large multinational business enterprises to organize themselves
into complex structures consisting of multiple domestic and foreign corporations, partnerships,
and branch entities. Non-tax business considerations such as liability management, regulatory
requirements, management accounting, and financing needs may influence the decision to
conduct a particular operation or make a particular investment through a certain kind of entity or
combination of entities. For example, the laws of a foreign country in which an enterprise
wishes to do business may provide that certain activities may be conducted only by a corporation
established under local law; or the involvement of a third-party foreign investor or partner in a
project may necessitate the use of a certain combination of foreign business entities. Tax
considerations generally also factor into the decision, both with respect to the choice of
jurisdiction and the choice of entity within a particular jurisdiction. Jurisdictions differ in terms
of overall tax burden, special tax rules applicable to certain types of income and activities, and
tax treaty networks. Some entities are treated as separate taxable persons (e.g., corporations),
some are not (e.g., branches), and some fall somewhere in between (e.g., partnerships). In
structuring complex international investments and operations, prudent tax planning typically
requires a U.S.-based multinational enterprise to use a combination of many different entities in

1070 The information in this section of the report is based on documents provided by the
company and by the IRS, and on interviews with Robert Hermann, James A. Ginty, Cullen A.
Duke, Edward R. Coats, Leesa M. White, and Stephen H. Douglas.

Hon? See, e.g., David Cay Johnston, Enron Avoided Income Taxes in 4 of 5 Years, New
York Times, Jan. 17, 2002 (“Enron paid no income taxes in four of the last five years, using
almost 900 subsidiaries in tax-haven countries and other techniques, an analysis of its financial
reports to shareholders shows”); Glenn R. Simpson, Enron’s Quest to Avoid Taxes Took the Firm
to the Netherlands, Wall Street Journal, Feb. 7, 2002 (“Enron’s quest to avoid taxes by using
offshore tax havens took the company to some unlikely places”).

373

=== PAGE 402 ===
many different jurisdictions, even if the enterprise’s tax planning goals are limited to the
generally unobjectionable ones of deferring U.S. Federal income tax on active, non-subpart-F
income until such income is repatriated, and mitigating the double taxation of foreign income to
the extent allowable under the foreign tax credit and the U.S. tax treaty network.

For this combination of non-tax and tax reasons, a multinational business enterprise that
conducts several lines of business in many different countries cannot avoid developing a
somewhat complex organizational structure, as it seeks to manage the potential liabilities of the
various businesses, satisfy all applicable local regulatory requirements, facilitate the evaluation
of manager performance in the different businesses, arrange the desired mix of debt and equity
financing from internal and external sources, and undertake sound tax planning measures with
respect to all relevant jurisdictions.

3. The number of foreign entities in Enron’s ownership structure

While the number and types of entities in the Enron ownership structure varied over time,
as of the end of 2001, this structure included approximately 1,300 different foreign entities. '°”
The vast majority (approximately 80 percent) of Enron’s foreign entities were “dormant” -- in
other words, inactive shells that did not hold and were not engaged in or associated with any
ongoing business, and that were therefore largely irrelevant for tax purposes.'°7? Approximately
20 percent of Enron’s foreign entities were associated with ongoing businesses and thus had
some potential relevance for tax purposes. Overall, leaving aside the dormant entities, Enron
conducted its foreign operations during 2001 through a network of roughly 250 different foreign
entities.

Enron created many entities in jurisdictions that imposed no tax on such entities. In
particular, as of the end of 2001, the Enron ownership structure included 441 entities formed in
the Cayman Islands, a country that has never imposed a corporate income tax.!° The majority
of these entities were dormant.!°”> The role of the Cayman entities, and the reasons why so
many were dormant, are explained in Part IV.C.4, below.

1072 This figure includes foreign corporations and foreign partnerships that were
controlled by Enron, as well as certain other entities in which Enron owned a significant stake
(e.g., “noncontrolled section 902 corporations,” in which Enron owned at least a ten percent
stake). This figure does not include “branch” entities, which are disregarded for Federal tax
purposes (e.g., pursuant to a “check the box” election) -- the activities, income, and deductions of
branches are treated as those of their owners for Federal tax purposes. The inclusion of foreign
branch entities would yield a total count of approximately 1,500 foreign entities for 2000. See
Enron Presentation to Joint Committee staff, June 7, 2002, at 9 (Appendix B, Part I to this
Report).

1073 Tq.; Joint Committee staff interviews.
1074 Enron Submission to IRS Examination Team, Feb. 26, 2002.

1075 Tq.; Joint Committee staff interviews.

374

=== PAGE 403 ===
An article in the New York Times presented some figures in this regard that appear to
reflect some confusion regarding certain information set forth the 2000 Form 10-K that Enron
filed with the SEC. According to the article, Enron created “881 subsidiaries abroad, including
692 in the Cayman Islands, 119 in the Turks and Caicos, 43 in Mauritius and 8 in Bermuda.”!°”°
These figures appear to be based on Exhibit 21 of Enron’s 2000 SEC Form 10-K, which lists
subsidiaries of the filing company. In preparing this list, Enron used a somewhat confusing
presentation format in which a single subsidiary would appear on the list multiple times if a
number of other Enron subsidiaries held interests in it. Given this format, a simple line-by-line
count of list entries would lead to substantial multiple-counting of certain entities, and thus to
inflated numbers in some cases. For example, a review of Exhibit 21 of Enron’s 2000 SEC Form
10-K suggests that multiple-counting of two Turks and Caicos companies (specifically
Smith/Enron Cogeneration Limited Partnership and Smith/Enron O&M Limited Partnership)
was largely responsible for the count of 119 Turks and Caicos companies reported in the article.
According to materials submitted to the IRS by the company, Enron in fact established only 4
Turks and Caicos companies.!°””

It is generally difficult to make useful tax inferences from the data that companies file
with the SEC in this regard. Companies have considerable flexibility in determining the content
and format of Exhibit 21, and the filing generally contains little or no information as to the
various subsidiaries’ assets, activities, tax treatment, and interrelationships. Moreover, different
companies appear to have different standards as to the circumstances under which a subsidiary is
regarded as “significant,” and therefore required to be reported on Exhibit 21. Some companies
may report relatively few of the overall entities in their structure on this form; others may report
most or all of their entities. Ultimately, the only reporting regime that yields the information
needed to determine the relevance of the various foreign entities to the administration of the
Federal tax rules is the information reporting regime required under those rules.!97

Most importantly, regardless of the data source (whether it be SEC or IRS filings), it
must be noted that relatively little can be inferred from a mere count of a company’s foreign
entities in various jurisdictions without examining why the entities were established and how
they are used transactionally. On the one hand, it is possible for a company to own numerous
foreign entities, even many formed in jurisdictions imposing no tax on such entities, without
using these entities for any inappropriate Federal tax purposes. (And even if some entities are
used for such inappropriate purposes, their sheer number does not necessarily bear a significant
relationship to the amount of any reduction in U.S. tax that the company might be attempting to
achieve.) On the other hand, it is possible for a company to employ a relatively simple entity
structure, with no entities in jurisdictions typically regarded as tax havens, and yet attempt to

1076 David Cay Johnston, Enron Avoided Income Taxes in 4 of 5 Years, New York
Times, Jan. 17, 2002.

1077 Enron Submission to IRS Examination Team, Feb. 26, 2002.

1078 Of course, the information provided under this regime generally is not made public.
See sec. 6103.

375

=== PAGE 404 ===
achieve significant inappropriate reductions in Federal taxes through the use of its foreign
entities.

Even with reference to Enron itself, it appears that the company’s most aggressive tax-
reduction strategy relating to the international tax rules was the Project Apache structured
transaction, which did not require the involvement of any entity created in a jurisdiction
generally regarded as a tax haven.!°”? The attempt to draw general conclusions about a
company’s international tax practices by simply following the trail of Cayman entities thus may
focus attention on certain unexceptional practices and yet fail to reveal the company’s most
aggressive practices.

In sum, Enron undoubtedly had a complex entity structure, but the tax implications of
that structure cannot be understood without examining the purposes and functions of the various
entities comprising that structure.

4. Sources of complexity in Enron’s ownership structure

Number of foreign infrastructure projects

One major component of Enron’s international growth strategy over the 10-year period
preceding the company’s bankruptcy involved bidding for, constructing, and eventually selling
foreign infrastructure projects, such as power plants and gas pipelines. Enron began developing
its first major foreign project in 1991, which was a power plant project in the United Kingdom.
By 1995, the company had undertaken project development activities in over 30 different +:
countries.!° The Enron domestic affiliate primarily responsible for this line of business was

. Enron Development Corporation, which reorganized as Enron International in December 1997.

Foreign infrastructure development was a high risk business, in which each project
opportunity represented a relatively small chance of generating very large returns. Enron
pursued numerous project opportunities around the world, anticipating that most projects would
fail but expecting that a few would be sufficiently profitable to make the overall line of business
successful for the company. 8! Each project, whether successful or not, typically had its own
separate entity structure. In view of this practice, and the number of projects that the company
initiated, the foreign infrastructure development business became the most significant contributor
to the proliferation of entities within Enron’s overall ownership structure.

1079 See Part I.D.1, above, for a discussion of Project Apache.
1080 Enron Foreign Operations White Paper, June 28, 1996, at EC2 000036151.

oo According to Enron, the company’s success rate in winning project bids was “well
under 20 percent.” In addition, many projects that Enron pursued encountered serious
difficulties or were abandoned either before submitting a bid or well after winning one. Letter
from Enron’s counsel (Vinson & Elkins) to IRS, Sep. 13, 2001, at EC2 000055688-689.

376

=== PAGE 405 ===
Multiple entities for each project

Enron generally formed a few separate entities for each foreign infrastructure project that
it pursued. As explained in Part IV.B, above, Enron’s dominant Federal income tax concern in
the structuring of its foreign operations was its persistent inability to use foreign tax credits, and
a deferral strategy was the company’s principal response to this problem. Enron’s typical
deferral structure required that a few different entities be created for each project. In addition to
a local project entity, the ownership of which might be divided between Enron and an unrelated
co-venturer, Enron generally employed a tiered arrangement of foreign holding companies
through which it held its own interest in the project entity. These tiered arrangements were
established primarily to facilitate potential sell-downs of Enron’s interests in the project entities,
while to the extent possible maintaining deferral of U.S. taxes on any project earnings. °°?

The nature of these arrangements changed over time in response to developments in U.S.
tax law. In particular, as explained in further detail below, the issuance of the “check the box”
entity classification regulations, effective at the beginning of 1997, enabled Enron to implement
holding company structures that made use of fewer entities and offered greater flexibility without
sacrificing U.S. tax deferral.'°*? Both before and after the issuance of these regulations,
however, the practice of establishing multiple entities for each foreign project produced
considerable complexity within the Enron ownership structure.

In a typical project structure established prior to the issuance of the “check the box”
regulations, Enron would hold its interest in a project through three separate Cayman Islands
holding companies, in addition to a project entity formed under local Jaw in the project
jurisdiction. The domestic Enron entity responsible for the project would own the stock of the
first Cayman Islands holding company (Cayman Parent”), which would be treated as a
corporation for U.S. Federal tax purposes. © 4 Cayman Parent in turn would own all of the stock
of a second Cayman Islands company (“Cayman Sub”), which also would be treated as a
corporation for U.S. Federal tax purposes. Cayman Parent and Cayman Sub in turn would own
99 percent and 1 percent, respectively, of the ownership interests in a Cayman Islands Limited
Life Company.(“Cayman LLC”), which Enron would treat as a partnership for U.S. Federal tax
purposes. Cayman LLC in turn would directly hold the Enron-side interest in the project entity.
If Enron had a partner in the project venture, then that partner also would own an interest in the
project entity. Cayman Sub, Cayman LLC, and the project entity typically would be dedicated
exclusively to the particular project.

The diagram on the following page depicts this structure.

1082 Enron Foreign Operations White Paper, June 28, 1996, at EC2 000036159; Joint
Committee staff interviews.

1083 Treas. Reg. sec. 301.7701-1, et seq.

1084 Cayman Parent could also hold interests in lower-tier entities established in
connection with other projects.

377

=== PAGE 406 ===
DIAGRAM OF TYPICAL CAYMAN ISLANDS

MULTI-TIERED OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE

Enron Corp
_ (U.S.)

100%

Cayman Islands
Top-Tier Corporation
(Corporation for
U.S. Tax Purposes)

99%

100%

Cayman Islands

Lower-Tier Corporation

(Corporation for
U.S. Tax Purposes)

1%

Cayman Islands
Limited Life Company
- (Partnership for
U.S. Tax Purposes)

Outside
Investors

Host Country
Project Entity
(Partnership for
U.S. Tax Purposes)

APPEND&xX Il

378

EC2 000036190

50.

=== PAGE 407 ===
The project entity usually was an entity treated as a corporation in the project jurisdiction,
due to regulatory requirements under local law, the needs of the venture partner, or both. For
U.S. Federal income tax purposes, however, it was desirable to treat the project entity as a
partnership, so that Enron’s Cayman Islands holding companies could receive distributions of
earnings from the project entity without generating subpart F income. Qualifying the project
entity as a partnership enabled Cayman LLC to be treated essentially as if it had earned the
project income itself. Thus, assuming that the project itself generated active type income that
was not subject to subpart F, U.S. Federal taxes on project income generally could be deferred

within the Cayman holding company structure until the earnings were repatriated to the United
States.'°8

In order to achieve characterization of the project entity as a partnership prior to the
issuance of the “check the box” regulations, the entity could possess no more than two out of the
four following corporate characteristics: limited liability, centralized management, free
transferability of interests, and unlimited life.1°8° In view of the practical importance of limited
liability and centralized management, Enron generally opted to eliminate the characteristics of
free transferability of interests and unlimited life, by adding share transferability restrictions and
dissolution provisions. Thus, for example, Cayman LLC typically would not be allowed to sell
its interest in the project entity without the consent of the venture partner, and the organizing
documents of the project entity would provide for dissolution in the event of the bankruptcy of
Cayman LLC or the venture partner. The transferability restrictions added to the complexity of
the project structure, since it required Enron to add a tier to its side of the structure in order to be
able to sell its interest in the project without obtaining the consent of its venture partner.'°87

The three Cayman Islands entities on the Enron side of the structure comprised a so-
called “Cayman Triangle.”!* The involvement of Cayman Sub, and its nominal level of
ownership of Cayman LLC, was intended to ensure that Cayman LLC also would be treated as a
partnership for U.S. tax purposes. Treatment of Cayman LLC as a partnership was important to
avoid the creation of subpart F income on the distribution of earnings from the foreign project
entity up through the Cayman holding company structure. If Cayman LLC were treated as a
corporation, then distributions of project earnings from Cayman LLC to Cayman Parent

1085 Such deferral was not always possible, however, even with respect to active business
income generated by a project. For example, certain income generated by the pipeline
transportation of natural gas across national borders could be subject to subpart F as “foreign
base company oil-related income.” Sec. 954(g).

1086 Treas. Reg. sec. 301.7701-2, as in effect before 1997.

1087 Tn some instances there were other advantages to selling an interest in a Cayman
holding company rather than an interest in a local project entity, including avoidance of project-
country taxes, ownership registration requirements, and other regulatory or contractual

restrictions on the transferability of interests under local law.

1088 Joint Committee staff interviews; Enron Foreign Operations White Paper, June 28,
1996, at EC2 000036159.

379

=== PAGE 408 ===
generally would have been dividends treated as subpart F income.’ Characterizing Cayman
LLC as a partnership for U.S. Federal income tax purposes made it possible for Cayman Parent

and Cayman Sub to receive distributions from Cayman LLC without generating subpart F
: 1090
income.

The advent of the “check the box” entity classification regulations made it possible for
Enron to plan for sell-downs and to achieve the desired deferral of U.S. taxes without using a
“Cayman Triangle,” since these regulations enabled taxpayers to treat eligible single owner
entities as disregarded entities, and to elect to treat multi-owner entities as partnerships, without
the need to contend with the four-factor test of the old entity classification regulations. Thus, as
of 1997, Enron could achieve deferral of U.S. taxes on project earnings through a simpler
structure in which Cayman Parent was the sole owner of the interest in Cayman LLC, which in
turn held the Enron interest in the project entity. Cayman Sub could be eliminated, and there
was no need to include transferability restrictions or dissolution provisions in the project entity’s
governing documents. In some cases, it might even have been possible for Cayman LLC to be
eliminated, and to have Cayman Parent invest directly in the project entity, but project country
tax considerations and regulatory or contractual transferability restrictions generally rendered it
desirable to invest in the project entity through at least one project specific Cayman Islands
entity underneath Cayman Parent.

Formation of project entity structures at early stage of project development

Another contributor to the proliferation of entities within the Enron ownership structure
was the company’s practice of establishing the separate entity structures described above at a
very early stage in the evaluation, bidding, and development process. As a result of this practice,
even those project opportunities that were abandoned before reaching any significant level of
development would contribute a number of new entities to Enron’s overall structure.

The principal reason that Enron established separate offshore entity structures so early in
the project development process was a concern that the project opportunity (perhaps reflected in
non-binding preliminary agreements, letters of intent, or “memoranda of understanding”) could
be found to constitute intangible property for tax purposes. Given this possibility, if preliminary
project activities were undertaken directly by a U.S. entity, and then the project were later carried
out by a foreign entity, the company was concerned that it might be deemed to have made an
outbound transfer of the intangible property. Such a transfer would have been subject to the
rules of section 367(d), which treat the transfer as a sale for contingent payments and require the
U.S. entity to include in income a stream of payments from the foreign entity “commensurate
with the income” generated by the intangible. By establishing a separate offshore entity

1089 The “same country dividend” exception of sec. 954(c)(3) requires that the dividend
paying controlled foreign corporation be engaged in a trade or business in its country of
incorporation, and thus would not have been available in the case of a holding company owning
an interest in a project entity in another country.

1090 The relatively small distributions from Cayman Sub to Cayman Parent, however,
generally would generate subpart F income.

380

=== PAGE 409 ===
structure from the outset of a project, and having the project specific entities execute any
preliminary agreements, the company sought to mitigate this risk. 1091

The company recognized that there was a cost to this practice, in the form of the creation
of multiple entities for projects that would never advance beyond the preliminary stages of
development. These entities would be costly to establish and maintain, but ultimately would
serve little or no purpose. Nevertheless, the company evidently concluded that the expected
reduction of the company’s exposure to IRS adjustments under section 367(d) outweighed these
costs.

Retention of dormant entities

The considerations described above explain why Enron’s infrastructure project
development business, and the manner in which the company conducted this business, led to the
creation of not just a large number of foreign entities, but also inevitably to a large number of
foreign entities that would become dormant. Indeed, as noted in Part IV.C.3 above, the vast
majority of foreign entities in Enron’s corporate structure fit this description. This observation
suggests that Enron could have achieved a great deal of simplification of its entity structure by
eliminating these dormant entities, but that the company chose instead to maintain them.

According to Enron tax department personnel interviewed by the Joint Committee staff,
the tax department consistently objected to the practice of maintaining dormant entities, and on
several occasions recommended to Enron’s legal and commercial groups that these entities be
liquidated. The tax department argued that maintaining the dormant entities generally served
little purpose other than to create unnecessary administrative and compliance costs for the
company (e.g., annual filings of IRS Form 5471, “Information Return of U.S. Persons with
Respect to Certain Foreign Corporations,” under section 6038).

109! Enron also proposed legislation to eliminate this potential pitfall, but the company’s
efforts in this regard were not successful. See Enron “Non-binding Intent Agreements” Policy
Memorandum, March 2000, Appendix B, Part XV to this Report.

381

=== PAGE 410 ===
The following table shows the number of Enron’s filings of IRS Form 5471 by year:

Table 4.-Enron’s Information Returns Relating
to Controlled Foreign Corporations

Year Number of Forms 5471 Filed
1992 84
1993 108
1994 128
1995 211
1996 247
1997 378
1998 491
1999 501
2000 564

In addition to controlled foreign corporations, Enron’s ownership of other types of
entities (e.g., controlled foreign partnerships) 1092. also entailed U.S. Federal tax information
reporting on an annual basis, even if such entities were empty shells. On average, the tax
department estimated that the company incurred $5,000 to $10,000 of administrative and
compliance costs per entity per year.!3 Given the number of dormant entities within the Enron
ownership structure, these arguably unnecessary compliance costs would total several million
dollars every year.

Notwithstanding these costs, and the recommendation of the tax department, the
company for the most part chose not to unwind its dormant entities. According to the Enron tax
department personnel interviewed, if there was even a remote chance that the project for which
an entity was created might be revived, the commercial and legal groups preferred that the entity
not be liquidated.’ This practice seems to have allowed the number of entities within the
Enron ownership structure to grow beyond what the tax department viewed as the reasonable
needs of the business, with little tax or non-tax effect other than for the company to incur
additional compliance costs.

1092 See sec. 6038(a), (e)(1), (e)(3).

1093 cee Enron “Non-binding Intent Agreements” Policy Memorandum, March 2000,
Appendix B, Part XV to this Report.

1094 Tn some cases there may have been a U.S. tax logic to this practice. For example, if
the dormant entity had some sort of preliminary agreement relating to the project, then the
section 367(d) concerns described above might weigh in favor of leaving that entity and its
potential intangible property in place.

382

=== PAGE 411 ===
D. Transfer Pricing Issues

In general’°*

For a multinational enterprise of its size, Enron’s activities did not present an unusual
level or range of transfer pricing issues. Unlike many other enterprises of its size (e.g., a typical
globally integrated manufacturing enterprise), Enron’s business generally did not rely on routine
related party transactions. The nature of the company’s business model thus limited somewhat
the potential scope of the company’s transfer pricing issues.

Performance of services for the benefit of related foreign entities

One aspect of Enron’s business, however, did raise persistent and significant transfer
pricing issues. These issues involved the treatment of services performed by Enron for the
benefit of related foreign entities in connection with the foreign infrastructure development
business.

Enron’s foreign infrastructure projects generally were prospected and developed by
personnel of Enron Development Corp. and Enron International, companies included in Enron’s
USS. Federal consolidated tax return. These personnel identified the project opportunity,
performed the financial analysis of the project’s feasibility, and negotiated preliminary
agreements with the relevant local authorities and other parties, among other development
activities. °° As described in Part IV.C.4 above, at a very early stage in the project development
process, the project typically was handed off to a local project entity that was uwned by Enron
(often jointly with a third-party co-venturer), with Enron’s interest in the project entity typically
held under two or more Cayman Islands holding companies. Thus, as of an early stage in the
project development process, some portion of the services performed by personnel of Enron
Development Corp. and Enron International could be regarded as performed on behalf of the
project-specific entities.

Based on Joint Committee staff interviews with Enron and IRS personnel, as well as
materials provided by the company, it appears that: (1) the company took the position that it was
entitled to take deductions on its U.S. consolidated return for certain salary and other
compensation related expenditures that were attributable to services provided by U.S. personnel
in support of these foreign projects; and (2) the company did not always receive an adequate fee
from either the project entity or the relevant foreign holding companies to reflect the benefit of

1095 The discussion in this section of the report is based on information and documents
provided by the company and by the IRS, and on interviews with Robert Hermann, James A.
Ginty, Cullen A. Duke, Edward R. Coats, Leesa M. White, Stephen H. Douglas, and IRS
personnel.

1096 Tn the heyday of Enron’s foreign infrastructure project development business, these
development activities were performed by a team of roughly 30 developers employed by Enron
Development Corp. and Enron International, led by Rebecca Mark and Joe Sutton. Joint
Committee staff interviews.

383

=== PAGE 412 ===
the services provided in connection with the foreign projects. In this manner, Enron arguably
sought to shift offshore a portion of the income attributable to the services of its U.S. employees.

Enron generally did charge the project specific entities a fee reflecting the cost (with no
mark-up) of providing some of these services. Enron did not include all compensation related
expenditures relating to project personnel in this charge, however. In particular, the cost of
bonuses provided to Enron Development Corp. and Enron International employees was not
included in this charge, despite the fact that such bonuses were geared to the anticipated value of
particular projects and to the achievement of certain milestones with respect to such projects.”
The cost of providing these bonuses was capitalized by Enron when awarded and then deducted
on its U.S. Federal consolidated tax return when paid.!°

It should be noted that the IRS examination team identified these issues and proposed
adjustments in this regard for every taxable year of the company since 1997. Thus, unlike the
“structured transactions” discussed in Part I above, the arguably aggressive practices at issue
here were readily detectable in the course of a normal audit and did not present the serious
problems of tax administration that those transactions did.’ It also should be noted that the
law in the area of transfer pricing for services and intangible property is unsettled, and that
Enron’s treatment of these expenditures, while arguably aggressive, was not entirely lacking
support in the law. In this regard, the Treasury Department is currently working on a regulation
project in an effort to provide more detailed and appropriate guidance in this area, with proposed
regulations anticipated in 2003.11

The current regulations under section 482 generally seek to distinguish between services
that provide only incidental, or indirect and remote, benefits to a related party, in which case no
arm’s length charge is normally required, and services that provide more meaningful and direct
benefits to a related party, in which case an arm’s length charge is required.''°! Even in the latter
case, however, the requirement of an arm’s length charge is generally considered met if the
recipient of the services pays the provider’s costs, unless the services constitute an “integral part”
of the business of either the provider or the recipient of the services.'' Services are regarded as

1097 Joint Committee staff interviews. See Part Four, III.B.3, below, for a detailed
discussion of the terms of these arrangements, the projects covered, and the compensation related
issues that arose in connection with Enron’s tax treatment of the arrangements.

1098 Joint Committee staff interviews.

1099 These taxable years and issues were still open as of early 2003. In order to avoid
interfering with the IRS examination process, the Joint Committee staff provides only a general
discussion of these issues in this Report, and does not reach specific conclusions as to particular

projects.

1100 See, e. g., Bob Ackerman, et al., “Global Transfer Pricing Update,” 29 Tax Notes
Int’] 375, Jan. 27, 2003.

1101 See Treas. Reg. sec. 1.482-2(b).

1102 Id.

384

=== PAGE 413 ===
“integral” under this test if: (1) either the renderer or the recipient is in the trade or business of
rendering the same or similar services to third parties; (2) providing services to related parties is
one of the principal activities of the renderer; (3) the renderer is “peculiarly capable” of
providing the services, the services are a principal element in the operations of the recipient, and
the value of the services is substantially greater than the costs or deductions of the renderer; or
(4) the recipient has received the benefit of a substantial amount of services from a related party
or parties during the year./13

Enron generally had three main arguments supporting its tax treatment of the services
performed by Enron Development Corp. and Enron International personnel. First, depending on
the ownership percentages in a project conducted jointly by Enron and a co-venturer, Enron
could take the position that the project-specific entities were not under Enron’s “control,” and
that the fees reflected actual arm’s length bargaining, rendering section 482 inapplicable.!!% If
that argument failed or could not be made, then Enron could take the position that Enron
Development Corp., and later Enron International, was a venture-capital-type operation, and that
the services performed by its personnel were in the nature of “stewardship” expenses to protect
what was appropriately characterized as an investor’s interest in the foreign projects, rather than
expenses incurred on behalf of a particular project entity itself. On this theory, the services
performed by Enron Development Corp. and Enron International personnel were performed -
primarily for the benefit of such companies, and not for the benefit of the project-specific
entities. Under this theory, the regulations described above would not apply, and no charge at all
would be required, since no substantial services would be regarded as provided for the direct
benefit of related entities.!'°° If the services were regarded as performed for the direct benefit of
a particular project entity, then Enron still could take the position in some cases that the services
provided were not “integral,” and thus that a fee reflecting cost was sufficient.

1103 With respect to the second and fourth categories of integrality set forth above (i.e.,
the “principal activities” and “substantial amount” tests), cost-based safe harbors are available.
Under the “principal activities” safe harbor, services generally are not treated as a principal
activity of the renderer if the cost of providing such services does not exceed 25 percent of its
total costs or deductions for the taxable year. Under the “substantial amount” safe harbor, a
recipient of services generally is not treated as receiving a substantial amount of services if the
cost of providing such services does not exceed 25 percent of the recipient’s total costs or
deductions for the taxable year. Manufacturing, production, extraction, and construction services
are not eligible for the “principal activities” cost safe-harbor. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.482-2(b)(7).

1104 Enron’s contemporaneous transfer pricing documentation for 1995 through 2000, for
example, makes this argument with respect to several different projects (EC2 000039103-
39623). Of course, it has long been recognized that it is possible for two otherwise unrelated
parties to act in concert to shift income to a jointly held entity, and that section 482 allocations

may be made in such situations. See, e.g., B. Forman Co. v. Comm’r, 453 F.2d 1144 (2d Cir.
1972).

105 See Treas. Reg. sec. 1.482-2(b)(2)(i), (ii) (providing that no section 482 allocations
are required in cases of certain “indirect or remote” benefits or cases in which the service merely
duplicates a service that the renderer is performing for itself).

385

=== PAGE 414 ===
While the matter is not free from doubt, and cannot be conclusively determined without a
detailed analysis of each individual project, on balance it appears that certain project-specific
entities related to Enron for purposes of section 482 derived substantial and direct benefits from
services provided by Enron Development Corp. and Enron International personnel. Thus, Enron
Development Corp. and Enron International probably were required under section 482 to include
in income a fee at least reflecting the full cost of providing such services. It also appears likely
that in many cases the services provided by Enron Development Corp. and Enron International
personnel were “integral” within the meaning of the applicable regulations,' thus requiring an
arm’s length charge reflecting the value of such services.

1106 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.482-2(b)(7). Enron’s contemporaneous transfer pricing
documentation for 1995 through 2000 conceded the “integrality” of the services in many

instances, while taking the position that section 482 did not apply due to lack of common control
(EC2 000039 103-39623).

386

=== PAGE 415 ===
E. Recommendation: Information Reporting with
Respect to Disregarded Entities

Present law requires no ongoing information reporting with respect to entities that are
disregarded pursuant to a “check the box” election.!!% Although the IRS is alerted of the
existence and classification of each entity at the time the election is made, there is no regime of
ongoing information reporting with respect to these entities. As a result, the IRS encounters
considerable difficulty in keeping track of the various foreign entities in a company’s structure
and monitoring how these entities are being used in transactions. In Enron’s case, the company
filed 103 “check the box” elections in 1997, 191 in 1998, 151 in 1999, and 97 in 2000."'°° After
the year in which these elections were filed, the IRS would encounter great difficulty in
monitoring how these entities were being used transactionally.

On the one hand, this lack of separate information reporting may be seen as appropriate,
given that the entities are supposed to be “disregarded” for Federal tax purposes pursuant to the
election. Nevertheless, it is also widely recognized that the application of the “check the box”
regulations in the international setting has raised a number of issues that the IRS has an interest
in monitoring. One example is the range of issues relating to the use of “hybrid entities” (foreign
entities that are disregarded for U.S. Federal tax purposes but treated as separate taxable entities
under foreign law).!! 2 In addition, the IRS recently has focused some attention on the so-called
“check and sell” practice, in which a “check the box” election is filed with respect to a lower-tier
controlled foreign corporation in order to avoid the creation of subpart F income in connection
with the sale of the stock of such corporation by a higher-tier controlled foreign corporation.

The “check the box” election in these cases may convert what would have been a sale of stock
(which generally creates subpart F income) into a sale of operating assets (which generally does
not create subpart F income).!!!° Proposed regulations have been issued to restrict this practice,
and the IRS appears to have been actively auditing the issue in the field.'""' The existence of
these and other issues relating to the use of “check the box” entities suggests that, although such

entities are generally disregarded in terms of tax treatment, the IRS has an interest in monitoring
their use.

The Joint Committee staff believes that a regime of annual information reporting with
respect to entities disregarded pursuant to “check the box” elections would enhance the IRS’s
ability to administer the international tax rules and to identify and address specific issues that
arise in applying the “check the box” regulations in the international area. The information to be
reported could be similar to that required to be provided on Form 5471 with respect to controlled

107 Treas. Reg. sec. 301.7701-1, et seq.
1108 TRS Forms 8832 filed by Enron.

1109 See, e.g., Notice 98-11, 1998-6 LR.B. 18; Notice 98-35, 1998-27 LR.B. 35.

110 See sec. 954(c)(1)(B).

RY e.g., Prop. Reg. sec. 301.7701-3(h) (Nov. 29, 1999); CCA 199937038; FSA
200046008; FSA 200049002.

387

=== PAGE 416 ===
foreign corporations, and thus could include income-statement and balance-sheet information, as
well as such other information as the Secretary of the Treasury may require. The statement also
should include information about the entity’s classification and tax treatment under the law of its
country of organization.

388

=== PAGE 417 ===
V. OFF-BALANCE SHEET TRANSACTIONS
A. Overview
1. Introduction to off-balance sheet transactions

Enron engaged in certain off-balance sheet partnership arrangements that were motivated
by financial reporting objectives rather than by tax benefits. Three of these arrangements
included Chewco Investments, LP (“Chewco”), LIM Cayman, LP (“LJM1”), and LJM2 Co-
Investment, LP (“LJM2”). Enron did not own equity interests in Chewco or in the LIM
partnerships. Ownership of those entities was held by certain Enron employees and, in the case
of the LJM partnerships, outside parties.'!’? Enron employees, however, controlled Chewco and
the LJM partnerships. In the cases of Chewco and LJM2, Enron owned interests in joint
ventures in which Chewco and LJM2 participated. Further, in the case of LJM2, Enron entered
into transactions using disregarded entities owned by Enron.'!3

The participation of Enron and Enron employees in these off-balance structures raised
issues regarding the appropriate accounting treatment of Chewco, the LJM partnerships, and
their affiliates, and of Enron’s transactions with those entities!!! These arrangements also
provided significant financial benefits to certain Enron employees.'!!> Certain of the corporate

112 Th this sense, Enron used employees as accommodation parties in order for Enron to
attain its financial statement objectives.

M3 Soe Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation, at
40 (June 7, 2002).

111¢ Enron’s accounting treatment with respect to the Chewco, LJM1, and LIM2
arrangements was determined with significant assistance from its outside auditor, Arthur
Andersen. On January 21, 2003, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued
guidance on special purpose entities and other types of “variable interest entities” which provides
new accounting rules for off-balance sheet structures such as Chewco, LJM1, and LJM2, and
nullifies certain accounting guidelines, including Emerging Issues Task Force Notice 90-15, that
had served as the basis for the special purpose entity accounting treatment adopted by Enron
with respect to these off-balance sheet partnerships. See FASB Interpretation No. 46,
Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities, an interpretation of ARB No. 51 (January 2003),
generally effective after January 31, 2003.

"15 For example, Enron reported to the Securities and Exchange Commission that it

believed that Andrew S. Fastow earned in excess of $30 million relating to his LIM management
and investment activities. Enron Corp., Form 10-Q filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (November 19, 2001), at 19. Michael J. Kopper reportedly received at least $10
million from these arrangements. Powers Report at 3.

389

=== PAGE 418 ===
governance and management oversight issues relating to these transactions were discussed in the
Powers Report and examined by other investigative bodies.'"!°

The Chewco, LJM1, and LJM2 structures were off-balance sheet arrangements involving
ownership by Enron employees and outside parties and were not part of Enron’s consolidated
Federal income tax returns. For this reason, as well as the various ongoing law enforcement
investigations into these structures, the Joint Committee staff was unable to investigate this area
in detail. Accordingly, the following description, which relies heavily on the Powers Report, is
necessarily incomplete.

2. Description of Chewco and JEDI I structure and transactions
JEDIT

Enron and the California Public Employees Retirement System (“CalPERS”) formed
JEDI I in 1993. JEDI I was not included in Enron’s consolidated balance sheet for financial
accounting purposes.

JEDI I’s partnership agreement stated its purpose was to acquire, own, hold, make,
participate in, exercise rights with respect to, and dispose of qualified investments, dispose of
Enron stock and put options, and engage in any such other business purpose to accomplish the
foregoing purposes.'! 7 JEDI I’s consolidated financial statements described its purpose as
investing in and managing certain natural gas and energy related assets.'!!8 At the end of 1996,
JEDI I held interests in eight separate limited partnerships formed to acquire and develop oil and
gas properties.''!® JEDI I had contributed approximately $57.4 million to these eight
partnerships and was committed to contributing an additional $32.2 million.''?° JEDI I also held
12 million shares of Enron stock.'!”! As of September 30, 1997, JEDI’s portfolio characteristics
comprised the following based on total portfolio values: private equity: 41 percent; public equity:

‘16 Bowers Report at 148-200. E.g., Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the
Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, The Role of the Board of Directors in
Enron’s Collapse, Report 107-70, at 77 (July 8, 2002).

1117 Amended and Restated Partnership Agreement of JEDI. E48090.

118 See JEDI: limited partnership and subsidiaries- Consolidated Financial Statements as
of December 31, 1996, together with Auditor’s Report. E48322.

119 See Id.
1120 See Id.

1121 Dowers Report at 59.

390

=== PAGE 419 ===
18 percent; Enron stock and put options: 26 percent; working interests: 2 percent; subordinated
debt: 6 percent; partnerships: 4 percent; and loans: 4 percent.!!7

Chewco

In 1997, Enron and CalPERS agreed to redeem CalPERS’ interest in JEDI I. Because
JEDI I had only two partners, a redemption of CalPERS’ interest, without a substitute partner to
replace CalPERS, would cause JEDI I to cease to be a partnership for State law purposes, and
cause JEDI I to be consolidated with Enron in its financial statements. Enron employees formed
Chewco to acquire and own the JEDI I investment previously held by CalPERS.'! CalPERS’
50 percent interest in JEDI I was redeemed in November 1997 and Chewco became JEDI I’s
limited partner. Chewco was structured as an unconsolidated special purpose entity to achieve
off-balance sheet treatment with respect to Enron, and to reserve off-balance sheet treatment
with respect to Enron’s continued ownership in JEDI 4

As of its date of formation, Chewco had no equity. The parties put together the Chewco
structure on short notice and arranged $383 million of bridge financing provided equally by
Barclays Bank PLC (“Barclays”) and Chase Manhattan Bank, and guaranteed by Enron, so
~ Chewco could acquire CalPERS’ interest in JEDI 1.15 In November 1997, JEDI made a
liquidating distribution to CalPERS of $383 million.''6 Concurrently, Chewco purchased a

1122 JEDI, Quarterly Reporting Package to Pacific Corporate Advisors, Inc. (September
20, 1997). E73563.

1123 Tnitially, Mr. Fastow intended to participate as an owner of Chewco. Mr. Fastow
was advised by Vinson & Elkins that his participation in Chewco would require a proxy
statement disclosure and approval from the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer under Enron’s
Code of Conduct of Business Affairs. Mr. Fastow arranged to have Mr. Kopper, an Enron
Global Finance employee, become the owner and manager of Chewco. Although Mr. Kopper’s
participation would require approval under Enron’s Code of Conduct of Business Affairs, Mr.
Kopper was not a senior officer of Enron, and would not be subject to the proxy statement
disclosure requirement.

1124 Chewco was described as perhaps the first instance where “Enron’s Finance Group
(under Mr. Fastow) used a special purpose entity managed by an Enron employee to keep a
significant investment partnership outside of Enron’s consolidated financial statements.” See
Powers Report at 41. Enron had previously used off-balance sheet entities prior to the formation
of Chewco, including JEDI I, to hold business investments, but the implication is that its prior
arrangements involved investors and managers that were unaffiliated with Enron and with
Enron’s employees.

1125 ‘This reportedly was required to satisfy a closing deadline imposed by CalPERS.
Criminal Complaint, United States of America v. Andrew S. Fastow, U.S. District Court,
Southern District of Texas (Case No. H-02-8889-M), at 11.

1126 Enron Corp., Form 8-K, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(November 8, 2001), at 18.

391

=== PAGE 420 ===
limited partner interest in JEDI I for $383 million.'””” In November or December 1997, a longer
term capital structure was created whereby three financing transactions took place: (1) a $240
million unsecured subordinated loan to Chewco was made by Barclays and guaranteed by Enron;
(2) a $132 million advance from JEDI I to Chewco was made under a revolving credit
agreement; and (3) $11.5 million in equity (representing 3 percent of Chewco’s $383 million of
assets) was provided by Chewco’s general and limited partners. !!78 The sum of these amounts
(i.e., $240 million, $132 million, and $11.5 million) equaled the $383 million CalPERS
redemption price.

Mr. Kopper invested $115,000 in Chewco’s general partner, and $10,000 in its limited
partner. Mr. Kopper later transferred his limited partnership interest in Chewco to his
acquaintance, Mr. Dodson. Barclays Bank provided “equity loans” in the amount of $11.4
million to Big River Funding, LLC (“Big River”), Chewco’s sole limited partner, and to Little
River Funding LLC (“Little River”), Big River’s sole member. Barclays Bank characterized the
advances as loans for business and regulatory purposes. Enron and Chewco characterized them
as equity contributions for accounting purposes. In order to secure its repayment right, Barclays
Bank required Big River and Little River to establish a cash reserve account funded with $6.6
million in cash at closing. The reserve account also had to be fully pledged to secure payment of
the $11.4 million advance. JEDII made a special $16.6 million distribution to Chewco, a
portion of which was used to fund the reserve account.

Following Chewco’s replacement of CalPERS as the limited partner of JEDIT, Enron
continued to treat JEDI I as an unconsolidated affiliate for financial statement purposes, and
engaged in a variety of transactions with Chewco and JEDI I designed to enable Enron to
accelerate revenue for financial statement purposes. For Federal income tax purposes, Enron
reported its pro rata share of income and losses.!17°

Specific transactions between Enron and Chewco or JEDI I

Overview

Without a substantial outside investor in JEDI I such as CalPERS, Enron was able to
enter into transactions with JEDI I and Chewco without having to obtain the consent of an
unrelated third party. Enron repeatedly used Chewco and JEDI I to generate or accelerate
financial reporting revenues through the use of loan guaranty fees, required payment
management fees, and the reporting of appreciation of value in Enron stock held by JEDI 1130

1127 Id.

1128 Powers Report at 49; see also Enron Corp., Form 8-K, filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission (November 8, 2001), at 18.

1129 See Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation, at
40 (June 7, 2002).

1130 bowers Report at 56-60.

392

=== PAGE 421 ===
Enron’s loan guaranty fee

Chewco had agreed to pay Enron a guaranty fee of $10 million in cash at closing, plus an
additional 315 basis points annually on the average outstanding balance of the $240 million
Barclays Bank loan provided to Chewco. In the 12 months that the Barclays Bank loan was
outstanding, Chewco paid $17.4 million to Enron. Enron characterized these payments as
structuring fees for financial statement purposes and reported income from the $10 million up-
front guaranty fee in December 1997, rather than ratably over the 12-month term of the loan. M31

Enron’s management fee

The December 1997 JEDI I amended partnership agreement provided that JEDI I would
pay Enron an annual management fee equal to the greater of 2.5 percent of $383 million (less
any distributions received by Chewco) or $2 million. The management services relating to the
management fees would cover a five-year period, 1998 through 2003. In March 1998, Enron and
Chewco amended the partnership agreement to convert 80 percent of the annual management fee
to a “required payment” payable to Enron, and took the position for accounting purposes that
Enron was entitled to recognize the entire “required payment” as revenue immediately. 1132
Consistent with this position, Enron immediately recognized, in its first quarter ae income,
$25.7 million with respect to the required payment portion of the management fee."

Appreciation in Enron shares held by JEDIT

JEDI I held 12 million shares of Enron stock in its portfolio. JEDI I carried its assets at
fair value, and Enron reported its investment in JEDI I under the equity method of accounting.
Enron reported as income Enron’s share of the increase in value of Enron stock held by JEDI I.
Enron reported $126 million of income in Enron stock appreciation for shares held by JEDI in
the first quarter of 2000 alone. 1134 Enron’s independent auditor informed Enron at some point
during 2000 that Enron could no longer include in its financial statements its share of JEDI I’s
gain attributable to Enron stock. When Enron’s stock declined in value during the first quarter of
2001, JEDI I’s value of Enron shares declined by $94 million. Enron did not report its
approximate $ 90 million share of this loss.''° This treatment had the effect of increasing
Enron’s earnings by $126 million in the first quarter of 2000 (when Enron’s stock increased in
value) without Enron reporting a loss when the value of the shares held by JEDI I declined in
2001.

Tax indemnity payment paid by Enron

M31 1g. at 56-57.
32 Td. at 57-58.
33 Td. at 58.
"34 Td. at 59.

1135 Id.

393

=== PAGE 422 ===
In 1997, when Chewco purchased the JEDI I limited partnership interest, Enron and
Chewco executed a tax indemnity agreement. This agreement reportedly compensated Chewco
for the difference between Chewco’s current tax obligations and its cash receipts during the term
of the partnership. The tax indemnity agreement required Enron to make payments to Chewco
for current tax obligations and cash receipts.' 136 Ty September 2001, Enron paid Chewco $2.6
million in connection with the March 2001 buyout of Chewco.'!*7

Other Chewco fees and payments

In December 1998, Chewco received a $400,000 payment from Enron in what has been
described as a “restructuring,” “amendment,” or “nuisance” fee, 118

Subsequent developments and buyout agreement

In March 2001, Enron repurchased Chewco’s limited partnership interest in JEDII for
$35 million and consolidated JEDI I into its consolidated financial statements for the first quarter
2001.'° The buyout contract price of $35 million was calculated by taking into account the
following: (1) a $3 million cash payment that had been agreed to in the year 2000; (2) $5.7
million to cover the remaining required payments portion of the management fee due to Enron
under the JEDI I partnership agreement (Enron reduced the $35 million purchase payment by
this amount); and (3) $26.3 million to satisfy Chewco’s outstanding $41.3 million obligation
under the revolving credit agreement with JEDI 11140

Accounting adjustments due to the unwind of Chewco

Enron and its independent auditor concluded in late 2001 that Chewco and JEDI I did not
satisfy the non-consolidated special purpose entity accounting rules prior to Enron’s buyout of
Chewco and related consolidation of JEDI I in early 2001. In November 2001, Enron announced
that it would consolidate Chewco and JEDI I retroactive to 1997. The retroactive consolidation
reduced Enron’s reported net income by $28 million (out of $105 million total) in 1997, by $133

"36 Td. at 64-65.

1137 Tq. There apparently was a dispute between Enron and Chewco regarding whether
the $2.6 million payment was required under the original tax indemnity agreement.

38 Td. at 55.

1139 Enron Corp., Form 8-K, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(November 8, 2001), at 4, 19. JEDI I remained a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron. Id. at 19.

1140 Powers Report at 62-63. Chewco was not required to pay off the entire $41.3

million obligation, and instead paid $26.3 million, with the remaining $15 million converted to a
term loan due in January 2003.

394

=== PAGE 423 ===
million (out of $703 million total) in 1998, by $153 million (out of $893 million total) in 1999,
and by $91 million (out of $979 million total) in 2000.'"*!

3. Description of LJM1 structure and transactions

LJM1 was formed as LIM Cayman, LP, a limited partnership registered in the Cayman
Islands. Its initial partners consisted of LJM Partners, LP, the general partner, and ERNB
Partnership, Limited (“ERNB”) and Campsie Limited (“Campsie”), as limited partners. LJM
Partners, LP was owned by Mr. Fastow and LJM Partners LLC, whose sole member was Mr.
Fastow. ERNB and Campsie were entities controlled by Credit Suisse First Boston and National
Westminster Bank, respectively, two banks with which Enron had banking relationships. Mr.
Fastow controlled LJM1 through his control of the management duties possessed by the general
partner. Enron did not own an interest in LJM1 Je

LJM1 was formed to provide Enron an accounting hedge against the decline in value of
Rhythms Net stock. Enron purchased a put option provided by an LJM1 subsidiary that was
designed to protect Enron against accounting risks relating to potential declines in value of the
Rhythms Net shares. LJM1 also engaged in the purchase from Enron of a portion of Enron’s
interest in the Cuiaba, Brazil pipeline assets.

Overview of hedging transactions

The LJM partnerships engaged in transactions that involved the use of hedging. The
definition of a hedging transaction varies widely depending upon the purpose for which the term
is used. For example, a hedging transaction for Federal income tax purposes is defined as any
transaction that is entered into in the normal course of a trade or business that is properly
identified as managing the risk of price changes, currency fluctuations, interest rate changes, or
any other risk prescribed in regulations with respect to ordinary property or borrowings.'!3 By
contrast, a hedging transaction for financial accounting purposes is defined as a derivative that is
designated as a hedge, but only to the extent that the changes in the value of the derivative are
effective in offsetting changes in the fair value or cash flow of an exposure or changes in the
value of net investment in a foreign operation.!!4 Hedging transactions typically involve
contractual arrangements with a creditworthy third party who has the financial wherewithal to
honor its obligations to the hedging party. Hedges may be effected through a variety of

41 Enron Corp., Form 10-Q, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(November 19, 2001), at 16. Enron’s reported debt also increased by $711 million in 1997, by
$561 million in 1998, by $685 million in 1999, and by $628 million in 2000, reflecting both
JEDI I’s and Chewco’s borrowings. Id.

1142 The interests of ERNB and Campsie were subsequently purchased by Mr. Fastow
and others in early 2000 through a partnership, Southampton, LP. Powers Report at 92-94.
Criminal Complaint, United States of America. v. Andrew S. Fastow, at 31-32.

143 Sec. 1221(b)(2).

1144 See Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 133, Accounting for
Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities.

395

=== PAGE 424 ===
mechanisms, including the use of forward contracts, put and call options, short sales, and
notional principal contracts such as swaps, caps, and floors.

In the LJM context, Enron was concerned with protecting itself against declines in the
market value of certain of its portfolio investments in publicly traded stock. The LIM hedges
were structured to protect Enron against financial accounting risks due to the volatility in value
of equity positions Enron held in such investments.!!*> Although Enron retained the underlying
investment, it would offset losses attributable to a decline in value of the underlying investment
with the offsetting gain on the hedging position that Enron held with respect to that investment.
Enron did not have to report losses attributable to the special purpose entity’s exposure under the
hedge as long as the special purpose entity could be treated as unconsolidated and had assets at
least equal to its liabilities.

Enron provided the LJM special purpose entities those assets that were to be used to
honor their contractual obligations to Enron in the event the hedged investments declined in
value. In most of the LJM hedging transactions, Enron’s hedge protection against the decline in
value of its investment assets consisted of Enron stock or stock rights.

Rhythms Net hedge

In 1998, Enron acquired 5.4 million shares of Rhythms Net stock for $10 million.!!
The value of the Rhythms Net shares increased to over $300 million during 1999, and Enron
reported the appreciation as income for financial statement purposes under the mark-to-market
method of accounting.'!*7 Enron was concerned that the value of the Rhythms Net shares would
decline and require Enron to report investment losses relating to the shares in such case. In
1999, Enron implemented a purported hedging transaction with LJM1 and an LJM1 subsidiary to
address its accounting exposure concerns relating to the Rhythms Net stock.

To effect the hedge, Enron purchased a put option provided by an LJM1 subsidiary, LIM
1 Swap Sub, LP (“Swap Sub”), valued by the parties at $104 million.''*8 The put option
obligated Swap Sub to purchase the 5.4 million Rhythms Net shares owned by Enron fora
purchase price of $56 per share.!!° In exchange for the put option and LIM1’s promissory note

1145" See Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation at
39-40 (June 7, 2002). See also, Interoffice Memorandum dated April 19, 2000, from AnnMarie
Tiller and Brent Vasconcellos to R. Davis Maxey (“The commercial purpose for the [Talon]
transaction is to create a risk management program to hedge from a financial accounting
perspective the volatility in value of equity positions Enron or its affiliates are expected to hold in
various companies, both public and private, many or most of which are expected to be in the
telecommunications and/or broadband communications areas.”) (italics added). EC 000850875.

1146 Bowers Report at 77.
147 1g
M48 Td. at 81.

1149 Id.

396

=== PAGE 425 ===
in the amount of $64 million, Enron transferred 3.4 million shares of its own stock to LJM1 to be
used by LJM1 as credit support to honor any obligation LJM1 might incur under the hedge. The
Enron shares had an unrestricted value at the time of the transfer of $276 million, but the parties
discounted their value to $168 million because Enron prohibited LJM1 from selling the shares
for four years.'°° Thus, the parties treated the transactions as Enron providing $168 million of
Enron stock to LIM! in exchange for a put option valued at $104 million and a $64 million note.

Enron agreed in the first quarter of 2000 to provide LJM1 a put option that gave LJIM1
the right to sell Enron shares to Enron at a price of $71.31 per share.''S! In March 2000, Enron
and LJM1 agreed to terminate the Rhythms Net hedge and related financial instruments.
Pursuant to that agreement, Enron received the shares of Enron stock held by Swap Sub and paid
LJM1 approximately $26.8 million.''*? Enron treated the settlement of the put options as a
realization event both for financial reporting and Federal income tax purposes."! 3

Sale of Cuiaba assets

In September 1999, Enron transferred to LJM1 a 13 percent equity interest in a company
owning a power project in Brazil for $10.8 million.''™* This enabled Enron to take the position
that it could recognize financial statement revenues of $65 million, $14 million, and $5 million
from a commodity contract with the company owning the power project in 1999, 2000, and
2001, tespectively.''° Enron paid LJM1 a marketing fee of $240,000 in May 2000.'1° Enron

50 Tq. at 79-82. LJM1 was not prohibited from pledging the Enron shares as collateral
for a loan, however, which meant that LJM1 and Swap Sub could use the shares to obtain a loan

to generate cash proceeds to honor the put obligation to Enron should Enron exercise the hedge.
Powers Report at 80.

151 Enron Corp., Form 10-Q, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(November 19, 2001), at 17.

1152 Id.

1153 See Appendix B, Enron Corp., Presentation to the Joint Committee on Taxation, at
39-40 (June 7, 2002). Enron reported gain for book and tax purposes on the settlement of the put
option of $104 million, and did not make a tax reporting change following the Form 8-K
restatement that occurred in November 2001. Id.

154 Enron Corp., Form 10-Q, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(November 19, 2001), at 23. LJM1 also paid $500,000 to acquire redeemable preference shares
in a related company. Id.

1155 Id.

1156 Id.

397

=== PAGE 426 ===
repurchased LJM1’s interest in the Cuiaba assets and the preference shares for $14.4 million in
2001.'1%7

4. Description of LJM2 structure and transactions

In October 1999, Messrs. Fastow and Kopper formed LJM2 as a Delaware limited
partnership. Enron described LJM2 as “a private investment company that primarily engages in
acquiring or investing in energy and communications-related investments, primarily involving
either assets Enron had decided to sell or risk management activities intended to limit Enron’s
exposure to price and value fluctuations with respect to various assets.”!!°8 | JM2 participated in
various transactions pursuant to which it acquired from Enron or an Enron affiliate various
assets, securities or other ownership interests involving Enron’s energy or communications
businesses.!'5? LJM2 is perhaps best known, however, for its four separate Raptors projects,
which were variations of hedging transactions that are described below.

LJM2 was controlled by Messrs. Fastow and Kopper through their ownership and control
of LJM2 Capital Management LP, the general partner of LJM2. 1169 The limited partners of

LJM2 were : approximately fifty investors who made their investments pursuant to a private
placement.’

Specific transactions between Enron and LJM2 or affiliated entities -
The Raptors transactions

The LJM2 transactions that had the greatest impact on Enron’s financial statements
involved the hedging structures known as the “Raptors.” The Raptors structures allowed Enron
to avoid reflecting almost $1 billion of losses on merchant investments during their existence,

1157 Id.

458 Enron Corp., Form 14 Proxy, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(March 2, 2001), at 29.

159 Tq. Enron’s asset sales to LIM2 included (1) a 75 percent equity interest in a power
project in Poland; (2) ownership rights to certain natural gas reserves; (3) an equity investment in
a Nigerian barge company; (4) dark fiber optic cable; and (5) a contractual right to acquire a gas
turbine. Enron Corp., Form 10-Q, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(November 19, 2001), at 23-24. :

1160 The general partner of LIM2 Capital Management LP was a limited liability
company, LJM2 Capital Management LLC, of which Mr. Fastow was the sole member and Mr.
Kopper was an authorized signatory. The limited partners were Mr. Fastow and a Mr. Kopper-
controlled limited liability company (Big Doe LLC).

‘161 Hearings Before the Permanent Subcommittee of Investigations of the Committee on

Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, 107" Cong. (July 23 and 30, 2002), The Role of the
Financial Institutions in Enron’s Collapse - Volume 2, at 2241, 2291.

398

=== PAGE 427 ===
including $501 million in 2000 and $453 million for 2001.''™ In the last two quarters of 2000,
Enron recognized revenues of $500 million on derivative transactions with Raptor entities, which
offset losses in Enron’s merchant investments, and recognized pre-tax earnings of $532 million
(including net interest income).!!® Enron reported that the combined notional principal amount

of the derivatives transactions entered into between Enron and LJM2 was approximately $2.1
billion.'!™

The Raptors were four separate and complex transactions that began in mid-2000 and
ended in 2001. The first, Raptor I, involved the use of Enron Corp. stock and stock rights to
hedge against the potential decline in value of certain Enron investments, including Internet
company stocks. The second and fourth, Raptors II and IV, involved using Enron stock and
stock rights to hedge other Enron investments. Raptor III involved a hedge relating to Enron’s
investment in New Power Holdings, Inc. (“NPW”), and differed from the other Raptors
structures because it used NPW stock rather than Enron stock to effect the purported hedge.

Each of the Raptor structures involved a special purpose entity formed by an Enron
wholly-owned limited liability company and LJM2. The Raptors structures were designed to
permit Enron to (1) exclude LJM2 from both its consolidated financial statement balance sheet
and consolidated Federal tax return; and (2) exclude the special purpose entity from Enron’s
consolidated financial statement balance sheet, but include the special purpose entity in Enron’s
consolidated Federal tax return.

Raptor I (Talon)

Raptor I was formed in April 2000 and used a special purpose entity naraed Talon I, LLC
(“Talon”). Talon was created for the purpose of engaging in hedging transactions with Enron.
Its investors were LJM2, through its affiliate LIM2-Talon, LLC, and Harrier I, LLC (“Harrier”),
a wholly owned special purpose entity of Enron Corp. formed to participate in Raptor I. Talon’s
assets consisted of cash, a promissory note, and Enron stock and stock contracts. LJM2 invested
$30 million cash, and Harrier invested a $50 million promissory note and Enron stock and stock
contracts valued by the parties at approximately $537 million. Talon was prohibited from
selling, pledging or hedging the Enron stock for three years, and the parties discounted the Enron
stock by 35 percent from its unrestricted fair market value. Harrier received a membership
interest and a $400 million revolving promissory note from Talon in exchange for the invested
assets. LJM2 was the party responsible for managing Talon.

Under Talon’s limited liability company agreement, both LJM2 and Harrier held
membership interests in Talon for State law purposes. The parties treated LJM2 as an equity
owner of Talon for financial accounting purposes but not for Federal income tax purposes. An

162 Enron Corp., Form 10-Q, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(November 19, 2001), at 20-21.

1163 See Powers Report at 14.

1164 Enron Corp., Form 14 Proxy, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(March 2, 2001), at 30.

399

=== PAGE 428 ===
internal memorandum dated April 19, 2000, states that Enron treated LJM2’s investment as debt,
and Talon as a single member LLC which Enron regarded as its owner for Federal income tax
purposes.'"® The memorandum further stated that “[n]Jotwithstanding the legal form or title
given to the interest LIM2 holds in Talon (which as described above was necessary solely for
financial accounting purposes), Talon’s [I]oan to LJM2 has all the important indicia of debt.”!'®
As indicated above, the structure was designed to permit Enron to: (1) exclude LJM2 from both
its consolidated financial statement balance sheet and consolidated tax return; and (2) exclude
Talon from its consolidated financial statement balance sheet, but include Talon in Enron’s
consolidated Federal tax returns.

LJM2’s economic rights differed from those of Harrier with respect to their Talon
interests. The parties agreed that Talon would not engage in hedging transactions until it had
distributed a minimum return from the income of Talon to LJM2, equal to the greater of $41
million or a 30 percent annualized return. By treating the minimum return as from Talon’s
income, rather than from Talon’s capital, the parties determined they could treat the $30 million
invested by LJM2 as capital for the 3 percent equity test applicable to related special purpose
entities.!!®’ After the minimum return was provided to LJM2, Harrier was entitled to all of any
further distributions of Talon’s income. Thus, for financial accounting purposes LJM2 was
treated as an equity investor in Talon, though for Federal income tax purposes it was treated as
the holder of a debt instrument issued by Talon (i.e., Talon’s obligation to pay LJM2 the greater
of $41 million or a 30 percent annualized return before any distribution could be made to
Harrier).

Talon and Enron entered into numerous swaps pursuant to which Talon purportedly

’ benefited from the upside, and was at risk for the downside, with respect to the underlying Enron
investments. One such investment was stock in Avici Systems, Inc. (“Avici”), a public company
in which Enron held a large stake.!'©8 For financial statement purposes, Enron had accounted for
its ownership of the Avici shares under the mark-to-market method, which meant that Enron

165 Interoffice Memorandum from AnnMarie Tiller and Brent Vasconcellos to R. Davis
Maxey (April 19, 2000) (“[iJn order for Talon to be viewed as an independent entity for financial
accounting purposes, the $30 [million] that LJM2 transfers to Talon will be exchanged for what
will legally be called a member interest in Talon.”). EC 000850876. See Interoffice
Memorandum from AnnMarie Tiller and Brent Vasconcellos to Ben Glisan (August 19, 2000)
(“[oJur earlier conclusion that we could treat LJM2’s original investment in Talon as debt solely
for tax purposes was in large measure based on Talon’s capitalization or wherewithal to pay
some few months after the closing.”) EC 000850968.

"166 Td. at EC 000850877.
1167 This meant that Talon could be viewed, for financial accounting purposes, as off-
balance sheet with respect to Enron, because LJM2 (a non-Enron entity) had provided outside

equity of at least 3 percent of Talon’s total assets.

1168 A vici is a provider of carrier-class routing solutions for the Internet. Avici Systems
Inc., Press Release dated December 11, 2002.

400

=== PAGE 429 ===
booked gain or loss on the 1.09 million shares!!© of Avici stock it owned as Avici’s stock price

increased or decreased. Enron and Talon entered into a swap arrangement regarding the 1.09
million Avici shares effective as of August 3, 2000, the date on which Avici shares traded at its
all-time high stock price ($163.50 per share). Under the swap arrangement, Enron retained
outright ownership of the Avici shares, but shifted to Talon the upside and downside with respect
to the Avici stock. Enron accounted for Talon on a cost basis, which meant Enron did not have
to book any losses Talon realized on its swap position with respect to the Avici shares.'!7°

Raptor IJ (Timberwolf)

Raptor II was created in June 2000 through the formation of Timberwolf I, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company. Timberwolf’s members were LIM2-Timberwolf, LLC, an
LJM2 affiliate, and Grizzly I, LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Enron Corp.''”’ The Raptor II
hedging structure was similar to that of Raptor I, with Enron paying the special purpose entity
$41 million to acquire a hedge against its investments, including certain assets in South America.
Enron capitalized Timberwolf by contributing a restricted contingent forward contract for 7.8
million shares of Enron stock and a $50 million note payable.!!”

Raptor III (Porcupine)

Raptor III was formed on September 27, 2000, to enter into hedging transactions with
Enron with respect to NPW, a power delivery company created by Enron and in which Enron
held a 75 percent ownership interest.''”? Raptor III differed from the other Raptors in two
respects: (1) it was formed to hedge a single Enron investment, NPW, rather than multiple Enron
investments; and (2) it held the stock of NPW, the company whose stock it was intended to
hedge, rather than Enron stock, for its credit support. Enron reportedly did not use its own stock
to serve as the hedge because it did not have sufficient shares available to transfer to the structure
without obtaining Board approval to issue additional common stock.!!7

Raptor III was conducted through a special purpose entity, Porcupine I, LLC
(“Porcupine”). Porcupine was a two-member limited liability company, with LJM2 holding one
membership interest, through its affiliate LIM2-Porcupine, LLC, and Enron’s wholly-owned

169 Criminal Complaint, United States v. Andrew S. Fastow, at 27.

1170 Thteroffice Memorandum from AnnMarie Tiller and Brent Vasconcellos to R. Davis
Maxey (April 19, 2000). EC 000850875.

1171 Notes to Financial Statements, Timberwolf I, LLC, December 31, 2000. E100025.

1172 I ‘d.

173 NPW initially was a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron. Subsequently it included
other investors, and in October 2000 it became a public company. Enron Corp., Form 8-K, filed

with the Securities and Exchange Commission (November 8, 2001) at 13.

1174 Powers Report at 116-118.

401

=== PAGE 430 ===
special purpose entity, Pronghorn I, LLC, holding the other. LJM2 contributed $30 million cash
in exchange for its membership interest. Enron, through Pronghorn, transferred warrants for 24
million shares of NPW stock to Porcupine in exchange for Porcupine’s promissory note in the
amount of $259 million.'!”°

Porcupine’s economic interests were structured in a manner similar to those of Raptor I,
and provided LJM2 a minimum return prior to Pronghorn receiving any distributions. LJM2’s
minimum return was the greater of $39.5 million or a 30 percent annualized return. Enron,
through Pronghorn, was to receive all Porcupine distributions after LIM2 received its minimum
return.

On October 5, 2000, the day of the NPW initial public offering, Porcupine made a $39.5
million distribution to LJM2, the requisite minimum return, permitting Porcupine to commence
hedging activities with Enron. On the same day, Enron and Porcupine entered into swaps with
respect to NPW stock at $21 per share, pursuant to which Porcupine obtained the economic
upside if NPW stock rose above $21, but became obligated to pay Enron when NPW stock fell
below that price. Because Porcupine was treated as an unconsolidated special purpose entity,

Enron did not have to book any of Porcupine’s investment losses attributable to decreases in
value of NPW shares.'!”°

Shortly after NPW’s initial public offering, its stock declined in value to below $21 per
share. This meant that Porcupine’s swap obligation to Enron increased, which was designed to
offset Enron’s investment losses on the NPW shares it held outright. However, because
Porcupine’s only asset available to honor its obligation to Enron was NPW stock, Porcupine’s
ability to honor its swap obligation diminished at the same time (and to the same extent) that its
obligation to Enron increased. This provided Enron no economic protection under the hedge,
and required Enron to report as income for financial reporting purposes the excess of Porcupine’s
obligations over its assets (i.e., its negative credit capacity)./"” By the end of December 2000,
NPW’s stock had dropped to below $10 per share, and Raptor III had a substantial negative
credit capacity.

175 The documents recorded this transfer of NPW shares at $10.75 per share. The
parties treated the transfer as a sale at $10.75 rather than a contribution of the shares. This
apparently was done to enable the parties to take the position that Enron did not hold an equity
stake in Porcupine for financial reporting purposes, so that Porcupine was not required to be
included in Enron’s consolidated financial statements. LJM2’s $30 million cash contribution
was intended to constitute equity for financial reporting purposes in order to satisfy the 3 percent
outside equity requirement. Enron treated Porcupine as a disregarded entity of which Enron
(through Pronghorn) was regarded as the owner of its assets. Notes to Financial Statements,
Porcupine I, LLC, December 31, 2000. E100240.

4176 Powers Report at 115-118.
1177 This was required under the accounting principles applicable to unconsolidated

special purpose entities, which permitted off-balance sheet treatment only if the special purpose
entity had the financial wherewithal to honor its obligations.

402

=== PAGE 431 ===
Raptor IV (Bobcat)

Raptor IV was formed in August 2000. Its hedging structure replicated those of Raptors I
and II, with Enron paying to acquire the hedge. Raptor IV was implemented through Bobcat I,
LLC (“Bobcat”), a limited liability company with LIM2-Bobcat, LLC, an LJM2 affiliate, and
Roadrunner I, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron Corp., as its members. Although

Raptor IV was capitalized, it was never used to engage in hedging transactions with Enron.!!78

1178 Instead its assets were used as credit support for Raptors I and III to address their
respective negative credit capacities. See Notes to Financial Statements, Bobcat I, LLC,
December 31, 2000. E 100330.

403

=== PAGE 432 ===
PART FOUR: ISSUES RELATING TO COMPENSATION
I. INTRODUCTION TO COMPENSATION-RELATED ISSUES
A. Overview of Issues Relating to Compensation

In general

The compensation arrangements of Enron have received considerable media attention in
the aftermath of the Enron bankruptcy.

Some of this attention has focused on the broad-based retirement plans maintained by
Enron that receive special tax benefits (“qualified retirement plans”). The decline of Enron’s
stock price and Enron’s subsequent bankruptcy has affected the benefits that Enron employees
are or may be entitled to under the Enron qualified retirement plans. Much of the media
attention regarding the effect of the bankruptcy on employees’ benefits relates to the significant
plan holdings in Enron stock, particularly in the Enron ESOP and the Enron Savings Plan.!!7?
For many Enron employees, the benefits provided under the Enron qualified retirement plans
may have been the individual’s primary source of retirement income.

Attention has also focused on the overall compensation arrangements of Enron,
particularly the magnitude and forms of compensation provided to executives. This Part Four
addresses both of these aspects of Enron’s compensation arrangements. Issues relating to the
qualified retirement plans are discussed first.!*

Enron qualified plans

During the period covered by the Joint Committee staff review, Enron maintained three
main qualified retirement plans: the Enron Corp. Employee Stock Ownership Plan (the “Enron
ESOP”); the Enron Corp. Retirement Plan (the “Enron Retirement Plan’’), which was modified
and renamed the Enron Corp. Cash Balance Plan (the “Enron Cash Balance Plan’); and the
Enron Corp. Savings Plan (the “Enron Savings Plan”).

The discussion relating to Enron qualified retirement plans begins with an overview of
present law relating to qualified retirement plans generally, with particular attention paid to the
rules relating to the types of qualified retirement plans maintained by Enron.!!®! This is followed

1179 Enron stock represented 62 percent of Savings Plan at the end of 2000. 2000 SEC
Form 11-K of the Enron Savings Plan.

1180 Qualified retirement plan issues are discussed in Part II, and other compensation-
related issues are discussed in Part III of this Part Four.

1181 ee Part II.A., below. All cross references within this Part Four refer to this Part
Four unless otherwise indicated.

404

=== PAGE 433 ===
by a description of each of the qualified retirement plans maintained by Enron, both currently
and historically.''®”

Certain specific issues relating to the qualified plans, and their impact on retirement
benefits of Enron employees are addressed in detail, including a description of relevant present
law, factual background, and a discussion of tax and other issues. The specific qualified plan
issues addressed in this manner are: (1) the phase out of the ESOP offset under the Enron
Retirement Plan; (2) the conversion of the Enron Retirement Plan into the Enron Cash Balance
Plan; (3) investment of the ESOP in Enron stock; (4) a change in recordkeeper under the Enron
Savings Plan shortly before the bankruptcy that resulted in a blackout period during which
investment changes could not be made, including selling Enron stock; (5) investments under the
Enron Savings Plan; and (6) a claim made by a former Enron employee that benefit funds were
allegedly misused by Enron.!!8

Other compensation-related issues

Part III of this Part Four discusses Enron’s general compensation structure and
arrangements. The section begins with a general overview of compensation of Enron, including
philosophies and tools used in determining how compensation for Enron employees would be
structured.!!®* This is followed with an overview of executive compensation, including a general
discussion of Enron’s executive compensation structure and philosophy, as well as a description
of particular executive compensation arran gements.''§ The principal forms of compensation
used by Enron are discussed in detail.

The section concludes with a detailed analysis of certain compensation arrangements,
including a description of present law, factual background, and a discussion of issues. These
issues were chosen for discussion based on a variety of factors, including the prevalence of use
of the arrangement, the media and other attention the arrangement has received, and potential tax
issues. The matters addressed in this manner are: (1) Enron’s nonqualified deferred
compensation arrangements; (2) stock-based compensation (3) employee loans; (4) the purchase
by Enron of annuity contracts from Kenneth L. Lay and his wife; (5) split-dollar life insurance
arrangements; and (6) the application of the $1 million limitation on the employer deduction for
certain executive compensation. '!®°

1182 See Part ILB., below.
1183 Soe Part IL.C., below.
1184 Coe Part IIL.A., below.
1185

See Part III.B., below.

1186 ee Part IILC., below.

405

=== PAGE 434 ===
B. Overview of Enron Internal Functions Relating to Compensation

In order to understand how decisions relating to compensation matters were made at
Enron, it is helpful to be familiar with the structure of the Enron Corp. Human Resources
Department. Enron’s corporate and departmental structure changed from time to time. The
description here is intended as a general overview of the structure preceding the bankruptcy.

Different departments within the Human Resources Department handled different
matters. The Benefits Department handled matters generally relating to all employees, including
qualified retirement plans, health and welfare plans, and miscellaneous employee benefits, such
as parking. The Compensation Department handled compensation matters relating to executives,
generally vice presidents and above. Specific arrangements handled by the Compensation
Department include nonqualified deferred compensation plans and bonuses. These departments
had various names over time. In addition, each business unit might have its own human
resources department that handled employee benefit matters for that business unit.

Specialized compensation arrangements for particular individuals were not handled in
the same manner as other arrangements. Interviews with Enron employees indicated there was
no single department or person that handled such arrangements; many of them did not appear to
be handled by the Human Resources Department. The Office of the Corporate Secretary was
responsible for compiling the information for the top-five executives for proxy purposes, and
therefore may have become aware of various arrangements, but was not responsible for setting
up or implementing the arrangements. Based on interviews with Enron employees, it was
difficult to identify the persons who were knowledgeable about specialized arrangements,
particularly arrangements involving top management.

406

=== PAGE 435 ===
II. QUALIFIED PLANS
A. Overview of Present Law Relating to Qualified Retirement Plans
1. In general

A plan of deferred compensation that meets the qualification standards of the Internal
Revenue Code’’*’ (“a qualified retirement plan”) is accorded special tax treatment under present
law. Employees do not include qualified retirement plan benefits in gross income until the
benefits are distributed, even though the plan is funded and the benefits are nonforfeitable. The
employer is entitled to a current deduction (within limits) for contributions to a qualified
retirement plan even though the contributions are not currently included in an employee’s
income. Contributions to a qualified retirement plan are held in a tax-exempt trust.

Employees, as well as employers, may make contributions to a qualified retirement plan.
Employees may, subject to certain restrictions, make both pre-tax and after-tax contributions to a
qualified retirement plan. Pre-tax employee contributions may be made to a qualified cash or
deferred arrangement, i.e., a 401(k) plan. Such contributions are referred to in the Code as
“elective deferrals” and are generally treated the same as employer contributions for Federal tax
purposes.

Present law imposes a number of requirements on GUE retirement plans that must be
satisfied in order for the plan to obtain tax-favored status.''®8 One of these requirements is that a
qualified retirement plan must be maintained for the exclusive benefit of employees. In
particular, a qualified retirement plan must prohibit the diversion of assets for purposes other
than the exclusive benefit of employees and their beneficiaries (the “exclusive benefit rule”).

In addition, minimum participation and coverage rules and nondiscrimination rules are
designed to ensure that qualified retirement plans benefit an employer’s rank-and-file employees
as well as highly compensated employees. Under the minimum coverage rules, a plan must
satisfy one of the following requirements: (1) the plan benefits at least 70 percent of employees

who are nonhighly compensated employees; '!®° (2) the plan benefits a percentage of nonhighly

87 Except as otherwise indicated, this discussion refers to rules in the Internal Revenue
Code. The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”) also contains rules
relating to qualified plans. In some cases the ERISA requirements are identical or substantially
similar to Code requirements. ERISA’s requirements generally may be enforced through
administrative actions by the Department of Labor or by lawsuits brought by plan participants,
the Department of Labor, or plan fiduciaries.

1188 Tn some cases, special provisions apply to certain types of plans, such as qualified
retirement plans maintained by State and local governments and churches. This document
discusses the rules applicable to qualified retirement plans without regard to such special
provisions, except as specifically mentioned.

1189 ‘Under present law, an employee is treated as highly compensated if the employee

(1) was a five-percent owner of the employer at any time during the year or the preceding year,
or (2) either (a) had compensation for the preceding year in excess of $90,000 (for 2002) or (b) at

407

=== PAGE 436 ===
compensated employees that is at least 70 percent of the percentage of highly compensated
employees benefiting under the plan; or (3) the plan satisfies an average benefits test which
compares the benefits received by highly compensated employees and nonhighly compensated
employees.!!° Present law also contains a general nondiscrimination requirement which
provides that a qualified retirement plan may not discriminate in favor of highly compensated
employees. This requirement generally applies to all benefits, rights, and features under the plan,
not just to contributions and benefits.'’?! Special rules apply to plans that primarily benefit key
employees (called “top-heavy plans”).!1?

The plan qualification standards also define certain rights of plan participants and
beneficiaries and provide some limits on the tax benefits for qualified retirement plans. A limit
of $200,000 (for 2003) applies to the amount of a participant’s compensation that may be taken
into account for qualified retirement plan purposes.'!” Limits apply also to the benefits or
contributions provided to a participant and to the amount an employer may deduct for
contributions to a qualified retirement plan, based on the type of plan.1!**

Certain rules that apply to qualified retirement plans are designed to ensure that the
amounts contributed to such plans are used for retirement purposes. Thus, for example, an early
withdrawal tax applies to premature distributions from qualified retirement plans,' 1 and the
ability to obtain distributions prior to termination of employment from certain types of qualified
retirement plans, including defined benefit plans, is restricted.!1%°

Enforcement of the requirements that apply to qualified retirement plans depends on the
source of the requirements. The qualification requirements under the Internal Revenue Code are

the election of the employer had compensation for the preceding year in excess of $90,000 (for
2002) and was in the top 20 percent of employees by compensation for such year. A nonhighly
compensated employee is an employee other than a highly compensated employee. Sec. 414(q).

1199 Sec. 410(b).
191 Sec, 401(a)(4).
1192 Sec, 416.

1193 Sec, 401(a)(17).

1194 See secs. 404 and 415. The Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of
2001 (“EGTRRA”) increased many of the limits that apply to qualified retirement plans. These
limit increases are generally effective for years beginning after December 31, 2001. The
provisions of EGTRRA generally do not apply for years beginning after December 31, 2010.

195 Sec. 72(t).

1196 See, e.g., sec. 401(k)(2).

408

=== PAGE 437 ===
enforced by the IRS.''®” If a plan fails to meet the Code’s qualification requirements, then the
favorable tax treatment for such plans may be denied; that is, the employer may lose tax
deductions and employees may have current income taxation. As a practical matter, the IRS
rarely disqualifies a plan. Instead, the IRS may impose sanctions short of disqualification and
require the employer to correct any violation of the qualification rules.

Certain of the Internal Revenue Code rules relating to qualified plans are enforced
through an excise tax rather than through disqualification. For example, a failure to satisfy the
minimum funding requirements for defined benefit plans, discussed below, does not result in
disqualification of the plan. Instead, an excise tax is imposed on the employer.

After a plan’s initial establishment, the employer may find it necessary or desirable to
change its terms and provisions by amending it. Amendment of a plan may be necessary to
ensure the plan’s continued qualification, or may be discretionary, implementing design changes
desired by the plan sponsor. Additionally, a plan, including amendments, may be restated from
time to time, that is, a new version of a plan document incorporating legal and design changes
will be produced to reflect all current provisions.

2. Types of qualified retirement plans

In general

Overview

Qualified retirement plans are broadly classified into two categories, defined benefit
plans and defined contributions plans, based on the nature of the benefits provided. A defined
benefit plan promises to provide a specific benefit specified in the plan. Defined contribution
plan benefits are based on the contributions to and investment returns on individual accounts.
Certain types of qualified retirement plans are referred to as hybrid plans because they have
features of both a defined benefit plan and a defined contribution plan. For example, a cash
balance plan is a hybrid plan. Legally, a cash balance plan is a defined benefit plan; however,
plan benefits are defined by reference to a hypothetical account balance. Floor offset
arrangements are another type of hybrid plan. These arrangements consist of a defined benefit
plan, which provides a floor benefit, and a defined contribution plan, which offsets the benefit
under the floor plan. Cash balance plans and floor-offset arrangements are discussed below.

Defined benefit plans

Under a defined benefit plan, benefits are determined under a plan formula, typically
based on compensation and years of service. For example, a defined benefit plan might provide
an annual retirement benefit of two percent of final average compensation multiplied by total
years of service completed by an employee. Benefits under a defined benefit plan are funded by
the general assets of the trust established under the plan; individual accounts are not maintained
for employees participating in the plan.

N97 Employees do not have a right to sue to enforce the qualified retirement plan
requirements under the Internal Revenue Code.

409

=== PAGE 438 ===
Employer contributions to a defined benefit plan are subject to minimum funding
requirements to ensure that plan assets are sufficient to pay the benefits under the plan.'"*8 An
employer is generally subject to an excise tax for a failure to make required contributions.!!”
Benefits under a defined benefit plan are guaranteed (within limits) by the Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corporation (“PBGC”).

Defined contribution plans

Benefits under defined contribution plans are based solely on the contributions (and
earnings thereon) allocated to separate accounts maintained for each plan participant. Defined
contribution plans fall into three general types: profit-sharing plans, stock bonus plans, and
money purchase pension plans. A plan must designate the type of plan it is intended to be.!2

Different types of contributions may be made to a defined contribution plan. The type of
contributions made to a defined contribution plan depends on the design of the plan. Many plans
provide for different types of contributions. Contributions fall into two general types: employee
contributions and employer contributions. Further distinctions apply within each type.

Employee contributions can be made on a pre-tax or an after-tax basis. Employee
elective deferrals under a 401(k) plan are pre-tax employee contributions. Elective deferral
contributions are generally treated the same as employer contributions for income tax purposes
and are not subject to tax until distributed from the plan.

Employer contributions consist of two types: nonelective contributions and matching
contributions. Nonelective contributions are employer contributions that are made without
regard to whether the employee makes elective deferrals or after-tax contributions. Depending
on the type of defined contribution plan and the plan terms, employer nonelective contributions
may be required or may be discretionary. Matching contributions are employer contributions that
are made only if the employee makes contributions.

Within the three general types of defined contribution plans are plan designs that contain

special features, such as qualified cash or deferred arrangements (or 401(k) plans) and employee
stock ownership plans (“ESOPs”), discussed below.

Cash balance plans

A cash balance plan is a type of defined benefit plan with benefits resembling the benefits
usually associated with defined contribution plans. Under a “cash balance” formula, the benefit

"98 Sec. 412.

"9% Sec. 4971.

1200 While certain rules apply only to certain types of plans, the differences between
these types of plans have been blurred over time and are largely historical with respect to some

plan characteristics. For example, contributions under a profit-sharing plan are no longer
required to depend on the employer’s profits.

410

=== PAGE 439 ===
is typically defined by a hypothetical account balance, which is periodically credited with an
amount based on the participant’s compensation (a “pay credit”) and interest thereon (an
“interest credit”).

Benefits paid to the participant are based on the value of the hypothetical account even
though the plan does not allocate assets to individual accounts to participants. The hypothetical
account is only a method of computing participants’ promised benefits. A participant’s
hypothetical account balance is typically credited with hypothetical contributions and
hypothetical earnings designed to mimic the allocations of actual contributions and actual
earnings to a participant’s account that would occur under a defined contribution plan.

Qualified cash or deferred arrangements (‘401(k) plans”)

A 401(k) plan legally is not a separate type of plan, but is a profit-sharing or stock bonus
plan that contains a “qualified cash or deferred arrangement.” 120! Thus, such arrangements are
subject to the rules generally applicable to qualified retirement plans. In addition, special rules
apply to such arrangements. 2

Under a 401(k) plan, an employee may elect to have the employer pay compensation as
contributions to a qualified retirement plan on behalf of the employee, or to the employee
directly in cash. Contributions made at the election of the employee are called elective deferrals.
The maximum annual amount of elective deferrals that can be made by an individual is $12,000
for 2003.!203 Starting in 2002, an individual who has attained age 50 before the end of the
taxable year may also make catch-up contributions to a 401(k) plan. The limit on elective
deferrals is increased for an individual who has attained age 50 by $2,000 for 2003. An
employee’s elective deferrals must be fully vested.

A special nondiscrimination test applies to elective deferrals under a 401(k) plan, which
compares the elective deferrals of highly compensated employees with elective deferrals of

201 Certain pre-ERISA money purchase plans and rural cooperative plans may also
include a qualified cash or deferred arrangement.

1202 Other arrangements are similar to 401(k) plans, but are not subject to all the same

rules, such as section 457 plans of State and local governments, and tax-sheltered annuity plans
(sec. 403(b)).

1203 Sec. 402(g). The dollar limit on elective deferrals increases to $13,000 for 2004,
$14,000 for 2005, and $15,000 for 2006. After 2006, the limit is adjusted for inflation in $500
increments. The increases in the limit are subject to the general sunset provision of EGTRRA.

1204 Sec. 414(v). The additional amount permitted for catch-up contributions increases to
$3,000 for 2004, $4,000 for 2005, and $5,000 for 2006. After 2006, the limit is adjusted for
inflation in $500 increments. The increases in the limit are subject to the general sunset
provision of EGTRRA.

411

=== PAGE 440 ===
nonhighly compensated employees.!”° Employer matching contributions and after-tax
employee contributions under a defined contribution plan are also subject to a special
nondiscrimination test.!2°°

Employers are not required to offer matching contributions based on employee elective
deferrals. Many employers provide a match because doing so makes it easier for the plan to
satisfy applicable nondiscrimination rules by encouraging employees to make elective deferrals.
For example, a plan could provide that the employer will make matching contributions equal to
50 percent of an employee’s elective deferrals, up to a maximum of three percent of
compensation.

In addition to or in lieu of matching contributions, some employers make “qualified
nonelective contributions” for employees participating in a 401(k) plan, which may be taken into
in account applying the special nondiscrimination test for elective deferrals test. Like matching
contributions, qualified nonelective contributions may make it easier for plans to satisfy the
applicable nondiscrimination rules. “Qualified nonelective contributions” are contributions that
are made by the employer without regard to whether the employee makes elective deferrals, that
are 100 percent vested, and that meet certain other requirements.

Under a safe harbor,!7”” a 401(k) plan is deemed to satisfy the special nondiscrimination
test if the plan satisfies one of two contribution requirements and satisfies a notice requirement.
A plan satisfies the contribution requirement under the safe harbor rule if the employer either:
(1) satisfies a matching contribution requirement; or (2) makes a nonelective contribution to a
defined contribution plan of at least three percent of an employee’s compensation on behalf of
each nonhighly compensated employee who is eligible to participate in the arrangement without
regard to the permitted disparity rules. A plan satisfies the matching contribution requirement if,
under the arrangement: (1) the employer makes a matching contribution on behalf of each
nonhighly compensated employee that is equal to (a) 100 percent of the employee’s elective
deferrals up to three percent of compensation and (b) 50 percent of the employee’s elective
deferrals from three to five percent of compensation; and (2) the rate of match with respect to
any elective contribution for highly compensated employees is not greater than the rate of match
for nonhighly compensated employees. Matching contributions that satisfy the design-based safe
harbor for 401(k) plans are deemed to satisfy the special nondiscrimination test for such

contributions-test. Certain alternative matching arrangements also can be used to satisfy the safe
harbor.

1205 Sec. 401(k)(3). (This test is called the actual deferral percentage test or the “ADP”
test).

1206 Sec. 401(m). (This test is called the actual contribution percentage test or the “ACP”
test.)

1207 Sec. 401(k)(12).

412

=== PAGE 441 ===
Employee stock ownership plans (“ESOPs”’)

An ESOP is a defined contribution plan that is designated as an ESOP, is designed to
invest primarily in securities of the employer, and meets certain other requirements. '“"° An
ESOP can be an entire plan or it can be a component of a larger defined contribution plan.!7
ESOPs are subject to additional requirements that do not apply to other plans that hold employer
securities. For example, voting rights must generally be passed through to ESOP participants,
employees must generally have the right to receive benefits in the form of employer securities,
and certain ESOP participants must be given the right to diversify a portion of their account into
investments other than employer securities.'?!°

In addition, certain benefits are available to ESOPs that are not available to other types of
qualified retirement plans that hold employer securities. For example, an ESOP may be
“leveraged,” i.e., employer securities held in an ESOP may be purchased with loan proceeds. In
a leveraged ESOP, the ESOP typically borrows from a financial institution. The loan is typically
guaranteed by the employer and the employer securities are pledged as security for the loan.
Alternatively, the loan can be made directly by the employer to the ESOP, or the employer may
borrow from a financial institution, and then make a loan to the ESOP. Contributions to the plan
are used to repay the loan. Dividends on employer securities may also be used to repay the loan.
The employer securities are held in a suspense account and released to participants’ accounts as
the loan is repaid.

Special tax benefits also apply to ESOPs. For example, the employer may deduct
dividends paid on employer stock held by an ESOP if the dividends are used to repay a loan, if
they are distributed to plan participants, or if the plan gives participants the opportunity to elect
either to receive the dividends or have them reinvested in employer stock under the ESOP and
the dividends are reinvested at the participant’s election.'*"! In addition, special deduction rules
apply to ESOPs that do not apply to other types of plans,!2!

Prior law also provided additional tax benefits for ESOPs that were in effect during the
period covered by the Joint Committee staff review of Enron. Prior law provided that banks and

1208 Sec. 4975(e)(7); Treas. Reg. sec. 54.4975-11. The plan must be either a stock bonus
plan or a stock bonus and money purchase pension plan.

1209 an ESOP may provide for different types of contributions, including employer
nonelective contributions and others. For example, an ESOP may include a 401(k) feature that
permits employees to make elective deferrals. Such an ESOP design is sometimes referred to as
a “KSOP.”

1210 cee secs. 401(a)(28), 409(e), and 409(h).

1211 Sec, 404(k). The ability to deduct dividends reinvested at the election of the
participant is effective for taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.

1212 Sec. 404(a)(9). Additional special rules also apply to ESOPs that hold employer
securities that are not publicly traded.

413

=== PAGE 442 ===
other financial institutions could exclude from income 50 percent of the interest received with
respect to a loan used to acquire employer securities for an ESop.'?3

In addition, prior law allowed for the transfer of defined benefit plan assets to an ESOP
without imposition of the excise tax on reversions.'?!4 Under present and prior law, an excise tax
is imposed on employer reversions from a qualified plan equal to 20 percent of the reversion (50
percent if the employer does not establish a replacement plan or provide certain benefit
increases). 1215 Prior law provided that, if certain requirements are satisfied, the reversion tax did
not apply to the extent a reversion upon plan termination was transferred to an ESOP.

In order for the exception for transfers to an ESOP to apply, the following requirements
had to be satisfied: (1) within 90 days, or such longer period as the IRS allowed, after the
transfer, the amount transferred had to be invested in employer securities or used to repay loans
used to purchase employer securities; (2) certain allocation requirements had to be met which
generally required that the employer securities be allocated ratably over no more than seven
years; 6 (3) at least half of the participants in the qualified plan had to be participants in the
ESOP as of the close of the first plan year for which an allocation of the securities was required;
(4) under the plan, employer securities, the acquisition of which satisfied the first condition, had
to, except to the extent necessary to meet plan qualification requirements relating to
diversification of assets, remain in the plan until distributed to participants in accordance with
the provisions of the plan; and (5) the amount had to be transferred after March 31, 1985, and
before January 1, 1989, or after December 31, 1988, pursuant to a termination which occurred
after March 31, 1985, and before January 1, 1989.

3. General rules relating to investment of qualified retirement plan assets

Risk of investment loss

The person who bears the risk of investment loss with respect to qualified retirement plan
assets depends on whether the plan is a defined benefit plan or a defined contribution plan.

1213 The exclusion was added in section 133 of the Code by the Deficit Reduction Act of
1984, Pub. L. No. 98-369 (1984), generally effective for loans used to acquire employer
securities after July 18, 1984. Significant changes were made to the interest exclusion by the
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989, Pub. L. No. 101-239 (1989), including a provision
generally limiting the exclusion to cases in which the ESOP owned more than 50 percent of the
stock of the corporation. The exclusion was subsequently repealed, generally effective for loans
made after August 20, 1996. Pub. L. No. 104-188, sec. 1602(a) (1996).

1214 Sec, 4980(c)(3). This provision was utilized by Enron to provide funding for the
Enron ESOP. A “reversion” is any amount of cash or the fair market value of property received
by an employer from a qualified plan. A reversion can occur, for example, if a defined benefit
plan is terminated and plan assets are greater than plan liabilities.

1215 Sec. 4980.

216 Sec, 4980(c)(3)(C).

414

=== PAGE 443 ===
In a defined benefit plan, investment risk is generally on the employer as a result of the
minimum funding requirements, under which the employer must make contributions in the
amount necessary to fund promised benefits, as discussed above. The minimum funding rules
also require periodic valuation of defined benefit plan assets. If the plan suffers investment

losses, the employer may be required to increase plan contributions to maintain the funded status
of the plan.

Benefits under most defined benefit plans are guaranteed (within limits) by the PBGC."?!7
In the event a plan terminates with assets insufficient to pay promised benefits, the PBGC will
pay benefits up to the maximum guaranteed amount.'?!8 For 2003, the maximum guaranteed
benefit for an individual retiring at age 65 is $3,664.77 per month, or $43,977.24 per year.

In a defined contribution plan, the benefit to which the participant is entitled is the
account balance. Thus, the plan participant bears the risk of investment losses, regardless of
whether investment decisions are made by the participant or a plan fiduciary. Defined
contribution plans are not insured by the PBGC.

General fiduciary rules and investment responsibility

Overview

Except with respect to certain investments in employer securities, discussed below,
generally neither the Internal Revenue Code nor ERISA imposes restrictions on the specific
investments that can be made with qualified retirement plan assets. Rather, ERISA imposes
general standards applicable to the conduct of plan fiduciaries. In addition, except with respect
to investment in employer securities and the ability of plan participants to direct investments,
discussed below, defined benefit plans and defined contribution plans are generally subject to the
same rules regarding the investment of plan assets.

Definition of fiduciary

ERISA provides, in relevant part, that a person is a fiduciary with respect to a plan to the
extent he or she exercises any discretionary authority or discretionary control respecting
management of such plan or exercises any authority or control respecting management or
disposition of plan assets or has any discretionary authority or discretionary responsibility in the
administration of the plan.'?"° Fiduciary status extends to those aspects of the plan over which
the fiduciary exercises authority or control. The determination of whether an individual is a plan
fiduciary often involves significant factual inquiry. Corporate officers and directors are not
considered plan fiduciaries merely because of their corporate position--whether they are
fiduciaries is determined by reference to whether they have or exercise the requisite authority

'217 ERISA sec. 4021.
1218 Soe ERISA sec. 4022.

1219 ERISA sec. 3(21)(A)(i) and (ii).

415

=== PAGE 444 ===
and control over the plan. Under ERISA, a person who makes investment decisions with respect
to a qualified retirement plan is generally a plan fiduciary.

ERISA also provides that every plan must have one or more named fiduciaries.'?”°
Named fiduciaries must be named in the plan document (or by the employer, employee
organization, or the two acting jointly, pursuant to a procedure specified in the plan). The named
fiduciary must have authority to control and manage the operation and administration of the plan.

In practice, a committee is often identified as the named fiduciary and has employer officers as
its members.

Generally, the plan trustee has exclusive authority and responsibility for managing and
controlling plan assets and is thus responsible for investing plan assets. However, the plan may
make the trustee subject to the direction of the named fiduciary, or the authority for managing
plan assets may be delegated to an investment manager.!*?! An investment manager is a
registered investment advisor, bank, trust company, or insurance company that is appointed by a
named fiduciary of the plan with the power to manage, acquire, or dispose of plan assets. The
investment manager must acknowledge in writing its status as a fiduciary.’

General standard of conduct for plan fiduciaries

ERISA contains general fiduciary standards that apply to all fiduciary actions,!773
including investment decisions made by fiduciaries. ERISA requires that a plan fiduciary
generally must discharge its duties solely in the interests of participants and beneficiaries and:

e for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to plan participants and beneficiaries
and defraying reasonable expenses of plan administration;

e with the care, prudence, and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a
prudent man acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the
conduct of an enterprise of a like character and with like aims;

¢ by diversifying the investments of the plan so as to minimize the risk of large losses,
unless under the circumstances it is clearly prudent not to do so; and

e in accordance with plan documents insofar as they are consistent with ERISA.'?4

1220 ERISA sec. 402(a).

1221 Th such case, ERISA provides that the trustee is obligated to follow the instructions
of the named fiduciary unless the directions are contrary to the provisions of ERISA or the plan
or trust. See ERISA sec. 403(a)(1) and (2).

1222 ERISA sec. 3(38).

1223 Although the focus of this discussion is plan investments, fiduciary actions and
liability are not limited to issues regarding investment of plan assets.

1224 BRISA sec. 404(a)(1).

416

=== PAGE 445 ===
In the case of a defined contribution plan, the diversification requirement and the
prudence requirement (only to the extent it requires diversification) are not violated by the
acquisition or holding of employer securities. 25 The application of the fiduciary rules to plans

holding employer securities is discussed in more detail in Part II.C.3, below.

The fiduciary rules under ERISA are subject to enforcement through administrative
actions by the Department of Labor or by lawsuits brought by plan participants, the Department
of Labor, or plan fiduciaries. Plan fiduciaries may be held personally liable for losses resulting
from a breach of fiduciary duty!”

In some circumstances, a plan fiduciary may be liable for a breach of fiduciary duty by
another fiduciary of the plan. 1227" fiduciary may be liable for a breach of duty by another
fiduciary if the fiduciary: (1) knowingly participates in, or undertakes to conceal, an act or
mission of the other, knowing that the act or omission constitutes a breach of duty; (2) enables
another fiduciary to commit a breach by failing to comply with their own duty; or (3) knows of a
breach by another fiduciary and fails to make reasonable efforts!” under the circumstances to
remedy it. For purposes of these provisions, constructive knowledge, rather than actual
knowledge is sufficient to establish cofiduciary liability. For example, a fiduciary may be liable
for the actions of another if the fiduciary knew or should have known of the breach and failed to
make reasonable efforts to correct the breach.

Plan investment decisions made by plan fiduciaries may in some cases violate the
exclusive benefit rule under the Internal Revenue Code. However, not all fiduciary violations
relating to plan investments are violations of the exclusive benefit rule.

Special fiduciary rules for participant-directed investments in defined contribution plans

A defined contribution plan may permit participants or beneficiaries to make investment
decisions with respect to their individual accounts. For example, it is common for 401(k) plans
to provide participants with investment authority with respect to their own elective deferrals.

Under a so-called safe harbor rule, ERISA fiduciary liability does not apply to investment
decisions made by plan participants in deferred contribution plans if plan participants control the
investment of their individual accounts.'””” Many employers design plans so that they can take
advantage of this rule in order to minimize fiduciary responsibilities. If the safe harbor applies, a

1225 ERISA sec. 404(a)(2).

1228 ERISA sec. 409.

1227 ERISA sec. 405. Such liability is often referred to as cofiduciary liability.

1228 Department of Labor regulations clarify that if a fiduciary takes reasonable steps to
remedy a breach by another, the fiduciary generally is not liable under cofiduciary liability

merely because the remedial efforts fail. 29 C.F.R. sec. 2509.75-7, at FR-10.

1229 ERISA sec. 404(c).

417

=== PAGE 446 ===
plan fiduciary may be liable for the investment alternatives made available, but not for the
specific investment decisions made by participants. This includes investments in employer
securities made at the direction of the participant. Failure to satisfy the safe harbor rule means
that plan fiduciaries may be held liable for the investment decisions of participants. The safe
harbor rule is discussed in detail below.'”*°

4. Rules relating to investments of qualified retirement plan assets in employer securities

In general

In addition to the general ERISA rules relating to the investment of qualified retirement
plan assets, special rules apply to the investment oy plan assets in stock or other securities issued
by the employer or an affiliate of the employer.'” | The assets of either a defined contribution
plan or a defined benefit plan may be invested in employer securities. However, the rules
relating to such investments differ for defined benefit plans and defined contribution plans, as
discussed below.

Application of fiduciary rules to plans holding employer securities

As mentioned above, the general diversification standard applicable to plan fiduciaries
(and the general prudence requirement to the extent it requires diversification) generally are not
violated by the acquisition or holding of employer securities by a defined contribution plan. 1232
However, under case law, this does not mean that the holding of such securities by such plans
never involves a breach of fiduciary duty. This issue, and applicable cases, is discussed in detail
below.

Limits on investments in employer securities

ERISA imposes restrictions on the investment of qualified retirement plan assets in
employer securities. ERISA prohibits defined benefit plans (and money purchase pension plans
other than certain pre-ERISA plans) from acquiring employer securities if, after the acquisition,
more than 10 percent of the assets of the plan would be invested in employer securities. 1234
Most defined contribution plans, such as profit-sharing plans, stock bonus plans, and certain pre-
ERISA money purchase pension plans are not subject to any limit on the amount of employer
contributions that can be invested (or required to be invested) in employer securities. 123

1230 See Part II.C.5.

1231 Special rules apply also to the investment of plan assets in employer real property.

1232 ERISA sec. 404(a)(2).
1233 Cee Part II.C.3.
1234 Soe ERISA sec. 407.

1235 ERISA sec. 407(b)(1).

418

=== PAGE 447 ===
In the case of a 401(k) plan, no more than 10 percent of elective deferrals can be required
to be invested in employer securities. However, this restriction does not apply if: (1) the amount
of elective deferrals required to be invested in employer securities does not exceed more than
one percent of any employee’s compensation; (2) the fair market value of all individual account
plans maintained by the employer is no more than 10 percent of the fair market value of all
retirement plans of the employer; or (3) the plan is an ESOP. In addition, there is no limit on the
amount of elective deferrals that an employee can choose voluntarily to invest in employer
securities.'?*°

The Code requires that ESOP plan participants who are age 55 and have 10 years of plan
participation must be permitted to diversify the investment of the participant’s account (i.e., to
invest the account in assets other than employer securities).'°” The participant must be given a
period each year for six years in which to diversify up to 25 percent (or 50 percent in the last
year) of the participant’s account, reduced by the portion of the account diversified in prior
years. As an alternative to providing diversified investment options in the plan, the plan can
provide that the portion of the participant’s account that is subject to the diversification
requirement is distributed to the participant.

Definition of employer securities

Under ERISA, a qualified retirement plan may hold only a “qualifying employer
security.’”!7% Any stock issued by the employer or an affiliate of the employer is a qualifying
employer security.!7°° In the case of a defined benefit plan (and money purchase pension plans
other than certain pre-ERISA plans), in order for stock to be a qualifying employer security, the
plan cannot hold more than 25 percent of the aggregate amount of the issued and outstanding
stock of the same class, and at least 50 percent of the aggregate amount of that stock must be
held by persons independent of the issuer.!*“°

For purposes of ESOP investments, employer securities (or “qualifying employer
securities”) are defined in the Code to mean only:

(1) publicly traded common stock of the employer or a member of the same
controlled group;

1236 ERISA sec. 407(b)(2).

237 Sec, 401(a)(28).

1238 BRISA sec. 407(a)(1)(A).

1239 ERISA sec. 407(d)(5). Qualifying employer securities also include certain publicly
traded partnership interests and certain marketable obligations (i.e., a bond, debenture, note,

certificate or other evidence of indebtedness). Id.

1240 ERISA sec. 407(f).

419

=== PAGE 448 ===
(2) if there is no such publicly traded common stock, common stock of the employer
(or member of the same controlled group) that has both voting power and
dividend rights at least as great as any other class of common stock; or

(3) noncallable preferred stock that is convertible into common stock described in (1)
or (2) and that meets certain requirements. In some cases, an employer may
design a class of preferred stock that meets these requirements and that is held
only by the ESop.!4!

5. Other rules
Prohibited transaction rules”

Both the Internal Revenue Code and ERISA contain prohibited transaction rules that
prohibit the employer, plan fiduciaries, and other persons with a close relationship to a qualified
retirement plan from engaging in particular transactions with the plan. These rules are not
targeted toward particular types of investments, but rather seek to prevent self-dealing
transactions.

Prohibited transactions include (1) the sale, exchange or leasing of property, (2) the
lending of money or other extension of credit, (3) the furnishing of goods, services or facilities,
(4) the transfer to, or use by or for the benefit of, the income or assets of the plan, (5) in the case
of a fiduciary, any act that deals with the plan’s income or assets for the fiduciary’s own interest
or account, and (6) the receipt by a fiduciary of any consideration for the fiduciary’s own
personal account from any party dealing with the plan in connection with a transaction involving
the income or assets of the plan.

Certain transactions are exempt from prohibited transaction treatment. In addition, the
Department of Labor may grant administrative exemptions in particular circumstances.

If a prohibited transaction occurs, the disqualified person who participates in the
transaction is subject to a two-tier excise tax under the Code. The first level tax is 15 percent of
the amount involved in the transaction. The second level tax is imposed if the prohibited
transaction is not corrected within a certain period and is 100 percent of the amount involved.

Limitations on contributions and benefits

Limits apply to the contributions or benefits provided to a participant under a qualified
retirement plan, based on the type of plan.'*3

1241 Secs, 4975(e)(7) and 409(1). This document uses the term “employer securities” to
refer generally to qualifying employer securities as defined under ERISA and the Code.

1242 See sec. 4975 and ERISA secs. 407 and 408.

420

=== PAGE 449 ===
Under a defined contribution plan, the annual additions to the plan with respect to each
plan participant cannot exceed the lesser of (1) 100 percent of the participant’s compensation or
(2) a dollar amount, indexed for inflation ($40,000 for 2003). Annual additions are the sum of
employer contributions, employee contributions, and forfeitures with respect to an individual
under all defined contribution plans of the same employer.

Under a defined benefit plan, the maximum annual benefit payable to a participant at
retirement cannot exceed the lesser of (1) 100 percent of the participant’s average compensation,
or (2) a dollar amount, indexed for inflation ($160,000 for 2003). The dollar limit is reduced for
benefit commencement before age 62 and increased for benefit commencement after age 65.

Deductions for plan contributions

Employer contributions to qualified retirement plans are deductible subject to certain
limits.!** In general, the deduction limit depends on the kind of plan. Subject to certain
exceptions, nondeductible contributions are subject to a 10-percent excise tax.!245

In the case of a defined contribution plan, the amount of deductible contributions is
generally limited by compensation. In general, the annual limitation on the amount of deductible
contributions to a profit-sharing or stock bonus plan is 25 percent of compensation of the
employees covered by the plan for the year,!46

In the case of a defined benefit plan, the employer generally may deduct the amount
necessary to satisfy the minimum funding cost of the plan for the year. In order to encourage
plan sponsors to fully fund defined benefit plans, the maximum amount otherwise deductible
generally is not less than the plan’s unfunded current liability. In the case of a plan that
terminates during the year, the maximum deductible is generally not less than the amount needed
to make the plan assets sufficient to fund benefit liabilities as defined for purposes of the PBGC
termination insurance program.

If an employer sponsors both a defined benefit plan and a defined contribution plan that
covers some of the same employees, the total deduction for all plans for a plan year generally is
limited to the greater of (1) 25 percent of compensation or (2) the contribution necessary to meet

1243 Sec. 415. EGTRRA increased many of the limits that apply to qualified retirement
plans. These limit increases are generally effective for years beginning after December 31, 2001.
The provisions of EGTRRA generally do not apply for years beginning after December 31, 2010.

1244 Sec. 404. EGTRRA increased many of the limits relating to qualified retirement
plans. These limit increases are generally effective for years beginning after December 31, 2001.
The provisions of EGTRRA generally do not apply for years beginning after December 31, 2010.

1245 Sec, 4972.

1246 Additional amounts may be deductible in the case of an ESOP as described in the
discussion of ESOPs in Part IT.A.2.

421

=== PAGE 450 ===
the minimum funding requirements of the defined benefit plan for the year (or the amount of the
plan’s unfunded current liabilities, in the case of a plan with more than 100 participants).

Taxation of qualified retirement plan contributions and distributions

Employer contributions and employee elective deferrals (and earnings) to a qualified
retirement plan generally are not includible in an employee’s income until distributed.

A distribution of benefits from a qualified retirement plan generally is includible in gross
income in the year it is paid or distributed, except to the extent the amount distributed represents
a return of the employee’s after-tax contributions (i.e., basis). Special rules apply to lump-sum
distributions, distributions rolled over to another employer-sponsored retirement plan or IRA,
and distribution of employer securities. '74”

Early distributions from qualified retirement plans generally are subject to an additional
10-percent early withdrawal tax. That is, includible amounts distributed prior to attainment of
age 59-1/2 are subject to an additional 10-percent tax, unless the distribution is due to death or
disability, is made in the form of certain periodic payments, is made to an employee after
separation from service after attainment of age 55, or is used to pay medical expenses in excess
of 7.5 percent of adjusted gross income.'?**

Distributions from a qualified retirement plan are required to begin no later than the
participant’s required beginning date. The required beginning date is April 1 of the calendar year
following the later of (1) the calendar year in which the employee attains age 70-1/2, or (2) the
calendar year in which the employee retires. In the case of an employee who is a five-percent
owner, the required beginning date is April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year the
employee attains age 70-1/2. Distributions after the participant’s death also must meet certain
minimum distribution requirements. '*“°

The sanction for failure to make a minimum required distribution to an employee (or
other payee) under a qualified retirement plan is a 50-percent nondeductible excise tax on the
excess in any taxable year of the amount required to have been distributed under the minimum
distribution rules, over the amount that actually was distributed. The tax is imposed on the
individual required to take the distribution. However, in order to satisfy the qualification
requirements, a plan must expressly provide that, in all events, distributions under the plan are to
satisfy the minimum distribution requirements. !”° °

M47 Sec, 402.
1248 Sec. 72(t). Certain other exceptions to the tax may also apply.
1249 Sec. 401(a)(9).

1250 Sec. 4974.

422

=== PAGE 451 ===
Qualified retirement plan reporting and disclosure requirements

A qualified retirement plan is subject to annual reporting and disclosure requirements
under both the Internal Revenue Code and ERISA.

The plan administrator of a qualified retirement plan generally must submit an annual
report of certain information with respect to the qualification, financial condition, and operation
of the plan to the Department of Labor.'?5! The plan administrator must also to file an annual
registration statement with the IRS with respect to certain participants who separate from service
during the year, |? The plan administrator must also furnish an individual statement to each

participant who separates from service and is listed in the annual registration statement described
253
above.

The plan administrator must automatically provide participants with a summary of the
annual report.!2°4 A plan administrator is also required to furnish participants with a summary
plan description that includes certain information, including administrative information about the
plan, the plan’s requirements as to eligibility for participation and benefits, the plan’s vesting
provisions, and the procedures for claiming benefits under the plan.!? The plan administrator
must also furnish participants with a summary of any material modification in the terms of the
plan and any change in the information required in the summary plan description within 210
days after the end of the plan year in which the modification or change occurs.!?° Under
ERISA, a plan administrator must also furnish a benefit statement to any participant or
beneficiary who makes a written request for such a statement.'25’ This requirement applies in the

case of any plan that is subject to ERISA, including defined contribution and defined benefit
plans.

1251 ERISA secs. 103 and 104. Defined benefit plans must also provide certain reports or
notices if the plan is underfunded (ERISA secs. 4010 and 4011), if a plan amendment
significantly reduces the rate of future benefit accrual (sec. 4980F and ERISA sec. 204(h)), or if
plan assets are transferred to health benefit accounts pursuant to sec. 420 (sec. 101(e) of ERISA).

252 Sec, 6057.
1253 BRISA secs. 101(a)(2) and 105(c).
1254 BRISA secs. 101(a) and 104(b)(3).

255 BRISA secs. 101(a), 103, and 104(3). The summary plan description must also be
furnished to the Department of Labor on request. ERISA sec. 104(a)(6).

1256 ERISA secs. 102 and 104(b).

1257 ERISA sec. 105.

423

=== PAGE 452 ===
IRS compliance

The IRS has three programs to ensure that plans comply with the numerous requirements
under the Code for a retirement plan to receive the tax benefits of qualified plan status: (1) the
determination letter program; (2) the examination program; and (3) the Employee Plans
Compliance Resolution System (“EPCRS”).

The IRS permits plan sponsors to voluntarily submit plans for review to ensure that plans
comply with tax law requirements for retirement plans. The IRS reviews the plan design
reflected in the plan documents and certain operational requirements. The determination letter
program involves the issuance of determination letters to requesting plan sponsors, which are a
statement of the IRS’ determination that a plan meets the qualification requirements of the Code.

The examination program involves the IRS’ examination of plans to determine whether
the qualification requirements are met in operation. The qualified plan examination program
reviews issues of plan design as well as those arising in plan operation. For example, a plan that,
by its terms, provides for contributions in a manner satisfying tax law requirements may in
operation result in contribution levels that impermissibly favor highly compensated employees.

Additionally, the IRS has established EPCRS, which is a comprehensive system of
correction programs for sponsors of retirement plans and annuities that are intended, but have
failed, to satisfy the requirements of section 401(a), section 403(a), or section 403(b), as
applicable. '”° 8 EPCRS permits employers to correct compliance failures and continue to provide
their employees with retirement benefits on a tax-favored basis.

The basic elements of the programs that comprise EPCRS are self-correction, voluntary
correction with IRS approval, and correction on audit. The Self-Correction Program generally
permits a plan sponsor that has established compliance practices to correct certain insignificant
failures at any time (including during an audit), and certain significant failures within a 2-year
period, without payment of any fee or sanction. The Voluntary Correction Program permits an
employer, at any time before an audit, to pay a limited fee and receive IRS approval of a
correction. For a failure that is discovered on audit and corrected, the Audit Closing Agreement
Program provides for a sanction that bears a reasonable relationship to the nature, extent, and
severity of the failure and that takes into account the extent to which correction occurred before
audit.

1258 Rey. Proc. 2002-47, 2002-29 LR.B. 1.

424

=== PAGE 453 ===
B. Overview of Enron’s Qualified Retirement Plans

This part provides an overview of qualified retirement plans maintained by Enron during
the period covered by the Joint Committee review: the Enron Corp. Retirement Plan (“Enron
Retirement Plan”), which was modified and is now the Enron Corp. Cash Balance Plan (“Enron
Cash Balance Plan”); the Enron Corp. ESOP (“Enron ESOP”); and the Enron Corp. Savings Plan
(“Enron Savings Plan”).!2 The plans collectively are referred to as the Enron qualified plans.
The Enron Retirement Plan and the Enron Cash Balance Plan are referred to collectively as the
Enron Retirement Plan/Cash Balance Plan. Additionally, this part describes matters common to
all of Enron’s qualified retirement plans, plan administration, and pending legal matters
involving the plans.

1. In general

Over time, the Enron Qualified Plans have been amended and restated to comply with
legal requirements and, in some instances, to implement design changes. Because of changes in
plan design, Enron employees may have earned benefits under more than one retirement formula
within the same plan. Additionally, Enron employees may earn benefits under more than one
plan.

The Enron Retirement Plan, a defined benefit plan was initially established effective July
1, 1986, as an amendment and restatement of the InterNorth, Inc. Retirement Income Plan II. At
the same time, the Houston Natural Gas Corporation Retirement Plan, maintained by the
Houston Natural Gas Corporation, an Enron subsidiary (“HNG”), was merged into the Enron
Retirement Plan. The Enron Retirement Plan was amended and restated and renamed the Enron
Corp. Cash Balance Plan effective January 1, 1996.

Enron established the Enron ESOP effective November 1, 1986,!26° During 1986, Enron
loaned the Enron ESOP $335 million to purchase shares of Enron Corp. common stock that had
previously been held as treasury stock. As a result of this purchase, the Enron ESOP held
approximately 19 percent of Enron’s outstanding common stock. During 1987, $230 million of
the principal amount of the loan was repaid with proceeds received from the terminating
InterNorth, Inc. Pension Plan 1° The final payment on the Enron ESOP loan was made in
March 1993.

1259 Other qualified retirement plans were maintained by other members of Enron’s
controlled group. For example, PGE maintained a separate defined benefit plan. This report
focuses on the retirement plans or Enron Corp. which were the largest plans within the Enron
controlled group, and generally available to employees of Enron Corp. and related entities.

1260 Materials reviewed by the Joint Committee staff indicate that Enron also sponsored a
“tax-credit ESOP” which was effective in 1975 and terminated in 1988. Joint Committee staff
did not review this plan.

261 Notes to Financial Statements, 1990 Form 5500 for the Enron Savings Plan, at 5.

Descriptions of the mechanics of the repayment vary. Other sources explain that a block of
Enron stock was purchased by the Enron ESOP in February 1987 with $230 million received by

425

=== PAGE 454 ===
Enron established a floor-offset arrangement, involving the Enron Retirement Plan and
the Enron ESOP effective January 1987. The Enron Retirement Plan was amended effective
January 1, 1995, to eliminate the offset arrangement between the Enron Retirement Plan and the
Enron ESOP for benefits accruing after 1994 and to freeze the amount of the offset over the
period 1996 to 2000. The amendment of the floor-offset arrangement is discussed in detail in
Part II.C.1., below.

The Enron Savings Plan began as a plan originally effective June 1, 1956.'2 The Enron
Savings Plan is a defined contribution plan which includes a qualified cash or deferred
arrangement (i.c., it is a so-called “section 401(k)” plan). Participants may make elective
deferrals and after-tax contributions to the Enron Savings Plan, and have a range of investment
choices available for their contributions. In addition, Enron made matching contributions based
on employee elective deferrals. The matching contributions were invested in Enron stock
pursuant to the plan terms; participants could elect to invest the matching contributions in
another investment only after attaining age 50. The Enron ESOP was amended and merged into
the Enron Savings Plan effective August 30, 2002, with the result that the provisions of the
Enron Savings Plan generally replace the provisions of the Enron ESOP in their entirety.!?°

2. Recent and pending legal matters involving the Enron qualified plans

IRS audit!’?™

The IRS has performed only one audit with respect to the Enron qualified plans.'?5° In
1998, the Tax Exempt and Government Entities Division of the IRS (“TE/GE”) audited the plans
with respect to 1995 and 1996. IRS personnel informed the Joint Committee staff that the audit
came about due to a request made by the Large and Mid-Size Business division of the IRS
(“LMSB”), which was conducting an audit of Enron tax’s return. LMSB did not identify any
issues for audit, but asked TE/GE if they could perform what the IRS refers to as a “support
audit.” TE/GE personnel said that they determined they had the time and the resources and
agreed to perform the audit.

Enron as the reversion. See Enron’s July 21, 1994, request for an advisory opinion from the
Department of Labor.

1262 Forms 5500 for the Enron Savings Plan.
1263 «Merger of Enron Corp. Employee Stock Ownership Plan with and into Enron Corp.
Savings Plan,” EC 000899959-000899961. Pursuant to the merger, the assets held under the
ESOP were transferred to the Enron Savings Plan to be held under the trust maintained
thereunder.

1264 This information was obtained primarily through interviews conducted by the Joint
Committee staff of IRS personnel.

1265 The IRS noted that Enron has qualified plans other than the Enron Savings Plan,

Enron ESOP, and Enron Retirement Plan/Cash Balance Plan. In conducting the audit, they
focused on these three plans because they are the largest.

426

=== PAGE 455 ===
IRS personnel said the audit was a long, labor intensive process. Among other things, the
IRS reviewed Forms 5500 for the Enron qualified plans and checked Enron’s deductions for
qualified plan contributions. They had a computer audit specialist make an examination to
determine if the Enron qualified plans were qualified in form, but spent the bulk of the time
looking at plan operations.

PBGC actions

In connection with Enron’s filing for Leth Sa ee) protection on December 2, 2001, the
PBGC filed claims against Enron in October 2002.'*°° The PBGC’s claim for unfunded benefit
liabilities of the Enron Cash Balance Plan was approximately $270 million. The PBGC’s
estimate of the underfunding may increase if the IRS rules adversely on the amendment to phase
out the floor-offset arrangement!” and the benefits attributable to offset amounts become
liabilities of the Enron Cash Balance Plan.'7©

Department of Labor actions

Following Enron’s filing of voluntary petitions for Chapter 11 bankruptcy organization
protection on December 2, 2001, the Department of Labor and Enron agreed in February 2002 to
replace the Administrative Committee with an independent fiduciary to administer the Enron
Qualified Plans. On March 14, 2002, the Department of Labor announced that a team of experts
from State Street Bank and Trust had been selected to act in that capacity.”

1266 See, e. g., Statement of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation in Support of Its
Claim for Unfunded Benefit Liabilities of the Enron Corp. Cash Balance Plan, at { 8, filed in In

re Enron Corp., et al, Case No. 01-16034, U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Southern District of New
York.

1267 This issue is discussed in detail in Part II.C.1., below.

1268 The PBGC estimates that could increase by as much as 100 percent or more. if the
phasing out of Enron’s floor-offset arrangement (Part II.C.1, below) is determined by the IRS to
fail the qualification requirements and the benefits attributable to offset amounts again become
liabilities of the Enron Cash Balance Plan. Statement of the Pension Benefit Guaranty
Corporation in Support of Its Claim for Unfunded Benefit Liabilities of the Enron Corp. Cash
Balance Plan, at paragraph 8, filed in In re Enron Corp., et al, Case No. 01-16034, U.S.
Bankruptcy Court, Southern District of New York.

1269 First Amendment to Enron Corp. Cash Balance Plan, EC01747538-EC01747541.
See Department of Labor news release, Department Of Labor Announces Enron Independent
Fiduciary State Street To Replace Enron’s Retirement Administrative Committee,
www.dol.gov/opa/media/press/opa/OPA2002145.

427

=== PAGE 456 ===
The Department of Labor is investigating Enron’s qualified retirement plans.'?”° The
investigation is ongoing and comprehensive. The Department of Labor has been deposing
“scores of witness and review[ing] literally millions of documents.”!77!

Private lawsuits

Additionally, several lawsuits involving the Enron qualified plans have been filed. The
lead case involving the plans is Tittle v. Enron Corp., pending in U.S. District Court in the
Southern District of Texas.!” Tittle was filed on behalf of an estimated 24,000 current and
former participants in the Enron Savings Plan, the Enron ESOP, and the Enron Cash Balance
Plan. A consolidated and amended complaint in the case was filed April 8, 2002.!"3 The case
was brought by Enron workers who allege that their retirement accounts lost millions of dollars
when Enron collapsed.'?” They allege that the defendants were fiduciaries of the Enron
retirement plans and that, rather than act prudently and solely in the interests of the Enron
retirement plans and their participants and beneficiaries, the fiduciaries did nothing to protect the
participants and beneficiaries from suffering huge losses even though the defendants knew or
should have known that the plans were paying too much for Enron stock and that financial
misstatements threatened the integrity of the retirement benefits.

The complaint seeks to recover losses incurred by participants or beneficiaries of the
Enron Savings Plan, the Enron ESOP and the Enron Cash Balance Plan who were affected by a
variety of alleged misconduct by the various defendants relating to the Enron stock in the Enron
Plans. The complaint is framed to recover on behalf of the Enron Qualified Plans as a whole

1270 Speech by Assistant Secretary of Labor Ann L. Combs to the Annual Conference of
the Society of American Business Editors and Writers (delivered Nov. 4, 2002),
www.dol.gov/pwba.

1 1g
27 The plaintiffs in Tittle seek class action status.

1273 The following cases were consolidated by orders of the U.S. District Court for the
Southern District of Texas, dated December 12, 2001, and January 18, 2002: Tittle v. Enron
Corp., No. H-01-3913; Rinard v. Enron Corp., No. H-01-4060; Harney v. Enron Corp., No. H-
01-4063; Kemper v. Enron Corp., No. H-01-4089; Clark v. Enron Corp., No. H-01-4125;
Ricketts v. Enron Corp., No. H-01-4128; Pottratz v. Enron Corp., No. H-01-4150; Stevens v.
Enron Corp., No. H-01-4208; Prestwood v. Gathman, No. H-01-4209; Walt v. Lay, No. H-01-
4299; Moore v. Enron Corp., No. H-01-4236.

1274 The plaintiffs in Tittle are Pamela M. Tittle, Thomas O. Padgett, Gary S. Dreadin,
Janice Farmer, Linda Bryan, John L. Moore, Betty J. Clark, Shelly Farias, Patrick Campbell,
Fanette Perry, Charles Prestwood, Roy Rinard, Steve Lacey, Catherine Stevens, Roger W.
Boyce, Wayne M. Stevens, Norman L. and Paula H. Young, Michael L. McCown, Dan Shultz,
on behalf of themselves and a class of persons similarly situated, and on behalf of the Enron
Corp. Enron Savings Plan, the Enron Corp. Employee Stock Ownership Plan and the Enron
Corp. Cash Balance Plan.

428

=== PAGE 457 ===
whether or not a class or classes are certified. The complaint covers alleged misconduct during
January 20, 1998, through December 2, 2001.

Among the defendants named in Tittle, in addition to Enron itself, are certain current and
former Enron directors and officers and the members of the Administrative Committee for the
Plans, who were all Enron employees appointed by Enron.” Defendants in the case moved to
dismiss the action on May 8, 2002, generally arguing that there is no set of facts that the
plaintiffs have alleged that would make them liable for the losses suffered by the Enron plans
and the retirement accounts of these workers.

The Department of Labor filed a brief as amicus curiae opposing the defendants’ motion
to dismiss. According to the brief, based on the allegations in the complaint, ERISA required the
fiduciaries to take action to protect the interests of the Enron plans, their participants and
beneficiaries, and ERISA provides remedies for the failure to have done so. The Department of
Labor argues that the allegations of the complaint are sufficient to withstand motions to dismiss
and that the plaintiffs should be allowed to conduct discovery to prove the allegations.

In its brief, the Department of Labor makes a number of points. First, it argues that the
fiduciaries responsible for monitoring the Administrative Committee that directly manages the
Enron Savings Plan (the “appointing fiduciaries”) have a duty under ERISA to ensure that the
Committee is properly performing its duties, and that it has the tools and the information
necessary to do its job. Initially, the Department of Labor concludes that because the appointing
fiduciaries had the power to appoint, retain, and remove the members of the Administrative
Committee, the Appointing Fiduciaries have discretionary authority over the management and
administration of the plan and are thus plan fiduciaries under ERISA.

1275 The parties named as defendants in Tittle are: Enron Corp., Enron Corp. Savings
Plan Administrative Committee, Enron Employee Stock Ownership Plan Administrative
Committee, Cindy K. Olson, Mikie Rath, James S. Prentice, Mary K. Joyce, Sheila Knudsen,
Rod Hayslett, Paula Rieker, William D. Gathmann, Tod A. Lindholm, Philip J. Bazelides, James
G. Barnhart, Keith Crane, William J. Gulyassy, David Shields, John Does Nos. 1-100 Unknown
Fiduciaries of the Enron Corp. Savings Plan or the ESOP, the Northern Trust Company, Kenneth
L. Lay, Jeffrey K. Skilling, Andrew S. Fastow, Michael Kopper, Richard A. Causey, James V.
Derrick, Jr., The Estate of J. Clifford Baxter, Mark A. Frevert, Stanley C. Horton, Kenneth D.
Rice, Richard B. Buy, Lou L. Pai, Robert A. Belfer, Norman P. Blake, Jr., Ronnie C. Chan, John
H. Duncan, Wendy L. Gramm, Robert K. Jaedicke, Charles A. Lemaistre, Joe H. Foy, Joseph M.
Hirko, Ken L. Harrison, Mark E. Koenig, Steven J. Kean, Rebecca P. Mark-Jusbasche, Michael
S. McConnell, Jeffrey McMahon, J. Mark Metts, Joseph W. Sutton, Arthur Andersen & Co.
Worldwide Societe Cooperative, Arthur Andersen, LLP, UK Arthur Andersen, David B.
Duncan, Thomas H. Bauer, Debra A. Cash, Roger D. Willard, D. Stephen Goddard, Jr., Michael
M. Lowther, Gary B. Goolsby, Michael C. Odom, Michael D. Jones, William Swanson, John
Stewart, Nancy A. Temple, Don Dreyfus, James Friedlieb, Joseph F. Berardino, Does 2 Through
1800 Unknown Partners in Andersen LLP, Merrill Lynch & Co., Inc., J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.,
Credit Suisse First Boston Corporation, Citigroup, Inc., Salomon Smith Barney Inc., Vinson &
Elkins, LLP, Ronald T. Astin, Joseph Dilg, Michael Finch, and Max Hendrick III.

429

=== PAGE 458 ===
The Department of Labor also argues that fiduciaries may not deceive plan participants or
allow others to do so. Rather, fiduciaries are obligated to take appropriate actions to carry out
their responsibilities. This may include investigating allegations of fraud, disclosing facts to
participants, other fiduciaries, or the public, and stopping further investment in company stock,
as required by a standard of prudence.

Additionally, the Department of Labor asserts, fiduciaries have an obligation to ensure
that investments in employer securities in a defined contribution plan are prudent,
notwithstanding plan provisions that favor such investments. Further, the Department of Labor
states that even if fiduciaries have “insider information” about the value of employer securities,
Federal securities law does not prevent the fiduciaries from taking some action to protect the
Enron qualified plans, such as public disclosure or temporarily suspending further purchase of
employer securities. Finally, the Department of Labor argues that directed trustees cannot follow
directions that they know or should know are imprudent or violate ERISA.

Defendants’ motion to dismiss Tittle is pending.
3. Administration of the Enron qualified retirement plans

In general

The Administrative Committee

The Enron Cash Balance Plan, the Enron Savings Plan, and the Enron ESOP generally
vest responsibility for plan administration in an administrative committee consisting of one or
more individuals appointed by Enron.'?” Each Plan provides for a separate administrative
committee for that Plan. In practice, however, the same individuals (typically senior Enron
officials appointed by the Chairman of the Board of Enron), served on all three Committees and
issues with respect to all three Plans were addressed in a single Committee meeting. This
document uses the term “Administrative Committee” to refer to the all three committees
provided for under the Enron qualified plans. The members of the Administrative Committee
are fiduciaries under ERISA.

The duties of each Plan Administrative Committee are specified in detail in each Plan
document. Many of these duties are similar for all three Plans. There are, however,
responsibilities which are specific to each Plan. An overview of the Administrative Committee’s
duties and activities is provided here; a detailed discussion follows.

According to interviews with former Administrative Committee members, there was no
formal process for the selection of Administrative Committee members; suggestions for new
members were typically made by the Enron Benefits Department to the Office of the Chairman.
The Chairman would then make an appointment.

1276 Under the Enron ESOP, the Administrative Committee is also the “named fiduciary”
with respect to general administration of the Enron ESOP. Under the Enron Cash Balance Plan
and the Enron Savings Plan, however, Enron is the “named fiduciary” with respect to general
administration.

430

=== PAGE 459 ===
The Joint Committee staff interviewed former members of the Administrative
Committee, including two former chairmen, and reviewed minutes of Administrative Committee
meetings. The view presented of the activities of the Administrative Committee is similar. The
interviews confirm that the members of the Administrative Committee viewed their role as
relatively narrow. In practice, the main activities of the Administrative Committee were: (1)
review of the investment performance under the Enron Cash Balance Plan; (2) review of the
performance of the various investment options under the Enron Savings Plan (other than Enron
stock)!?”’; and (3) participant appeals with respect to all three plans. These appeals generally
related to the denial or calculation of benefits. One former member of the Administrative
Committee said that the two main issues addressed during his five-year tenure on the
Administrative Committee involved a change in a family of investment funds offered under the
Enron Savings Plan and the merging of a PGE plan and the Enron Savings Plan.

The Administrative Committee generally did not evaluate Enron stock as an appropriate
investment under either the Enron ESOP or the Enron Savings Plan. As described by one
Administrative Committee member, the Enron ESOP plan terms provided for investment of plan
assets in Enron stock, so there was no need to review that investment. The Administrative
Committee questioned for the first time whether it should be examining Enron stock as an
investment under the Enron qualified plans on November 1, 2001.'?”8

Administrative Committee meetings were generally attended by a member of the Enron
Benefits Department and the Enron Treasury Department (who focused on investment matters,
particularly with respect to the Enron Cash Balance Plan). Others also attended on an as.needed
basis, including in-house counsel, Enron counsel, and the Administrative Committee’s counsel.
The Committee received advice on numerous occasions from outside Enron ERISA counsel.
The role of these parties may not always have been clear to Committee members; one former
member indicated he was not sure whether the Enron ERISA counsel lawyer represented the
Committee or Enron.

The Administrative Committee was briefed on occasion regarding their duties by Enron’s
ERISA counsel. In once such briefing, the Committee members were counseled to think of their
fiduciary role as a “parable of hats.” They were advised that each member has four hats, an
Enron hat, an Enron Cash Balance Plan hat, an Enron Savings Plan hat, and an Enron ESOP hat;
the member could wear only one hat at a time. Interviews with Administrative Committee
members indicated that they generally understood that they were plan fiduciaries and that they
were to act in the best interests of plan participants. It is not clear whether the members
understood the special nature of ERISA fiduciary duties; one member told the Joint Committee
staff that he missed a briefing on ERISA fiduciary duties, but that he had experience in fiduciary
matters and therefore understood his obligations.

277 Tn reviewing investment performance under the Enron Cash Balance Plan and the
Enron Savings Plan, the Administrative Committee relied on the advice of third parties, as well
as in-house personnel.

1278 Minutes of the Meeting of the Administrative Committee (Nov. 1, 2001).
EC000001847.

431

=== PAGE 460 ===
The Enron qualified plans provide that Enron will indemnify Administrative Committee
members against expenses and liabilities arising out of their administrative functions or fiduciary
duties (other than expenses and liabilities arising out of gross negligence or willful misconduct).

There was no set schedule for Administrative Committee meetings, although there
appeared to be a general intent to meet at least quarterly. There may be some lapse in the
recordkeeping with respect to such meetings; Enron informed the Joint Committee staff that the
Administrative Committee did not meet during the one-year period from October 19, 1998, to
October 26, 1999. However, documents provided by Enron and interviews with former
Administrative Committee members indicate that during this period the Administrative
Committee was actively involved in issues relating to the merging of the Enron and PGE Plans.

The Administrative Committee started having weekly, then daily meetings near the end
of 2001 as the stock price of Enron was falling rapidly. These frequent meetings focused at first
on the change of recordkeepers and the blackout under the Enron Savings Plan, and later on the
questions involving Enron stock as a suitable investment and pending law suits.

As described above, on March 14, 2002, the Department of Labor announced that a team
of experts from State Street Bank and Trust had been selected to administer the Enron qualified
1279
plans.

Role of Enron

The day-to-day operations of the Enron qualified plans were generally performed by the
Enron Benefits Department.'”8° According to interviews with current and former Enron
personnel, the Benefits Department processed distributions, prepared retirement packages,
provided customer service, and answered telephone calls. The Benefits Department was
generally responsible for employee communications with respect to Enron’s retirement plans.
Additionally, Benefits Department employees interviewed by Joint Committee staff reported
varying levels of discretion and involvement in amendments to the plans. The Administrative
Committee generally did not oversee the activities of the Enron Benefits Department.

1279 First Amendment to Enron Corp. Cash Balance Plan (Jan. 1, 2001, restatement),
EC01747538-EC01747541. According to the Department of Labor announcement of the
selection of State Street Bank and Trust, State Street is responsible for, among other things, the
investment of Enron qualified plan assets, the selection and monitoring of investment managers,
the investment of Enron qualified plan assets in employer securities, representation of the
interests of the Enron qualified plans in litigation. This includes representation of the plans’
interests in the Enron bankruptcy and the selection and monitoring of funds and investment
options offered under the Enron Savings Plan. Department of Labor news release, Department
Of Labor Announces Enron Independent Fiduciary State Street To Replace Enron’s Retirement
Administrative Committee, www.dol.gov/opa/media/press/opa/OPA2002 145.

1280 Third-parties, such as recordkeepers, also had responsibilities with respect to some
plan activities. The appointment of State Street Bank and Trust to administer the Enron qualified
plans does not appear to affect these responsibilities.

432

=== PAGE 461 ===
Enron, not the Administrative Committee was responsible for plan design and plan
amendments. The Administrative Committee would receive briefings regarding proposed Plan
changes, but typically was not involved in the decision-making process.

Role of the Compensation Committee

The Compensation Committee of the Board also had a role with respect to Enron Plans.
The Committee approved Plan amendments; in some cases this approval was final, in other cases
amendments were approved for action by the full Board of Directors. The extent to which the
members of the Compensation Committee understood their role with respect to the Enron
qualified plans is unclear; one former member of the Compensation Committee interviewed by
the Joint Committee staff indicated he did not remember having any responsibilities with respect
to such plans.

Membership of the Administrative Committee

During the period reviewed by Joint Committee staff, there appears to have been no
formal, written process for the selection of members to the Administrative Committee. Rather,
’ membership on the Administrative Committee was generally subject to the discretion of the
Chairman of Enron. Individuals in Enron’s Benefits Department would typically recommend
individuals for Committee membership to the Chairman’s office. If the Chairman agreed with
the recommendation of the Benefits Department, he would send a letter to the individuals
requesting that they volunteer for the Administrative Committee. A former chair of the
Administrative Committee indicated to the Joint Committee staff that, in looking for
Administrative Committee members, the general approach was to look for someone at the officer
level who would be interested in serving on the Administrative Committee and who would be
qualified either by background or interest. He also indicated that changes to the Administrative
Committee were not made very often, so the issue did not arise very much. Another former chair
of the Administrative Committee stated that he believed people within Enron viewed serving on
the Administrative Committee as an honor.

The Enron qualified plans provide that Administrative Committee members served until
they resigned, died, or were removed by Enron. The Enron qualified plans provide that
Administrative Committee members are not compensated for their Administrative Committee
service. ;

There was no established number of persons on the Administrative Committee. Former
Administrative Committee members told the Joint Committee staff that typically, there were four
to eight individuals on the Administrative Committee at various points in time.

Meetings of the Administrative Committee
The Administrative Committee did not have a regular meeting schedule. Meetings of the

Administrative Committee were generally held at the discretion of the Administrative Committee
chair.

433

=== PAGE 462 ===
During the period of the Joint Committee staff review, the frequency of Administrative
Committee meetings varied. Minutes of Administrative Committee meetings'**! as well as
interviews with former Administrative Committee members demonstrate a general intent to meet
quarterly. However, this did not always happen, and attendance was sometimes an issue.!2°2

A major gap in meetings appears to have occurred for slightly more than one year, from
the October 19, 1998, meeting until the October 26, 1999, meeting. Enron informed the Joint
Committee staff that the Committee did not meet during this period. However, documents
provided by Enron, as well as interviews with former Administrative Committee members
indicate that the Administrative Committee conducted business during this time. These sources
indicate that the Enron and PGE plans were being merged, and that the Administrative
Committee was involved in this merger. One member of the Administrative Committee at this
time said the merger of these plans was one of the two major issues addressed during his tenure
on the Administrative Committee. There are briefing materials prepared for the Administrative
Committee regarding the merger dated November 1998. There are no other indications of what
the Administrative Committee did during this time period. It may be that there is a gap in
recordkeeping for this period.

In 2001, the Administrative Committee met quarterly until October/November, when
they started meeting as frequently as weekly. In late 2001, the Administrative Committee met on
a daily basis. The reason for more frequent meetings was, at first, primarily to address the issue
of the change in recordkeepers and blackout period under the Enron Savings Plan.!?8 Later, thé
meetings addresses issued related to Enron’s financial problems, including the possibility of
obtaining an investment advisor to assess the suitability of Enron stock as an investment and
pending lawsuits.

In addition to Administrative Committee members, meetings were attended by others.
An Enron benefits department representative and an Enron Treasury Department representative
would usually attend. The Enron Treasury Department representative generally addressed issues
relating to investments under the Enron Cash Balance Plan. Others also attended on an as-
needed basis, including legal counsel for Enron (in-house as well as outside counsel) and legal
counsel for the Administrative Committee. The sources of legal advice for the Administrative
Committee are discussed further, below.

Plan provisions regarding the Administrative Committee

Under the Enron qualified plans, the Administrative Committee is to “supervise the
administration and enforcement of the Plan[s] according to the terms and provisions [t]hereof
and shall have all powers necessary to accomplish these purposes.” Under all of the Plans, the
Administrative Committee’s powers include, but not by way of limitation, the right, power,
authority, and duty:

1281 Minutes of the Administrative Committee Meeting (Sept. 26, 2000).

1282 Id.

1283 This issue is discussed in detail in Part II.C.4., below.

434

=== PAGE 463 ===
power:

e to make rules, regulations, and bylaws for the administration of the Plan that are not
inconsistent with the terms and provisions of the Plan, provided such rules,
regulations, and bylaws are evidenced in writing, and to enforce the terms of the Plan
and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder by the Administrative
Committee;

e toconstrue in its discretion all terms, provisions, conditions, and limitations of the
Plan, and, in all cases, the construction necessary for the Plan to qualify under the
applicable provisions of the Code shall control;

e tocorrect any defect or to supply any omission or to reconcile any inconsistency that
may appear in the Plan in such manner and to such extent as the Administrative
Committee deems expedient in its discretion to effectuate the purposes of the Plan;

e toemploy and compensate such accountants, attorneys, investment advisors, and
other agents, employees, and independent contractors that the Administrative
Committee may deem necessary or advisable for the proper and efficient
administration of the Plan;

e to determine in its discretion all questions relating to eligibility;

e to make a determination in its discretion as to the right of any person to a benefit
under the Plan and to prescribe procedures to be followed by distributees in obtaining
benefits;

e to prepare, file, and distribute, in such manner as the Administrative Committee
determines to be appropriate, such information and material as is required by the
reporting and disclosure requirements of ERISA;

With respect to the Enron Savings Plan only, the Administrative Committee also has the

e to require and obtain from Enron and the Plan and their beneficiaries any information
or data that the Administrative Committee determines is necessary for the proper
administration of the Plan;

e to instruct the trustee as to the loans to participants;

e to direct the Trustee as to the investment of the trust fund in Enron stock or Enron Oil
& Gas stock as the Administrative Committee may deem to be appropriate and in
accordance with the provisions of the Enron Savings Plan;

e to appoint investment managers; and
to direct the trustee as to the exercise of rights or privileges to acquire, convert, or
exchange Enron stock or Enron Oil & Gas stock.

With respect to the Enron ESOP only, the Administrative Committee has the power:

e to make a determination as to the right of any person to a benefit under the Enron
ESOP;

e to receive and review reports from the Plan trustee as to the financial condition of the
trust fund established under the Plan, including its receipts and disbursements;

e to instruct the trustee in the voting of Enron stock, provided, that the Administrative
Committee shall follow the directions of the members to the extent required by the
Plan and further provided that the Administrative Committee may in its discretion

435

=== PAGE 464 ===
appoint a voting fiduciary to receive voting directions from the participants and direct
the trustee with respect thereto;
to select an appraiser to value Enron stock held by the Plan;

e to direct the trustee as to the purchase and sale of Enron stock, including, but not
limited to, tender or exchange decisions in accordance with Members’
decisions...and decisions as to the purchase of Company Stock pursuant to the option
granted to the trustee...and to cause the trustee to enter into an Exempt Loan and to
purchase Enron stock for the Trust Fund with the proceeds of such Exempt loan;

e to instruct the trustee as to the loans to participants; and

e to instruct the trustee as to the management, investment and reinvestment of the trust
fund generally.

With respect to the Enron Cash Balance Plan only, the Administrative Committee has the
power:

e to issue directions to the trustee concerning all benefits that are to be paid from the
trust fund according to the plan; and

e to receive and review reports from the trustee as to the financial condition of the trust
fund, including its receipts and disbursements.

No supplemental written guidelines specifying the Administrative Committee’s
responsibilities were provided to Administrative Committee members.

Review of the minutes of Administrative Committee meetings and interviews with
former Administrative Committee members provide a picture of the specific issues addressed by
the Administrative Committee with respect to each Plan in practice. The Administrative
Committee would oversee and review the performance of investments of Enron Retirement
Plan/Cash Balance Plan assets made by the professional investment managers. One former
Administrative Committee member described this process as follows: typically, the
Administrative Committee reviewed investment performance of plan assets for the previous
quarter. However, the Administrative Committee would normally not act based on a single
quarter’s performance. Rather, it tended to take a long-term view. If an investment manager
was not performing in at least the fiftieth percentile for their family of managers, the
Administrative Committee would instruct the Enron Finance or Treasury Department to analyze
the performance. If the investment manager was consistently underperforming, the
Administrative Committee was authorized to change investment managers. Experts would
appear before the Administrative Committee and recommend investments.

The Administrative Committee would also oversee the investment options under the
Enron Savings Plan. The Administrative Committee would review the investments and consider
whether they were adequate and whether the participants had adequate choices. The
Administrative Committee would also periodically change investment options available to Enron
Savings Plan participants.

The Administrative Committee also handled participant appeals with respect to benefit

determinations and other issues under all three Plans. Pursuant to Plan terms, the Enron ESOP
was invested primarily in Enron stock. As a result, the Administrative Committee generally did

436

=== PAGE 465 ===
not review Enron ESOP Plan investments. The primary activity of the Administrative
Committee with respect to the Enron ESOP was participant appeals.

Sources of legal advice for the Administrative Committee

Legal counsel was available to the Administrative Committee from Enron’s in-house
lawyers and also from legal advisors outside Enron. The Administrative Committee had counsel
that represented the Committee. In addition, the Committee received advice from outside counsel
for Enron. This individual was referred to by former Administrative Committee members and
Enron employees as the “ERISA counsel.” Here, he is referred to as Enron’s ERISA counsel.
While the Enron ERISA counsel represented Enron, not the Committee, he provided advice to
the Committee, as well as Enron benefits personnel, regarding a variety of matters. For example,

as discussed below, the Enron ERISA counsel briefed the members of the Committee regarding
their fiduciary duties.

Some Committee members may not have fully understood the precise relationship
between the various legal counsel and the Committee. For example, one former Committee
member indicated he was not sure whether the Enron ERISA counsel represented the Committee
or Enron, but that he was consulted periodically by the Committee.

Overview of briefings provided to Administrative Committee members regarding their
duties

Members of the Administrative Committee received periodic briefings regarding their
obligations under ERISA. During the period 1996 through 2001 '?84 the Administrative
Committee received two briefings regarding their duties and fiduciary responsibilities. These
briefings occurred at the Administrative Committee meetings of December 6, 1996, and
March 9, 2000. In addition, as described below, selected issues with respect to the
Administrative Committee’ s duties were addressed at other meetings. '”8

In the meeting on December 5, 1996, the Administrative Committee was advised in a
presentation by Enron’s ERISA counsel that each Plan sponsored by Enron had a separate
Administrative Committee, and that each Administrative Committee is a fiduciary with respect
to the Plan it administers. The Administrative Committee was also advised that Enron Corp. is a
fiduciary with respect to each Plan, and that the individual committee members are plan
fiduciaries.

The briefing materials provided to the Committee include a summary of the basic ERISA
fiduciary standards, '7% including the exclusive purpose rule, the prudent man rule, the rule

1284 The first year for which the Joint Committee staff reviewed Administrative
Committee minutes was 1996.

1285 The materials describing the duties of the Administrative Committee presented at
these meetings are included in Appendix D to this Report.

1286 ERISA’s fiduciary rules are described in Part II.A.3., above.

437

=== PAGE 466 ===
relating to diversification of investments, and the duty to act in accordance with plan documents
and the “reasonable person” standard. The materials note the existence of the prohibited
transaction rules, as well as rules regarding investment duties. The materials also discuss the
Committee’s responsibilities with respect to appeals by plan participants.

Minutes for the March 9, 2000, Administrative Committee meeting indicate that the
meeting had been called for the purpose of reviewing of the members’ duties and
responsibilities. Enron’s ERISA counsel made a presentation to the members describing the
members and Enron’s respective Administrative, trustee, and fiduciary duties as defined in the
Enron qualified plans. The minutes state that the information was presented as documented.
Unlike the December 1996, briefing, this briefing did not focus on fiduciary issues, but also
addressed issues such as the role of Enron, the specific powers and duties of the Administrative
Committee under the terms of the Plans, and the role of third parties. There were follow-up
items that were to be researched by Enron’s ERISA counsel, including the appointing of a voting
fiduciary, differentiation between “power to” versus “responsibility” and whether the
Administrative Committee has shared or sole responsibility for the administration of the Enron
qualified plans.

Minutes for the meeting of September 26, 2000, state that the Chair stressed the need to
have Administrative Committee meetings quarterly and emphasized the importance of
attendance. The minutes state that the Administrative Committee revisited the responsibilities of
the Administrative Committee and referenced the March 9, 2000, meeting. The representatives
from the Enron Finance and Benefits Departments were charged to list their duties and
responsibilities for supporting the Administrative Committee.

In response to this last item, the September 26, 2000, minutes include the following list of
duties of the Administrative Committee secretary:

Record and hold minute records,

Facilitate addition and removal of Committee members,
Type agenda items as determined by the Committee,
facilitate meeting location and time,

distribute agenda to committee members as well as review materials provided by
presenters or members themselves.

eeeee

This list also indicates that the Enron Service Director of Benefits brings appeals
requiring an Administrative Committee vote to the question of the Administrative Committee
and that the Administrative Committee determines meeting times and agendas. !°87

At the November 2, 2000, Administrative Committee meeting, there was a discussion of
the Administrative Committee’s responsibilities with respect to the decision of the outsourcing of
the Enron qualified plans and whether the Administrative Committee was responsible for
reviewing the expenses of outsourcing. The Committee Secretary advised the Administrative
Committee that, based on the presentation made by ERISA counsel at the March 9, 2000,

1287 The materials presented at this meeting are included in Appendix D to this Report.

438

=== PAGE 467 ===
meeting, this issue was specifically addressed and determined to be the role of Enron and not the
Administrative Committee. The Committee Secretary was directed to obtain written
documentation of this from Enron ERISA counsel.

4. The Enron Corp. Retirement Plan (“Enron Retirement Plan”)

Historical background

Enron established the Enron Corp. Retirement Plan, a defined benefit plan, effective July
1, 1986, as an amendment and restatement of the InterNorth, Inc. Retirement Income Plan II. At
the same time, the Houston Natural Gas Corporation Retirement Plan, maintained by HNG, was
merged into the Enron Retirement Plan. For the period preceding July 1, 1986, participants in
the Enron Retirement Plan were generally credited with their service in amounts equal to all
service credited under predecessor plans as such plans existed on June 30, 1986.

The Enron Retirement Plan was amended and restated and renamed the Enron Corp. Cash
Balance Plan effective January 1, 1996.

Plan features

Participation

Individuals employed by Enron, one of its subsidiaries, or affiliated companies on its
domestic payroll who were age 21 or older generally were eligible to participate in the Enron
Retirement Plan. In general, such employees could participate in the Enron Retirement Plan
beginning on the first day of the month of their first anniversary of employment, as long as they
had worked at least 1,000 hours during that year. Collective bargaining unit employees were
generally not eligible to participate in the Enron Retirement Plan.

Benefits

Participants in the Enron Retirement Plan accrued benefits under a final average pay
formula. Under the formula, participants were generally entitled to benefits based upon the sum
of different percentages of their final average pay multiplied by years of accrued service. 788
Contributions to the Enron Retirement Plan by participants were not permitted.'®°

1288 For example, the January 1, 1989, restatement of the Enron Retirement Plan,
provided that participants who retire on or after their normal retirement date are entitled to
receive a benefit that is the actuarial equivalent of a pension beginning on the first day of the
month coinciding with or next following the date of their retirement, each monthly payment is
equal to: (1) 1.45 percent of participant’s final average pay multiplied by years of accrual
service not in excess of 25 years; plus (2) 0.45 percent of the participant’s final average pay
multiplied by years of accrual service in excess of 25 years, up to a maximum of 10 years; plus
(3) 0.45 percent of final average pay in excess of a factor related to Social Security integration;
plus (4) 1 percent of final average pay multiplied by years of accrual service in excess of 35
years; plus (5) one-twelfth of an amount equal to 25 percent of the aggregate contributions
(without interest) made by the participant to the Houston Natural Gas Corporation Retirement

439

=== PAGE 468 ===
Effective January 1987, Enron established a floor-offset arrangement, involving the
Enron Retirement Plan and the Enron ESOP.!% Under the floor-offset arrangement, a
participant’ s accrued benefit in the Enron Retirement Plan is offset by the annual annuity
value!**! of Enron stock held in the participant’s Retirement Subaccount as of certain
determination dates, generally the date that benefit payments from the Enron Retirement Plan
commence. However, distributions from the Enron ESOP before the determination date were
also taken into account.

Depending on the value of Enron stock, the amount of the offset might be greater than the
value of a participant’s benefit under the Enron Retirement Plan at any given time. If so, the
excess in the Enron ESOP Retirement Subaccount would have been used to offset the
participant’s future benefits under the final average pay formula. If the offset amount was less
than the benefit under the Enron Retirement Plan, the Enron Retirement Plan would pay the
portion of the benefit that is not offset by the Enron ESOP Retirement Subaccount. In 1994, the
Enron Retirement Plan was amended to provide that the offset would not apply with respect to
benefits accrued after 1994 and the amount of the offset for prior years would be set over the
period 1996-2000. These amendments are discussed in detail in Part II.C.2., below.

Vesting

Participants were fully vested in their benefits under the Enron Retirement Plan after five
years of service with Enron.

Plan before February 1, 1980, excluding any contributions refunded to the participant; minus
(6)(a) the monthly benefit payable from the normal retirement date under the life annuity form
used to determine the value of assets transferred from the InterNorth, Inc. Retirement Income
Plan, or a lump sum amount paid with respect to a period of employment include in accrual
service otherwise factored in and (b) the monthly benefit commencing at age 65 the participant
has received or is entitled to receive under any other qualified defined benefit plan to the extent
attributable to a period of service or employment for which the participant is credited with
accrual service under the plan. Sec. 5.1, Enron Retirement Plan (Jan. 1, 1989, restatement).
(Items (1) through (4) of the computation appears to describe annual benefit amounts, and so
must be divided by 12 for a monthly amount.)

1289 However, according to sec. 11.1 of the Enron Retirement Plan (Jan. 1, 1989,
restatement), contributions were made to the Plan by participants through prior plans.

1290 The floor-offset arrangement does not affect benefits earned before 1987. See the
discussion of the Enron ESOP in Part II.B.5.

1291 The annual annuity value is the dollar amount available each year if the account
balance at retirement were used to purchase an annuity, using standard assumptions for life
expectancy and interest. The value of the ESOP offset was based on the amount of a monthly
single life annuity that could be purchased by the value of an individual’s ESOP offset as of
certain determination dates. For purposes of this calculation, Enron assumed annuity returns of
8.5 percent annually.

440

=== PAGE 469 ===
Distributions

Benefits under the Enron Retirement Plan were generally payable in the case of
retirement, disability, or death and were paid in the form of an annuity. The automatic form of
benefit was a single life annuity or a joint and survivor annuity in the case of married
participants. Participants could also choose certain other optional forms of benefit, including a
term certain annuity and a lump sum, in certain cases.

Compliance

The IRS issued favorable determination letters with respect to the tax-qualified status of
the Enron Retirement Plan on June 2, 1988, and December 20, 1995. The Plan was amended
and restated effective as of January 1, 1989, 17°

On July 24, 1994, Enron requested an advisory opinion from the Department of Labor!”
concerning the Enron Retirement Plan and Enron ESOP as to whether a proposed restructuring
of the plans and dismantling of the floor-offset arrangement with respect to future benefit
accruals would cause it to be newly “established” such that it would lose its grandfathered status
under ERISA.'?4 Enron proposed to split the Enron ESOP from the defined benefit plan and

1292 Certain documents provided to Joint Committee staff indicate that Enron entered into
a closing agreement for 1989 and 1990 in order for the Enron Retirement Plan to remain
qualified.

123 An advisory opinion is an opinion of the Department of Labor as to the application
of one or more sections of ERISA, regulations promulgated under ERISA, ERISA interpretive
bulletins, or exemptions from certain ERISA provisions issued by the Department of Labor to a
specific factual situation. ERISA Procedure 76-1, 41 Fed. Reg. 36281 (Aug. 27, 1976). The
advisory opinion is a written statement issued to an individual or organization, or to the
authorized representative of such individual or organization, and typically applies only to the
situation described in the request and provides reliance only to the parties described in the
request for the opinion. Id.

1294 Previously, in December 1992, Enron requested an advisory opinion from
Department of Labor for the Enron ESOP and for the Enron Retirement Plan. Letter from
Vinson & Elkins to Department of Labor, (Dec. 8, 1992). Pursuant to a series of intercorporate
transactions, Enron intended to transfer certain of its affiliates’ assets and liabilities to Enron Oil
Trading & Transportation Company (“EOTT”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Enron. Id. After
completion of such transfers, the Enron ESOP was to receive EOTT shares incident to the
spinoff in the same manner as any other shareholder of Enron. Jd. EOTT shares received by the
Enron ESOP were to be credited to participants’ accounts in the ESOP with reference to the
shares of Enron Stock credited to such accounts. Jd. Enron sought the Department of Labor’s
opinion (1) that the grandfather provision of sec. 9345(a)(3) of OBRA 1987 would not be
rendered inapplicable by the Enron ESOP’s retention of the EOTT shares; (2) that the sale by the
Enron ESOP of the EOTT shares pursuant to the spinoff and the investment of the proceeds of
such sale in Enron stock would not render the grandfather provision of sec. 9345(a)(3) of OBRA
1987 inapplicable; and (3) that the sale by the Enron ESOP of the EOTT shares pursuant to the

441

=== PAGE 470 ===
allocate no additional shares of Enron stock to the offset account as of December 31, 1994.
Enron proposed to permanently fix the value of one-fifth of the shares of Enron stock allocated
to each participant’s offset account each January 1 during the period 1996-2000. In connection
with the restructuring, the Enron Board of Directors adopted an amendment to the Enron
Retirement Plan to temporarily suspend accruals. If the Department of Labor had not issued
favorable opinions regarding the restructuring, the suspension of accruals under the Enron
Retirement Plan would have been retroactively rescinded as though the suspensions had never
been made.!””°

Advisory Opinion 94-42A was issued to Enron by the Department of Labor on December
9, 1994. According to the Advisory Opinion, Enron’s dismantling of the floor-offset
arrangement over a five-year period would not adversely affect the application of the special
provision.

5. The Enron Corp. Employee Stock Ownership Plan (“Enron ESOP”)

Historical background

Enron Corp. established the Enron ESOP effective November 1, 1986. The Plan
document and summary plan description state that the primary purpose of the Plan was to enable
plan participants to acquire stock ownership interests in Enron. The Enron ESOP also provided
that it could be used to meet Enron’s general financing requirements, including capital growth
and transfer in the ownership of Enron stock. The Plan document also provides that the Enron
ESOP may receive loans (or other extensions of credit) to finance the acquisition of Enron stock,
secured primarily by a commitment by Enron to make contributions to the plan sufficient to
repay principal and interest on the loan and employer securities acquired with the loan. The
Enron ESOP was funded from two transactions, the proceeds of an exempt loan transaction and a
reversion from a terminating pension plan within the Enron controlled group.

During 1986, Enron loaned the Enron ESOP $335 million to purchase shares of Enron
Corp. common stock that had previously been held as treasury stock. As a result of this
purchase, the Enron ESOP held approximately 19 percent of Enron’s outstanding common stock.
During 1987, $230 million of the principal amount of the loan was repaid with proceeds received
from the terminating InterNorth, Inc. Pension Plan 1.1 Stock acquired with the loan proceeds

spinoff and the investment of the proceeds of such sale in assets other than Enron stock would
not render the grandfather provision of sec. 9345(a)(3) of OBRA 1987 inapplicable. Id. By
letter dated January 18, 1994, Enron withdrew its request for an advisory opinion.

1295 Notice of Temporary Suspension of Accruals under the Enron Corp. Retirement
Plan, EC000020212.

1296 Notes to Financial Statements, 1990 Form 5500 for the Enron Savings Plan, at 5.
The mechanics of this repayment are described variously in different sources. Enron’s July 21,
1994, request for an advisory opinion from the Department of Labor explains that a block of
Enron stock was purchased by the Enron ESOP in February 1987 with $230 million received by
Enron as the reversion.

442

=== PAGE 471 ===
and the reversion were held in suspense accounts in the Plan and allocated to participants over
the period required under applicable law (in the case of the reversion) and the terms of the
exempt loan (in the case of the exempt loan amount). Cumulative cash dividends paid on Enron
stock held by the trustee were used to make the periodic payments of principal and interest
necessary to retire the loan.!”” The final payment on the Enron ESOP loan was made in March
1993.

The Enron ESOP was amended and merged into the Enron Savings Plan effective August
30, 2002, with the result that the provisions of the Enron Savings Plan generally replace the
provisions of the Enron ESOP in their entirety.!7°° Pursuant to the merger, the assets held under
the Enron ESOP would be transferred to the Enron Savings Plan to be held under the trust
maintained thereunder. Participants in the Enron Savings Plan who participated in the Enron
ESOP are entitled to benefits at least equal to the benefit they would have been entitled to
receive immediately before the merger if the Enron ESOP was then terminated. Enron ESOP
participants who did not otherwise participate in the Enron Savings Plan as of the date of the
merger became participants in the Enron Savings Plan as of that date.

Plan features
Participation

As originally adopted, the Enron ESOP covered most full-time employees and certain
part-time employees of Enron and other entities adopting the Enron ESOP. Full-time employees
could begin participating in the Enron ESOP on the date they began working for Enron. Part-
time or temporary employees could generally begin participating in the Enron ESOP on the
January 1 following their one-year anniversary of working for Enron. Employees generally
excluded from Enron ESOP participation were: employees whose terms and conditions of
employment were governed by a collective bargaining agreement, nonresident aliens receiving
no earned income from U.S. sources, and leased employees. Beginning January 1, 1995, new
Enron employees were no longer allowed to participate in the Enron ESOP.

Contributions/allocations

The Enron ESOP provided that contributions by Enron were to be made in amounts
authorized by the Board of Directors and were payable in cash or in shares of Enron stock, as
determined by the Board of Directors. Although the Enron ESOP provided for discretionary
employer contributions, Enron has never made any direct contributions to it (i.e., account
balances are attributable to the shares purchased with the 1986 loan and the 1987 reversion). °°

297 1993 Form 5500, Notes to Financial Statements.

1298 ry

1299 «Merger of Enron Corp. Employee Stock Ownership Plan with and into Enron Corp.
Savings Plan,” EC 000899959-000899961,
http://www.enron.com/corp/proofsofclaim/plans.html.

1300 Form 5300 Attachment I, Item 1 1b.

443

=== PAGE 472 ===
Participants in the Enron ESOP were neither required nor permitted to make contributions to the

plan. Rollovers from amounts received from an IRA or annuity or from another qualified plan
were accepted.

Each participant’s account in the Enron ESOP was comprised of separate subaccounts: a
Savings Subaccount and a Retirement Subaccount. In general, at the end of each year, shares of
Enron common stock were allocated (1) to each participant’s Savings Subaccount in an amount
equal to 10 percent of the participant’s compensation for the year and (2) to each participant’s
Retirement Subaccount based on the participant’s length of service with Enron, age, and
compensation. Additionally, Enron made a five percent allocation to a Special Allocation
Subaccount for participants who were actively employed by Enron on December 31, 1994,130!

This five percent allocation was made in lieu of an accrual for 1995 to the Enron Retirement
Plan32

The initial loan made in 1986 to fund the Enron ESOP was held in a Suspense Account,
which was credited with Enron stock acquired with the proceeds of the exempt loan. The Enron
ESOP provided that as of the last day of each plan year, a certain number of shares of financed
stock held in a stock suspense account would be allocated to participants’ accounts. Allocations
to participants from the suspense account were made over periods required (1) under applicable
law (in the case of the reversion amount) and (2) by the terms of the exempt loan (in the case of
the exempt loan amount). All payments on the exempt loan were made out of dividends on the
stock held in the suspense account as well as out of allocated stock held by the Enron ESOP.

Beginning January 1, 1987, the Enron ESOP was integrated with the Enron Retirement

Plan as part of the floor-offset arrangement. Significant changes were made to the operation of
the offset in 1994.9

The Enron ESOP was amended to provide final allocations to participants’ Retirement
Subaccounts and Savings Subaccounts for 1994. Although the Enron ESOP was ongoing, no
further allocations were made to participants’ accounts.

Vesting

Participants were vested in their Enron ESOP accounts at a rate of 25 percent for each
year they worked for Enron. Any amounts forfeited by participants who were not fully vested

1301 Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources personnel in responding to

questions from employees (Jan. 1995), included in Appendix D. The allocations made under the
Enron ESOP are discussed in Part II.C.1.

1302 Tq. Enron estimated that the shares actually allocated to participants’ accounts would
be approximately 4.4 to 4.6 percent of base pay, net of dividends. Jd. Questions and answers for
use by Enron human resources personnel in responding to questions from employees state that

the difference would be made up in the allocation under the Enron Cash Balance Plan for 1996.
Id.

1303 The floor-offset arrangement is discussed in detail in Part II.C.1., below.

444

=== PAGE 473 ===
upon termination of employment were available, after a five-year holding period, for allocation
to a Special Allocation Subaccount for participants who are eligible to receive them. Participants
terminating employment with Enron for reasons other than retirement, total or permanent
disability, or death were entitled to their vested interest in their account. Participants who
attained normal retirement age under the Plan or terminated employment with Enron due to

business circumstances, layoff, or corporate reorganization were 100 percent vested in amounts
allocated to their accounts.

An Enron ESOP participant who was actively employed by Enron as of December 31,

1994, the date the plan was frozen, was 100 percent vested in his or her Retirement Subaccount,
as required by law.

Loans

Under the 1989 restatement of the Enron ESOP, loans to participants were permitted.
The amount of any loan could not exceed the lesser of 50 percent of the total value of a
participant’s vested interest in the participant’s Savings Subaccount and $50,000. Loans are not
permitted under the 1999 restatement of the Enron ESOP.

Distributions and withdrawals

In general, the Enron ESOP provided that participants were entitled to a benefit based on
the total value of their accounts as of the date they turn age 65 or terminate employment with
Enron. Participants are generally required to begin receiving distributions by the April 1
following the calendar year in which they turn age 70%. If participants left Enron before turning
age 65, they generally were entitled to receive the vested portion of their Retirement Subaccount

balance upon turning age 55'5% and the vested portion of their Savings Subaccount 90 days after
leaving Enron. 2%

Initially, participants in the Enron ESOP could elect to receive their benefits in a lump
sum or periodic installment payments for a term not longer than fifteen years, '7°° In general,
participants could elect to receive their distributions from the Enron ESOP in shares of Enron
stock.'°°7 Beginning in 1989, participants could elect to receive benefits in the form of an
annuity purchased from an insurance company, but could no longer elect installment
payments.'°°8 Effective November 1, 1996, the Enron ESOP was amended to provide that the

1304 ‘This rule also applied to the Special Allocation Account which held a special
allocation made to participants’ accounts in 1994. See Part II.C.1., below.

1305 Sec, 12.1(a)(iii), Enron ESOP (Jan. 1, 1999, restatement).
1306 Sec. 11.02(a), Enron ESOP (effective Nov. 1, 1986).

1307 Sec. 11.02(c), Enron ESOP (effective Nov. 1, 1986), Sec. 12.2, Enron ESOP (Jan. 1,
1989, restatement), and Sec. 12.2(c), Enron ESOP (Jan. 1, 1999, restatement).

445

=== PAGE 474 ===
standard benefit generally was a joint and survivor annuity for married participants and a single
life annuity for unmarried participants. However, the 1999 restatement of the Enron ESOP
provided that an annuity was an alternative form of benefit to the standard lump sum. As
described below, effective August 15, 2001, the Enron ESOP was amended to eliminate all
forms of benefit other than lump sums.

In connection with the phasing out of the floor-offset arrangement, the Enron ESOP was
amended effective March 1, 1994, to provide eligible participants access to the shares of Enron
stock allocated to their Savings Subaccount.'*”°

Beginning in 1996, dividends from shares of Enron stock in all of participants’
subaccounts, including those to which they had not yet gained access, began to be paid directly
to them each quarter.’ u

Under the version of the Enron ESOP effective in 1989, participants could withdraw (1)
from his or her Enron ESOP Savings Subaccounts amounts held for 24 months or more which
were not in excess of the greater of 100 shares of Enron stock or 25 percent of the vested balance
of his or her account or (2) allocations of company contributions, financed stock, or reversion
amounts credited to his or her Enron ESOP Savings Subaccount for at least 60 cumulative
months, but any case not more than the greater of 100 sharers of Enron stock or 25 percent of the
value of the vested interest in his or her ESOP Savings Subaccount.'3!?_ Under the 1999
restatement of the Enron ESOP, the limits were changed to the vested interests of participants’
ESOP Savings Subaccount.

Compliance

The IRS issued a favorable determination letter for the Enron ESOP on June 2, 1988.
The Enron ESOP was amended and restated effective January 1, 1989.

1308 Sec. 12.2, Enron Corp. ESOP (Jan. 1, 1989, restatement). The annuity distribution
option was initially added by Enron effective January 1, 1990, under the Fifth Amendment to the
Enron Corp. ESOP (effective Nov. 1, 1986).

1309 Twelfth Amendment to the Enron ESOP (Jan. 1, 1989, restatement), effective Nov.
1, 1996. Under the amendment, the Enron ESOP provided that the annuity was the standard
form of benefit with respect to the portion of participants’ accounts not subject sec. 409(h). Sec.
409(h) provides that a participant who is entitled to a distribution from the plan has the right to
demand that his or her benefit be distributed in the form of employer securities or if the employer
securities are not readily tradeable on an established market has a right to require that the
employer repurchase employer securities under a fair valuation formula.

1310 The details of this process are discussed in Part II.C.1., below.

311 Enron - Benefit Plans and Related Programs, Policies and Practices--Employee
Stock Ownership Plan (Dec. 14, 2001), EC000021272-EC000021280.

1312 Enron ESOP section 13.2 (Jan. 1, 1989, restatement).

446

=== PAGE 475 ===
By letter dated January 6, 1993, Enron submitted to the IRS requests for rulings with
respect to the Federal income tax consequences of proposed transactions involving the Enron
ESOP. Enron intended to transfer certain assets and liabilities to Enron Oil Trading &
Transportation Company (“EOTT”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Enron. After completing
such transfers, Enron would distribute all of its EOTT shares to its shareholders in a spinoff
transaction. After the spinoff, Enron would no longer own any EOTT shares, EOTT would not
own any equity interest in Enron and EOTT would not maintain or sponsor the Enron ESOP for
its employees. As a holder of Enron stock, the Enron ESOP would receive EOTT shares incident
to the spinoff in the same manner as any other shareholder of Enron. EOTT shares received by
the Enron ESOP would be credited to participants’ accounts in the Enron ESOP. Enron
requested rulings with respect to the applicability of certain excise taxes relating to prohibited
transactions and employer reversions from qualified plans.'3?

In general, in a letter dated December 20, 1993,!°"4 the IRS ruled that, for purposes of the
section 4975(a) excise tax on prohibited transactions, it would not be a violation of the
requirement that an ESOP invest primarily in qualifying employer securities if shares of EOTT
stock or assets other than Enron stock purchased with the proceeds from the sale of such shares
are allocated to participants accounts on the same basis as are Enron shares. As such, the excise
tax on prohibited transactions would not apply. 15

Additionally, the IRS ruled that the spinoff transaction would satisfy an exception to the
section 4980(a) excise tax on the amount of an employer reversion from a qualified plan.'31¢
Specifically, the IRS ruled that the retention by the Enron ESOP of the shares of EOTT stock
which are allocated to a reversion suspense account under the Enron ESOP until distribution to
participants would not be treated as a disposition of Enron shares.'*'” The IRS also ruled
favorably on the sale by the Enron ESOP of the shares of EOTT stock which are allocated to the
reversion suspense account and the use of the proceeds from such sale to acquire Enron stock. !318
However, the IRS ruled that the sale of EOTT shares and the use of the proceeds from such sale
to acquire assets other than Enron stock would violate the requirement that employer securities
purchased with a reversion amount remain in the Enron ESOP until distribution to participants in
accordance with the plan terms.'?!?

1313 Specifically, Enron requested rulings as to the applicability of secs. 4975(a) and
4980(a).

1314 Priy, Ltr. Rul. 9411038 (Dec. 20, 1993).
1315 Id.
1316 Id.
1317 Id.
1318 Id.

1319 Id.

447

=== PAGE 476 ===
The IRS issued favorable determination letters for the Enron ESOP on August 20, 1993,
and March 6, 1996. The Plan was amended and restated effective January 1, 1999.

In late February or early March 2000, the Enron ESOP was referred to the IRS National
Office for technical advice in connection with the issue of whether the Enron ESOP was at all
times required to offer a joint and survivor spouse annuity as the standard form of benefit rather
than as an alternative form of benefit to the Enron ESOP’s standard lump sum distribution
form.'*”° The IRS is currently reviewing this issue.

An application for determination of the tax-qualified status of the Enron ESOP was
submitted to the IRS on February 15, 2002. The application requested that the IRS take into
account all of the plan qualification requirements of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act, the
Small Business Job Protection Act of 1986, the Uniformed Services Employment and
Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, the Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998, and the Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000.

Plan provisions in effect in 2001 and 2002

Effective January 1, 2001, the Enron ESOP was amended to preclude that Enron would
make any contributions to the Enron ESOP. '*?!

Beginning August 15, 2001, all forms of distribution from the Enron ESOP except lump
sums were eliminated. !°2? Additionally, the Enron ESOP was amended effective November 1,
2001, to provide that regular withdrawals from the Enron ESOP would be paid in company stock
unless the participant elected to receive a withdrawal in cash.

As described above, the Enron ESOP was amended and merged into the Enron Savings
Plan effective August 30, 2002.'°3 The assets held under the Enron ESOP were transferred to
the Enron Savings Plan. Participants in the Enron Savings Plan who participated in the Enron
ESOP are entitled to benefits at least equal to the benefit they would have been entitled to
receive immediately before the merger if the Enron ESOP was then terminated. Enron ESOP
participants who did not otherwise participate in the Enron Savings Plan as of the date of the
merger became participants in the Enron Savings Plan as of that date.

1320 Attachment I to Form 5300 for Enron ESOP, submitted to the IRS on February 15,
2002.

1321 Adoption of Administrative Procedures Relative to the Suspension of Contributions
to the Enron Corp. Employee Stock Ownership Plan (executed Feb. 12, 2002), EC2000008923.

1322 a5 described below, the IRS is currently reviewing this issue.
1323 «Merger of Enron Corp. Employee Stock Ownership Plan with and into Enron Corp.

Savings Plan”, EC 000899959-000899961,
http://www.enron.com/corp/proofsofclaim/plans.html.

448

=== PAGE 477 ===
6. The Enron Corp. Cash Balance Plan (“Enron Cash Balance Plan’)

Historical background

Effective January 1, 1996, the benefit formula under the Enron Retirement Plan was
changed from the traditional defined benefit formula to a cash balance formula. Additionally,
the Plan was amended, restated, and renamed “the Enron Corp. Cash Balance Plan.”

Plan features
Participation

Employees of Enron who were age 21 or older were generally eligible to participate in
the Enron Cash Balance Plan, except nonresident aliens who receive no earned income from
sources within the United States, leased employees, individuals who are designated,
compensated, or otherwise classified or treated by Enron as an independent contractor or other
non-common law employee, and any employees whose terms and conditions of employment are
governed by a collective bargaining agreement unless such agreement provides for coverage
under the Plan.

Benefits

On conversion to the cash balance formula, each participant under the Enron Retirement
Plan retained the benefit of their final average pay formula benefit based on their compensation
and service as of December 31, 1994, which was the last day prior to the 1995 plan year during
which all accruals under the Enron Retirement Plan were suspended. Thus, the benefit under the

Enron Cash Balance Plan is equal to this preserved benefit plus amounts earned under the cash
balance formula.

Hypothetical accounts are maintained for the participants in the Enron Cash Balance
Plan. Such accounts are generally credited with five percent of participants’ monthly base
pay. Additionally, at the end of each calendar month for which participants have cash
balance accounts, their accounts are credited interest based on 10-year Treasury bond yields.

The Enron Cash Balance Plan does not accept rollover contributions from other qualified
plans or IRAs.

1324 For a general description of the characteristics of cash balance plans, see Part II.A.2.,
above.

1325 A special accrual was credited to the accounts of participants hired on or before Dec.
31, 1995. Their accounts were credited with 1.223 percent of their annualized base pay for each
calendar month in 1994, EC000020097. Second Amendment to Enron Corp. Cash Balance Plan
(effective Jan. 1, 1996) (executed May 6, 1997).

449

=== PAGE 478 ===
Vesting

Participants in the Enron Cash Balance Plan are fully vested in their benefit under the
plan on the earlier of completing five years of service or attaining the normal retirement age
under the plan, which is age 65. If an Enron Cash Balance Plan participant accrued benefits
under the Enron Retirement Plan under the final average pay formula, they are 100 percent
vested in those benefits at all times.

Distributions

The standard form of benefit for a participant who is married on his or her annuity
starting date is a joint and survivor annuity. The standard form of benefit for a participant who is
not married is an annuity payable for the life of the participant. Participants in the Enron Cash
Balance Plan could also elect one of the following optional forms of benefit:

(1) A single life annuity for the participant’s life;

(2) An annuity for the joint lives of the participant and any joint annuitant designated
by the participant providing 50 percent or 100 percent benefits to the surviving
joint annuitant;

(3) For the portion of the participant’s benefit consisting of a final average pay
benefit, an annuity for a term certain of five, ten, or fifteen years and continuous
for the life of the participant if the participant survives such term certain or
continuing to the end of such term certain to the beneficiary or beneficiaries
designated by the participant in the event of the participant’s death before the end
of such term certain; or

(4) A single lump sum cash payment for the portion of the participant’s benefit under
the cash balance formula.

Participants in the Enron Cash Balance Plan can receive their benefits upon normal and
early retirement, disability, termination, and on an employee’s death. Payment of benefits
generally begins after a participant reaches the Plan’s normal retirement age of 65. However,
participants may withdraw the vested portion of their benefit that accrued after 1995 if they leave
Enron for any reason. The Enron Cash Balance Plan also provides for an early retirement
benefit.

Compliance

The IRS issued favorable determination letters to the Enron Cash Balance Plan on
December 20, 1995, November 14, 1996, and January 22, 1997.

An IRS examination of the Enron Cash Balance Plan resulted in a request by IRS

examiners for technical advice from the IRS National Office during 2000. The request arrived in
National Office of the IRS on March 17, 2000, and is currently under review.

450

=== PAGE 479 ===
On April 12, 2000, Enron submitted to the IRS a request for a determination of the tax-
qualified status of the Enron Cash Balance Plan.

On September 5, 2000, the Enron Cash Balance Plan was submitted to the National
Office for review, in accordance with a September 15, 1999, directive from the National Office
of the IRS that all qualification determination filings and field audits with respect to defined
benefit plans which have been or are being converted from one formula into a cash balance
formula be referred to the National Office of the IRS in connection with its ongoing review of
technical issues relating to such conversions.'2”° The IRS notified Enron that its request for a
determination letter would be associated with the 2000 request for technical advice from IRS
examiners.

An application for determination of the tax-qualified status of the Enron Cash Balance
Plan was submitted to the IRS on February 15, 2002. The application requested that the IRS take
into account all of the plan qualification requirements of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act,
the Small Business Job Protection Act of 1986, the Uniformed Services Employment and
Reemployment Rights Act of 1994), the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, the Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998, and the Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000.

Plan provisions in effect in 2001 and 2002
The Enron Cash Balance Plan was amended and restated effective January 1, 2001.

In general, participation in the 2001 version of the Enron Cash Balance Plan was open to
the same Enron employees as under the January 1, 1996, version of the Plan.

Participants in the Enron Cash Balance Plan are generally credited with a cash balance
accrual equal to five percent of their compensation for each month during which they are
employed by Enron and otherwise qualify to participate in the Plan. Enron Cash Balance Plan
participants are at all times 100 percent vested in their final average pay benefit under the Enron
Retirement Plan benefit formula.

In general, the normal retirement benefit under the Enron Cash Balance Plan is equal to
the sum of participants’ monthly final average pay benefit under the Enron Retirement Plan
benefit formula and the monthly amount derived by converting their cash balance benefit as of
their annuity starting date into a single life annuity. A portion of the final average pay benefit
otherwise payable under the Enron Cash Balance Plan will be offset by the equivalent annuity
value of a participant’s interest in the Enron ESOP as determined over the period 1996-2000.
The normal form of retirement benefit for a participant who is married on their annuity starting
date will be a joint and survivor annuity. For a participant who is not married on their annuity
starting date, the normal form of benefit will be an annuity payable for the life of the participant.

1326 4 nnouncement 2003-1, 2003-2 LR.B. 281, http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/a-03-

Lpdf.

451

=== PAGE 480 ===
In October 2002, the PBGC filed claims against Enron in its bankruptcy proceeding. '*””
The PBGC’s claim for unfunded benefit liabilities of the Enron Cash Balance Plan was
approximately $270 million. 1328 The PBGC’s estimate of the underfunding may increase if the
IRS rules adversely on the phasing out of the floor-offset arrangement’? 2° and the benefits
attributable to offset amounts become liabilities of the Enron Cash Balance Plan.'*”°

Accruals under the Enron Cash Balance Plan were frozen as of December 31, 2002.
7. The Enron Corp. Savings Plan (“Enron Savings Plan”)

Historical background

The Enron Savings Plan began as a plan originally effective June 1, 1956.'°3! The Enron
Savings Plan is a defined contribution plan which provides for elective deferrals pursuant to
section 401(k),!332 and after-tax contributions. Additionally, Enron contributed as matching
contributions to the Enron Savings Plan amounts equal to a percentage of participants’
contributions. Enron’s matching contributions were discontinued effective November 28,

2001.

1327 Soe, e.g., Statement of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation in Support of Its
Claim for Unfunded Benefit Liabilities of the Enron Corp. Cash Balance Plan, at paragraph 8,

filed in In re Enron Corp., et al, Case No. 01-16034, U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Southern District of
New York.

1328 This represents the PBGC’s estimate of the Plan’s underfunding.

1329 ‘The phasing out of the floor-offset arrangement is discussed in detail in Part II.C.1.,
below.

1330 The PBGC estimates that the unfunded benefit liabilities could increase by as much
as 100 percent or more if the phasing out of the floor-offset arrangement is deemed to have been
illegal and the benefits attributable to offset amounts again become liabilities of the Enron Cash
Balance Plan. See, e.g., Statement of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation in Support of Its
Claim for Unfunded Benefit Liabilities of the Enron Corp. Cash Balance Plan, at paragraph 8,
filed in In re Enron Corp., et al, Case No. 01-16034, U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Southern District of
New York, discussed in Part II.B.2., below.

1331 Forms 5500 for the Enron Savings Plan.

1332 The Enron Savings Plan refers to elective deferrals as “Before-Tax Contributions.”
See discussion in Part II.A.2., above.

1333 First Amendment to Enron Corp. Savings Plan (As Amended and Restated Effective
July 1, 1999), DOL020351-DOL020354.

452

=== PAGE 481 ===
Plan features

Participation

In general, all employees of Enron are eligible to participate in the Enron Savings Plan.
Exceptions include nonresident aliens with no U.S. source income, leased employees, and
employees whose terms and conditions of employment are governed by a collective bargaining
agreement. Participation is voluntary and generally begins on the first day of the first month
coincident with or next following the date on which an employee first works for Enron.'3*4

The HNG Savings Plan was merged into the Enron Savings Plan effective July 1, 1986.
Participants in the HNG Savings Plan were immediately covered by the provisions of the Enron
Savings Plan. The Enron Savings Plan was amended and restated effective January 1, 1989,
January 1, 1994, and July 1, 1999. From time to time, other plans were merged into the Enron
Savings Plan as a result of corporate events.'**°

Contributions

Participants may contribute to the Enron Savings Plan from one percent to 15 percent of
their base pay 336 in any combination of elective deferrals or after-tax contributions, subject to

certain limits prescribed by the Code.” The Enron Savings Plan also accepts certain qualifying

1334. 4 dditionally, a number of participants in the Enron ESOP who did not otherwise
participate in the Enron Savings Plan as of the August 30, 2002, merger of the plans may have
become participants in the Enron Savings Plan as of that date.

1335 Effective June 1, 1999, the portion of the Koch General Holdings, Inc. Retirement
Savings Plan consisting of the accounts of those individuals who became employed by EOTT
Energy Corp. as a result of that entity’s acquisition in 1998 of certain assets of Koch Industries,
Inc. were merged into the Enron Plan. The OmniComp Inc., Salary Savings Plan, Bentley
Engineering Co. Savings Plan, and Portland General Holdings, Inc. Retirement Savings Plan
were also merged into the Enron Savings Plan as of June 1, 1999. Effective September 1, 1999,
a portion of the Cogen Technologies 401(k) Savings Plan, consisting of accounts attributable to
Cogen participants who became employed by Enron were merged into the Enron Savings Plan.
Effective February 1, 2001, the WarpSpeed Communications 401(k) Plan was merged into the
Enron Savings Plan. Source: Form 5300 Application for Determination for Employee Benefit
Plan, Attachment I, Item IX (February 12, 2002).

1336 The Enron Savings Plan generally defines “base pay” as a participant’s basic rate of
compensation for a payroll period (or other period established by the Administrative Committee)
based on the hourly pay rate, weekly salary, established benefit rate, or similar unit of base
compensation applicable to the participant under regular payroll accounting as of the last day of
the period. The plan provides that the base pay of any participant taken into account for
purposes of the plan is limited to the applicable limit under sec. 401(a)(17).

1337 The maximum amount of the permitted employee contribution as a percentage of
based pay varied historically.

453

=== PAGE 482 ===
contributions rolled over from individual retirement accounts and annuities and other qualified
plans (“rollover contributions’).

Additionally, Enron contributed as matching contributions to the Enron Savings Plan
amounts equal to a percentage of participants’ contributions. Enron’s matching contributions
were credited to a separate account called the “company contribution account.” The amount of
the matching contribution made by Enron varied over time.!°38 As described above, Enron’s
matching contributions were discontinued effective November 28, 2001 1339

On at least one occasion, Enron also made a special cash contribution to the Enron
Savings Plan on behalf of active, regular full-time Enron employees. !*“°

Investments

Investments under the Enron Savings Plan are discussed in detail in Part II.C.5., below.
A general overview is provided here.

The Enron Savings Plan permits participants to direct the investment of their elective
deferrals, after-tax contributions, and rollover contributions to the Enron Savings Plan.
Participants have approximately 20 investment options to choose from, including Enron stock
and a self-directed brokerage account subject to certain restrictions defined by the Plan.'*4! Plan
participants can change their investment mix on a daily basis. 34?

The Enron Savings Plan provides that all Enron matching contributions are invested in
the common stock of Enron corp. Only upon attaining age 50, participants can elect to reallocate
their company contribution account balances to other investment options offered under the Enron
Savings Plan.

1338 The amount of the matching contribution made by Enron is discussed in detail in
Part IL.C.5.

1339 Third Amendment to Enron Corp. Savings Plan (July 1, 1999, restatement).
1340 En Sight (Nov. 1996), EC000020134-EC000020137.

1341 Enron Explains Basic Facts About Its 401k Savings Plan,
http://www.enron.com/corp/pressroom/releases/2001/ene/100-121401ReleaseLtr.html;
Retirement Insecurity: 401(k) Crisis at Enron, Hearing before the Committee on Governmental
Affairs, United States Senate, S.Hrg. 107-378, at 32 (Feb. 5, 2002). Beginning July 1, 1999,
participants could also begin choosing to invest their contributions through a Schwab self-
directed brokerage account, subject to certain restrictions, as defined by the plan. 1999 SEC
Form 11-K.

1342 Enron - Benefit Plans and Related Programs, Policies and Practices--Savings Plan
(May 31, 2002), http://www.enron.com/corp/proofsofclaim/plan/SavingsPlanSPD.pdf.

454

=== PAGE 483 ===
Vesting

Under the Enron Savings Plan, participants are fully vested at all times in their elective
deferrals, after-tax contributions and rollover contributions. Participants vest in their company
contribution accounts at a rate of 25 percent per year of service but are automatically 100 percent
vested in such accounts upon attaining age 65. For plan years 1998 and later, the Plan was
amended to provide that participants are fully vested in their company contribution accounts. 1343
In connection with the July 1, 1999, restatement of the Enron Savings Plan, the plan was
amended to provide that participants hired by Enron prior to July 1, 1999, were 100 percent
vested in their company contribution accounts and the actual earnings thereon. Participants hired
on or after July 1, 1999, would become vested in the company contribution account after
completing one year of service (or, prior to one year of service, upon reaching age 65, becoming
totally and permanently disabled, involuntary termination, or upon death while an employee).

Loans

Additionally, participants can borrow a minimum of $1,000, up to a maximum amount
equal to the lesser of $50,000 or 50 percent of their vested balance under the Enron Savings Plan
but cannot have more than one loan outstanding at a time. Loan terms cannot exceed five years,
except for loans used to purchase a primary residence. Additionally, the Enron Savings Plan
provides that effective January 1, 1998, participants can withdraw from their company
contribution account amounts that were allocated prior to such date if held for 24 months or
more, but not in excess of their vested interest in such amounts. ae

Distributions and withdrawals

The Enron Savings Plan provides that participants may receive a distribution of the
vested balance under the Plan due to termination of service, death, disability, or retirement.
Distributions must begin no later than April 1 following the calendar year in which they attain
age 70’. Normal retirement date under the Enron Savings Plan is the date a participant turns
age 65.

Historically, such distributions could be paid out in the form of a joint and survivor
annuity for married persons, a single life annuity for unmarried persons, or in the form of a
single lump sum payment. As discussed at below, effective August 15, 2001, all forms of benefit
payable from the Enron Savings Plan except lump sum distributions were eliminated.

Participants who choose to leave Enron and whose vested balance is greater than $5,000
can leave their balance in the Plan or receive it as an annuity or lump sum. Balances of $5,000
or less are automatically distributed in a lump sum.

1343 Sixth Amendment to Enron Corp. Savings Plan (Jan. 1, 1999, restatement).
DOL020424-DOL020425.

1344 Id.

455

=== PAGE 484 ===
Participants in the Enron Savings Plan can make certain withdrawals from the Enron
Savings Plan while they are still employed by Enron."

Compliance

The IRS issued favorable determination letters to the Enron Savings Plan on June 22,
1988, and March 5, 1996. The Plan was amended and restated effective January 1, 1989,
January 1, 1994, and January 1, 1999.

An application for determination of the tax-qualified status of the Enron Savings Plan
was submitted to the IRS on February 15, 2002. The application requested that the IRS take into
account all of the plan qualification requirements of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act, the
Small Business Job Protection Act of 1986, the Uniformed Services Employment and
Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, the Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998, and the Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000.

Plan provisions in effect in 2001 and 2002

Effective August 15, 2001, all forms of benefits payable from the Enron Savings Plan
except lump sum distributions were eliminated. Any individual who had a right to receive a
distribution from the Enron Savings Plan and had elected payment or commencement of
payment before August 15, 2001, had the right to elect any form of payment as provided under
the then current terms of the plan.

The Enron Savings Plan was amended effective November 28, 2001, to eliminate Enron’s
matching contributions unless they were required to continue the tax-qualified status of the
Enron Savings Plan. Any matching contributions made after November 28, 2001, (other than
contributions attributable to periods before such date) were made in cash. At the same time, the
Enron Savings Plan was amended to provide that participants may invest the amounts in their
company contribution account among the investment alternatives offered under the Plan.

Effective February 15, 2002, the Plan was amended to provide that the portion of a
rollover contribution including Enron stock or other “employer securities” will continue to be so
invested until the participant elects to convert it into another investment under the Plan.
Effective March, 15, 2002, the Enron Savings Plan was amended to provide that participants
may not elect to convert any investment of any portion of their account into an investment in
Enron stock or any other “employer security.”

As described above, the Enron ESOP was amended and merged into the Enron Savings
Plan effective August 30, 2002, with the result that the provisions of the Enron Savings Plan

1345 Th general, participants can withdraw any amount not in excess of the value of the
after-tax contributions or rollover contributions in their account. Withdrawals can be made from
the company contribution account so long as the amount is attributable to contributions allocated
thereto prior to 1987 and in certain other limited cases. Participants aged 59% or older may
withdraw an amount not in excess of the value of the elective deferrals in their account. Enron
Savings Plan sec. 11.1 (July 1, 1999, restatement).

456

=== PAGE 485 ===
generally replace the provisions of the Enron ESOP in their entirety.'°“° Pursuant to the merger,
the assets held under the Enron ESOP were transferred to the Enron Savings Plan to be held
under the trust maintained thereunder. Participants in the Enron Savings Plan who participated
in the Enron ESOP are entitled to benefits at least equal to the benefit they would have been
entitled to receive immediately before the merger if the Enron ESOP was then terminated. Enron
ESOP participants who did not otherwise participant in the Enron Savings Plan as of the date of
the merger became participants in the Enron Savings Plan as of that date.

Coincident with the August 30, 2002, merger of the Enron ESOP with and into the Enron
Savings Plan, participants’ Enron ESOP accounts were initially invested in Enron stock,
notwithstanding any pre-existing investment direction of an Enron Savings Plan participant.
After the initial transfer of Enron ESOP accounts to the Enron Savings Plan, the plan amendment
provided that participants would be permitted to direct the investment of their Enron ESOP plan
accounts in accordance with the Enron Savings Plan. Upon investment by a participant of any
portion of their Enron ESOP plan account in any investment other than Enron stock, the amount
would no longer be part of the Enron ESOP and would become part of the Enron Savings
Plan.

1346 “Merger of Enron Corp. Employee Stock Ownership Plan with and into Enron Corp.
Savings Plan”, EC 000899959-000899961,
http://www.enron.com/corp/proofsofclaim/plans. html.

1347 Id.

457

=== PAGE 486 ===
C. Discussion of Specific Issues
1. Phase out of the ESOP offset under the Enron Corp. Retirement Plan
Present Law

Floor-offset arrangements in general

A “floor-offset arrangement” coordinates benefits from a defined benefit plan with those
of a defined contribution plan.!*48 The defined benefit plan, the “floor,” establishes a minimum
benefit level in accordance with the benefit formula specified by the plan. The defined
contribution plan provides the “offset.” The projected value of the participant’s benefit under the
defined contribution plan offsets the amount of the participant’s benefit payable under the
defined benefit plan. If the offset provides a benefit at least equal to the minimum established
under the floor, the participant receives the balance of the defined contribution plan account. In
such cases, no benefit is paid from the floor plan. If, however, the defined contribution plan
provides less than the minimum benefit established under the floor plan, e.g., as a result of
investment performance, benefits will be paid from the floor plan to make up the shortfall in the
defined contribution plan benefit. That is, the different between the floor benefit and the defined
contribution plan benefit will be paid from the defined benefit plan. The benefit under a typical
floor-offset arrangement payable at normal retirement age generally can be determined through
the following steps:

(1) the initial monthly vested benefit under the defined benefit Plan formula is
determined (the “gross benefit”);

(2) the vested account balance in the defined contribution plan is determined;

(3) the accumulated vested account balance is converted to an actuarially equivalent
monthly accrued benefit, using the interest and mortality factors in the plan
document;'*° and

(4) if the amount determined in step (3) is greater than that determined in step (1), no
benefits are due from the defined benefit plan and all benefits will be paid from
the defined contribution plan. If the amount determined in step (1) is greater than
the amount determined in step (3), the participant is entitled to the vested account
balance in the defined contribution plan plus--from the defined benefit plan--an
amount equal to the difference between step (1) and step (3).

1348 See Part IL.A.2., above, for a definition of defined benefit plans and defined
contribution plans.

1349 Although this actuarially equivalent benefit is used as the offset amount, the defined
contribution plan is not actually required to provide such a benefit to participants.

458

=== PAGE 487 ===
If the benefit is payable prior to normal retirement age, then the vested account balances
in the defined contribution plan is projected to normal retirement age, using the interest factor
specified in the plan, before performing step (3).

Floor-offset arrangements, particularly those involving ESOPs, can be attractive from the
perspective of both employers and employees. Present law encourages the establishment of
ESOPs by providing special tax benefits to employers that adopt such plans.!*5 ° A floor-offset
arrangement involving an ESOP generally allows participants to benefit from an increase in
value of the employer securities held by the ESOP, while protecting them from losses in value by
providing a minimum floor benefit under the defined benefit plan. The benefit under the defined
benefit plan is guaranteed by the PBGC, thus providing additional protection. A plan sponsor
might establish a floor-offset arrangement because such arrangements may offer employees the
better of two worlds: there is a defined contribution plan benefit and a minimum benefit from a
defined benefit plan. As described below, floor-offset arrangements involving defined
contribution plans with large investments in employer securities, such as ESOPs, were found to
present additional exposure to the PBGC compared to a typical defined benefit plan, and rules
relating to such plans were changed in 1986, which had the effect of prohibiting floor-offset
plans involving ESOPs.

Code provisions relating to floor-offset arrangements

Background (Rev. Rul. 69-502, 1969-2 C.B. 89)

Prior to the enactment of ERISA in 1974, the IRS took the position in a Revenue Ruling
that neither the defined benefit plan portion nor the defined contribution plan portion of a floor
offset arrangement would meet the Code’s qualification requirements.'*° The Ruling involved a
floor-offset arrangement consisting of a defined benefit plan and a defined contribution profit-
sharing plan. In it, the taxpayer had established a defined contribution plan and a defined benefit
plan for the same employees. The defined benefit plan provided a monthly retirement benefit
after age 65 equal to 50 percent of each employee’s average annual compensation, offset by the
actuarial value of any amounts to which the employee might be entitled under the defined
contribution plan. In the ruling, the IRS addressed whether the provision for offsetting benefits
under the defined benefit plan by amounts received under the first affected the qualification of
the plans.

With respect to the defined contribution plan, the IRS held that since the funds held in an
employee’s account under the defined contribution plan would be used to reduce the employee’s -
benefits under the second plan, the employer will be relieved from contributing to the second
plan to the extent of those funds. Thus, the first plan is not for the exclusive benefit of the

1350 Present law affecting employers adopting ESOPs is discussed in Part II.A.2., above.

1351 Rey. Rul. 69-502, 1969-2 C.B. 89

459

=== PAGE 488 ===
employees in general within the meaning of the regulations.!*> 2 Accordingly, it was held that the
plan did not meet Code requirements for tax qualification.

Additionally, the IRS held that with respect to the defined benefit plan, because the
amount of benefits payable out of the funds held under the plan was contingent upon the amount
available under the defined contribution plan, the benefits an employee will receive under the
second plan are not definitely determinable as required by applicable Treasury Regulations.'*° 3
In particular, the requirement that the amount of benefits not depend on the plan sponsor’s
profitability would be violated because the benefits under the defined benefit plan would depend
on the assets in the profit-sharing plan, and the profit-sharing plan depended on the profits of the
employer. Accordingly, it was held that the plan does not meet Code requirements for tax
qualification.

Present-law rules

In 1976, the IRS reversed its position in a Revenue Ruling, citing a Code provision which
was added by ERISA.'** Again considering a floor-offset arrangement involving a defined
benefit pension plan and a defined contribution profit sharing plan, the IRS succinctly concluded
that under the Code “as amended by ERISA an arrangement described in [the Revenue Ruling]
does not fail to satisfy the requirements...of the Code...merely because of the type of such
arrangement.” Under the new Code provision, a defined benefit plan generally may qualify even
though it provides benefits derived from employer contributions based partly on the balance of
the separate account of participants. °° 5 Such a hybrid plan is treated as a defined contribution
plan for some purposes and a defined benefit plan for other purposes.!3°°

The 1976 Revenue Ruling provides that the defined benefit plan part of a floor-offset
arrangement must specify the actuarial basis that will be used to determine the benefit after
offset. Thus, the plan must specify the interest and mortality assumptions to be employed, as well

1352 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.401-1(b)(3), enacted before ERISA, provides that a qualified plan
must benefit the employees in general even though it need not provide benefits for all the
employees. That section also provides that a profit-sharing plan is not for the exclusive benefit
of the employees in general if the funds therein may be used to relieve the employer from
contributing to a pension plan operating concurrently and covering the same employees.

1353 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.401-1(b)(1)(), enacted before ERISA, provides that a pension
plan, within the meaning of sec. 401(a), is a plan established and maintained by the employer
primarily to provide systematically for the payment of definitely determinable benefits to his
employees over a period of years, usually for life, after retirement. Under Treas. Reg. sec.
1.401(a)-1(b)(i), the definitely determinable benefit requirement continues to apply under

ERISA.
1354 Rev. Rul. 76-259, 1976-2 C.B. 111.
1355 Dub. L. No. 93-406, sec. 1015 (1974).

1356 Sec. 414(k).

460

=== PAGE 489 ===
as the date as of which the determination shall be made, in a way that precludes discretion on the
part of the employer. Additionally, the Revenue Ruling indicates that the benefits under a
defined benefit plan will not fail to be definitely determinable merely because the defined
contribution plan does not have a definite contribution formula. Thus, even though contributions
to the defined contribution plan may vary from year to year, the defined benefit plan benefit is
not precluded from being definitely determinable. The Revenue Ruling provides that the
determination of whether the defined benefit plan satisfies accrual rules under the Code may be
made based on the pre-offset benefit in certain cases. Finally, only the vested benefit in the
defined contribution plan may be used to offset the benefit under the defined benefit plan.

Generally, any defined benefit plan may be part of a floor-offset arrangement. There are,
however, restrictions on the types of defined contribution plans that may be part of a floor-offset
arrangement. Specifically, defined contribution plans with section 401(k) cash or deferred
arrangements may not be part of a floor-offset arrangement because of the requirement that no
benefits other than matches may be conditioned on whether the employee makes or does not
make elective deferrals.'*>” However, arrangements established by April 16, 1986, are not
subject to this restriction. °°

Like other qualified plans, floor-offset arrangements are subject to the Code’s
qualification requirements. Because floor-offset arrangements combine the features of two
different types of plans, special rules are applied in some cases, particularly to reconcile the
differences between the rules that apply only to one type of plan. For example, defined benefit
plans are subject to joint and survivor annuity requirements that do not apply to many defined
contribution plans. To reconcile this difference, Treasury regulations provide that the defined
contribution portion of a floor-offset arrangement must comply with qualified joint and survivor
requirements even if the plan would not otherwise be subject to those requirements. °°

One of the generally applicable qualification requirements that is relevant to the Enron
floor-offset arrangement is the “anticutback” rule, which provides that an amendment of a
qualified retirement plan may not decrease the accrued benefit of a plan participant.'3 An
amendment is treated as reducing an accrued benefit if, with respect to benefits accrued before
the amendment is adopted, the amendment has the effect of either (1) eliminating or reducing an
early retirement benefit or a retirement-type subsidy, or (2) except as provided by Treasury
regulations, eliminating an optional form of benefit.'>°!

1357 Sec. 401(k)(4)(A).

1358 Pub, L. No. 99-514, sec. 1116(f)(5) (1986).

1359 ‘Treas. Reg. sec. 1.401(a)-(20), Q&A 5(a).

1360 Sec. 411(d)(6) and sec. 204(g) of ERISA.

1361 With respect to the effect of an amendment on future benefits, the Code and ERISA
provide that a defined benefit pension plan or a money purchase pension plan may not be

amended so as to provide for a significant reduction in the rate of future benefit accrual
(including any elimination or reduction of a significant early retirement benefit or retirement-

461

=== PAGE 490 ===
For purposes of these rules, a participant’s accrued benefit under a defined benefit plan is
generally the participant’s accrued benefit determined under the plan and expressed in the form
of an annuity beginning at normal retirement age, 136 Consistent with this definition, the formula
under the plan for determining the annuity payable to the participant beginning at normal
retirement age (the “normal retirement annuity’) is the basis for the participant’s accrued benefit.

ERISA provisions

While defined contribution plans that invest in employer securities (including ESOPs),
may be part of a floor-offset arrangement, ERISA generally provides that a defined benefit plan
cannot invest more than 10 percent of its assets in qualifying employer securities. In 1987,
ERISA was amended to clarify that the defined contribution plan in a floor-offset arrangement is
treated as part of the defined benefit plan for this purpose.'*° This clarification reflected
concern that if individual accounts under a floor-offset arrangement are invested primarily or
exclusively in employer securities, financial difficulties of the employer and a decline in the
price of employer securities could cause the defined benefit plan to experience a funding
deficiency at a time when the employer is least able to fund it, resulting in an unreasonable risk
to the benefit security of the plan participants and to the pBGc.36

This change had the practical effect of prohibiting floor-offset arrangements involving
ESOPs or other defined contribution plans in which more than 10 percent of the combined asset
values of the defined benefit plan and the defined contribution plan are invested in employer
securities. However, the 1987 change applies only with respect to arrangements established after
December 17, 1987.13 The Enron floor-offset arrangement was therefore unaffected by the
provision, 27

type subsidy) unless certain notice requirements are met. Sec. 4980F of the Code and
sec. 204(h) of ERISA.

1362 Sec. 411(a)(7)(A)(i) and sec. 3(23)(A) of ERISA.
1363 ERISA sec. 407.

1364 ERISA sec. 407(d)(3)(C) and (d)(9), as enacted by sec. 9345 of Pub. L. No. 100-203
(1987).

1365 HR. Rep. No. 100-391, at 116-117 (1987).

1366 Pub. L. No. 100-203, sec. 9345(a)(3) (1987).

1367 According to Steven Kandarian, Executive Director of the PBGC, Enron’s floor-
offset ESOP arrangement and those of about 150 other companies were permitted under the
“grandfather” provision. Statement of Steven A. Kandarian, Executive Director, PBGC, to the

Senate Finance Committee, on February 27, 2002,
http://www.pbgc.gov/news/speeches/test_02_27_2002.htm.

462

=== PAGE 491 ===
ERISA contains general fiduciary duty standards that apply to all fiduciary actions.
Among them are requirements that plan fiduciaries generally discharge their duties solely in the
interest of participants and beneficiaries and with care, prudence, and diligence. A plan fiduciary
that breaches any of the fiduciary responsibilities, obligations, or duties imposed by ERISA is
personally liable to make good to the plan any losses to the plan resulting from such breach and
to restore to the plan any profits the fiduciary has made through the use of plan assets. A plan
fiduciary may be liable also for a breach of responsibility by another fiduciary in certain
circumstances.

As discussed above, under a so-called safe harbor provision, fiduciaries generally are not
liable for the investment decisions of plan participants in a defined contribution plan if the
participants control the investment of their account.!*°* The Department of Labor has stated this
safe harbor!'*® does not apply to the defined contribution plan portion of a floor-offset

arrangement. '°”° Thus, the general fiduciary rules apply, even with respect to decisions made by
participants.

Factual Background

The floor-offset arrangement involving Enron’s Retirement Plan and the Enron ESOP
was established in 1987.'°7! Under the arrangement, benefits accrued by participants under the
Enron Retirement Plan for service during 1987 through 1994 generally would be offset by the
equivalent annuity value!*”” of Enron stock held in one of two main subaccounts maintained for
participants in the Enron ESOP as of certain determination dates, generally the date that benefit
payments from the Enron Retirement Plan commence. The portion of the Enron ESOP that was
used as the basis for the offset was called the “ESOP Retirement Subaccount.” The computation
of the offset took into account previous distributions from the Enron ESOP. If the gross annuity
value of a participant’s ESOP Retirement Subaccount was greater than the benefit determined

1368 Soe Part TIL.A.4., above.
1369 See Part II.A.3., below.

1370 Preamble to the final regulations under ERISA sec. 404(c), 57 Fed. Reg. 46906,
46907, n.6 (Oct. 13, 1992).

1371 At the time, the Enron ESOP was not subject to the 10-percent limitation on
investment in qualifying employer securities. Further, because the floor-offset arrangement
between the Enron Retirement Plan and the Enron ESOP was established before December 1,
1987, ERISA changes limiting such arrangements, as discussed above, did not apply to it.

1372 This is defined by the Enron Retirement Plan as the single life annuity that could be
purchased under the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Group Annuity Contract No. 9373-0
(or any successor contract) based on a specified date of implementation of the purchase of an
annuity contract, a specified date of the first benefit payment under an annuity contract, and an
amount of distribution from a participant’s ESOP Retirement Subaccount. Sec. 20.2(a) of the
Enron Retirement Plan.

463

=== PAGE 492 ===
under the Enron Retirement Plan benefit formula, the participant would be entitled to the
1373
excess.

In general, depending on the value of Enron stock, the amount of the offset might be
greater than the value of a participant’s benefit under the Enron Retirement Plan at any given
time. If so, the excess in the ESOP Retirement Subaccount would have offset the participant’s
future benefits under the final average pay formula. If the offset amount was less than the
benefit under the Enron Retirement Plan, the Enron Retirement Plan would pay the portion of the
benefit that is not offset by the ESOP Retirement Subaccount.

By 1994, Enron began to consider strategies for phasing out the floor-offset
arrangement. '°”4 Based on the prevailing price of Enron stock, there was concern that many
Enron employees would be better off if the stock in their Enron ESOP accounts were made
available to them instead of remaining in the plan.'3” According to one Enron official, because
the Enron ESOP did not allow for in-service distributions from the Retirement Subaccount, some
employees had left Enron in order to access the value in their Enron ESOP accounts. Giving
them access to their accounts, it was thought, might mitigate this trend.'*”° An Enron executive
told the Joint Committee staff that a study performed for Enron by an outside consultant showed
that 97 percent of Enron employees would be better off if the Enron ESOP assets were freed up
and made available to them. This reportedly made freeing up the assets under the Enron ESOP
preferable to maintaining the current plan. Materials prepared for Enron’s human resources
personnel for responding to employee questions explain that phasing out the floor-offset
arrangement would “enabl[e] [employees] to take advantage of the strong performance of Enron
stock in the Enron Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) and benefit directly from any excess
value in [their] ESOP Retirement Subaccount[s].”!°”7

Enron would also benefit from the change. According to the materials prepared for
Enron’s human resources personnel, Enron would “receive an up-front reduction in the Enron
Retirement Plan’s expense for 1995 because of the ESop.”1378

1373 See Enron Retirement Program Guide, included in Appendix D to this Report.

1374 Facsimile memorandum dated May 26, 1994, from Patrick Mackin to Carol Jewett
concerning alternative strategies for phasing out the floor-offset arrangement. EVE1214712-
EVE1214724.

1375 Additionally, according to one Enron executive interviewed by Joint Committee staff
some employees had left Enron in order to get access to their ESOP accounts.

1376 Id.

1377 Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources personnel in responding to

questions from employees (Jan. 1995), included in Appendix D to this Report. See also, The
Enron Retirement Plan & ESOP Program Guide for Former Employees, EC000020149-
EC000020166.

1378 Id.

464

=== PAGE 493 ===
Enron officials decided to phase out the floor-offset arrangement on a gradual, five-year
schedule. For each year during the period 1996 through 2000, (1) the value of 20 percent of the
stock in participants’ Retirement Subaccounts would be frozen permanently and used to offset
participant’s final average pay benefit accrued during the period 1987 through 1994 and (2)

participants generally would have access to 20 percent of their vested Enron ESOP Retirement
Subaccount balances.!3””

Each January during 1996 through 2000, 20 percent of participants’ ESOP Retirement
Subaccount was withdrawable at their election. As discussed in detail below, participants had
four options with respect to each 20 percent increment of their ESOP Retirement Subaccount
released to them. For participants who chose to leave their shares in the Enron ESOP, the value
of that increment was fixed. A separate offset value was calculated for each 20 percent
increment of participants’ Retirement Subaccounts. The closing market stock price as of January
1 of each year determined the value of the offsets, permanently fixing that component of the
offset.!3®° If no sale of Enron stock occurred on such date, the closing price for the next
preceding day on which a sale occurred would be used. Subsequent changes in the value of
Enron stock did not change the part of the offset that had been fixed. The floor-offset
arrangement is discussed in further detail below.

The concept of locking in the stock price for the offset was developed by Enron
employees and executives as well as outside counsel. According to Enron’s outside counsel,
Enron management wanted “to take extra-ordinary efforts to find a way, if at all possible, to
avoid making all of the shares in the ESOP Retirement Account available at one time.”!2*!
Enron officials participating in the design of the phase out told the Joint Committee staff that
they were generally motivated by an orderly roll out of employees’ Enron ESOP accounts. They
believed that staggering the availability of employees’ shares in their Retirement Subaccounts
would “avoid market distortions in the trading of Enron stock...reduce the risk of fixing the
offsets based on an aberrant value, and...deter participants from making precipitous decisions
regarding the disposition of amounts that become distributable from their Offset Accounts.”!3%
The rationale was also explained as preventing “all of the shares [from] hit[ting] the market in a

137 Active employees with an ESOP Special Allocation Subaccount also had access to
the vested portion of that account. In addition, employees who were active and who were at least
age 50 and with at least five years of accrual service on January 1, 1995, received 100 percent
access to their shares in the Retirement Subaccount in January 1996.

1389 Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources personnel in responding to
questions from employees (Jan. 1995) states that the “specific day in January will probably be
the closing price on the first trading day of the year.” These materials are included in Appendix
D to this Report.

1381 Facsimile memorandum dated May 26, 1994, from Patrick Mackin to Carol Jewett of
Vinson & Elkins, EVE1214721-EVE1214722.

1382 Facsimile memorandum dated May 26, 1994, from Pat Mackin to Carol Jewett of

Vinson & Elkins, EVE1214721-EVE1214722. Also see Department of Labor Advisory Opinion
94-42A (Dec. 9, 1994).

465

=== PAGE 494 ===
given year as this could have a negative impact on the stock price. In addition, this allows
[employees] to lock in the offset at multiple points in time and continue to focus on increasing
the value of Enron stock through [their] efforts.”383

In connection with the phasing out of the floor-offset arrangement, the Enron ESOP was
frozen and the Enron Retirement Plan was continued as an independent plan.'3%4 No additional
shares of Enron stock were allocated to participants’ ESOP Savings Subaccounts after December
31, 1994, and participants were deemed to be 100 percent vested in those accounts as of that
date.!*8> Participants would vest in their Special Allocation Subaccounts over four years at a rate
of 25 percent per year, 1386

Enron ESOP participants who were actively employed by Enron on January 1, 1995, and
who during such employment had both attained age 50 and completed five or more years of
accrual service under the Enron Retirement Plan as of January 1, 1995, (“senior participants”)

1383 Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources personnel in responding to

questions from employees (Jan. 1995).

1384 Enron effected a transitional benefit accrual freeze under the Retirement Plan
conditioned on receipt of a favorable advisory opinion from the Department of Labor. See
Department of Labor Adv. Op. 94-42A (Dec. 9, 1994). The freeze provided that no participant
would be credited with accrual service for the 1995 plan year and any provisions of the
Retirement Plan which affect accrued benefits by reason of changes pertaining to a participant’s
employment (including compensation changes) would not apply to affect a member’s accrued
benefit by reason of events occurring in 1995.

1385 See Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources personnel in
responding to questions from employees (Jan. 1995), included in Appendix D to this Report.
Additionally, in late 1994, 1995 and 1996, small allocations were made to the accounts of
existing ESOP participants. On December 31, 1994, participants received an allocation
originally targeted to be five percent of their December 31, 1994, annualized base pay, adjusted
for projected 1995 dividends. The actual 1994 allocation was 2.826 percent of base pay. In
1995, an additional 0.427 percent of base pay was allocated from nonvested shares forfeited by
former participants. In 1996, an allocation of 0.524 percent was made. This represented the
difference between the total allocation and the five percent target amount, 1.223 percent of
December 31, 1994, base pay, which was to be provided as a credit under the Enron Cash
Balance Plan. This allocation and the special credit to the Enron Cash Balance Plan were made
in lieu of a Retirement Plan accrual for 1995. In 1996, participants in the Enron ESOP began to
directly receive the dividends on shares held in their Retirement Subaccounts and Special
Subaccounts, including those to which participants had not gained access, EC000021272-
EC000021280. Enron - Benefit Plans and Related Programs, Policies and Practices--Employee
Stock Ownership Plan (Dec. 14, 2001). The dividends are paid in cash on a quarterly basis to
participants. Id.

1386 Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources personnel in responding to
questions from employees (Jan. 1995).

466

=== PAGE 495 ===
could annually withdraw all of their vested interest in their ESOP Retirement Subaccounts as of
that date.!*®’ Beginning in January 1996, senior participants could also annually access in 20

percent increments special allocation subaccounts set up to hold special allocations made in
1994.

Also, beginning January 15, 1996, participants other than senior participants could
withdraw 20 percent of (1) their ESOP Retirement Accounts and (2) the vested portions of the
special allocation accounts set up to hold special allocations made in 1994,1388 Any amount not
withdrawn would be added to the future amounts available for withdrawal.'*®? Table 1 shows the
schedule on which participants could withdraw shares from their accounts.

1387 Tenth Amendment to the Enron Corp. Employee Stock Ownership Plan (Jan. 1, 1989
restatement), EC002674029. See also Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources
personnel in responding to questions from employees (Jan. 1995). Participants electing to retire
from active employment at retirement age who were 100 percent vested could withdraw their
total benefit from the Enron ESOP. Jd. The benefits of participants under the Enron
Retirement/Cash Balance Plan who left Enron before retiring would also be subject to the phased
out floor-offset arrangement.

1388 The ESOP also provided that participants could withdraw (1) from their ESOP
Savings Subaccounts amounts held for 24 months or more or (2) allocations of company
contributions, financed stock or reversion amounts credited to their ESOP Savings Subaccount
for at least 60 cumulative months, but in either case no amount in excess of the value of the
vested interest in their accounts was withdrawable. ESOP section 13.1 (Jan. 1, 1999,
restatement).

1389 Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources personnel in responding to
questions from employees (Jan. 1995). Participants could also elect to receive a partial
withdrawal and/or a partial rollover to an IRS or to the Enron Savings Plan. Jd. However, only
one such transaction could be processed each month. Id.

467

=== PAGE 496 ===
Table 1.-Amounts Available for Withdrawal under the Phase Out of the
Floor-Offset Arrangement 1996-2000

Date First Withdrawable

Number of Shares of Enron Stock Becoming
Withdrawable

January 15, 1996

One-fifth of total allocated shares.

January 15, 1997

An additional number of shares equal to the number of
shares which became withdrawable as of January 15,
1996, plus one-fourth of the amount of any shares
purchased with earnings after January 15, 1996, if any,
to the extent such shares have not become previously
withdrawable.

January 15, 1998

An additional number of shares equal to the number of
shares which became withdrawable as of January 15,
1996, plus one-third of the amount of any shares
purchased with earnings after January 15, 1996, if any,
to the extent such shares have not become previously
withdrawable.

January 15,1999

An additional number of shares equal to the number of
shares which became withdrawable as of January 15,
1996, plus one-half of the amount of any shares
purchased with earnings after January 15, 1996, if any,
to the extent such shares have not become previously
withdrawable.

January 15, 2000

An additional number of shares equal to the number of
shares which became withdrawable as of January 15,
1996, plus all remaining shares which had have not
become previously withdrawable.

For each year for which the floor-offset arrangement was phased out, the following four
options were available to participants with respect to the portion of their Retirement Subaccount
and Special Allocation Subaccount then accessible to them.'*” Participants could:

1390 See Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources personnel in
responding to questions from employees (Jan. 1995).

468


=== PAGE 497 ===
(1) Leave it in the Enron ESOP where it would remain invested in Enron stock;!39!

(2) Roll it over to the Enron Savings Plan where it would initially be invested in
Enron stock but could be reinvested in the Enron Savings Plan’s other investment
options;

(3) Roll it over to an IRA; or

(4) Receive the shares of Enron stock (although partial shares were distributable in
cash). 1392

Enron communicated the phasing out of the floor-offset arrangement to employees ina
variety of ways, including through Enron’s employee benefits newsletter EnSight'*”? and special
employee meetings.'°"4 Enron also provided employees with statements during the second
quarter of 1995 containing the estimated January 1, 1987, through December 31, 1994, accrued
benefit under the Enron Retirement Plan.'*”> Employees would also receive a communication to
assist them in comparing the estimated value of their ESOP Retirement Subaccounts as
compared to their estimated Enron Retirement Plan accrued benefit for that time period.'°°

Coincident with phasing out the floor-offset arrangement, Enron sought an advisory
opinion from the Department of Labor. Enron wanted the Department of Labor’s opinion as to
whether progressively phasing out the floor-offset arrangement over a five-year period would

1991 Tf a participant elected to leave a portion of their Retirement Subaccount in the Enron
ESOP at the time it first became withdrawable, the participant thereafter had rights to withdraw it
or to roll it over to an IRA or the Enron Savings Plan.

1392 ESOP Subaccounts Summary of Options, EC000021992; see Questions and answers
for use by Enron human resources personnel in responding to questions from employees (Jan.
1995).

1393 En Sight (Nov. 1994), EC000020204-EC00002021 1.

1394 Memorandum dated J anuary 11, 1995, from Phil Bazelides, Director of Enron
Corporate Human Resources, to all Enron employees enclosing the Enron Retirement Program
Guide and announcing schedule of employee meetings. EC000020294. In addition, participants
were encouraged to review the International Association for Financial Planning’s Consumer
Guide to Comprehensive Financial Planning. Memorandum from Kenneth Lay and Richard
Kinder to all Enron employees (July 26, 1995), EC000020144-000020146.

1395 Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources personnel in responding to

questions from employees (Jan. 1995).

1396 Id.

469

=== PAGE 498 ===
render the “grandfather” treatment for pre-1987 ESOPs inapplicable. 1397 pe Department of
Labor issued a favorable opinion on the phaseout on December 9, 1994,'3

Effective January 1, 1996, the final average pay benefit formula under the Enron
Retirement Plan was converted to a cash balance formula and the plan was renamed the “Enron
Corp. Cash Balance Plan.” The phased out floor-offset arrangement was retained under the
Enron Cash Balance Plan. Thus, under the Enron Cash Balance Plan, the portion of the final
average pay benefit under the Enron Retirement Plan attributable to years of accrual service
credited under the plan between January 1, 1987, and December 31, 1994 (“Offsetable Benefit”)
is offset according to the phasing out floor-offset arrangement. That is, the Offsetable Benefit is
reduced (but not below zero) by reference to sum of the five separate Enron ESOP offset
amounts (the total Enron ESOP Offset Amount).

An “Offsetable Amount” equal to the actuarially equivalent annuity for such 20 percent
would be determined based on the market value of the 20 percent portion on the release dates.
The annuity purchase values used to value the 20 percent increments were based on an interest
rate of 8.5 percent.'9°9

Exhibits to the Enron Cash Balance Plan are described as the “definitive interpretations”
of the floor-offset arrangement provisions.'4° Using an example included in those exhibits,
Table 2 shows how phasing out the floor-offset arrangement works for a participant who retires
or is terminated having left all the stock in their ESOP Retirement Subaccount. The example
includes a final average pay benefit attributable to years of service credited under the plan prior
to January 1, 1987 (“Non-Offsetable Benefit”). 1401

He According to Steven Kandarian, Executive Director of the PBGC, Enron’s floor-
offset arrangement and those of about 150 other companies were permitted under the
“srandfather” provision. Statement of Steven A. Kandarian, Executive Director, PBGC, to the
Senate Finance Committee, on February 27, 2002,
http://www.pbgc.gov/news/speeches/test_02_27_2002.htm.

1398 Department of Labor Adv. Op. 94-42A (Dec. 9, 1994).

1399 Prior to the phase out of the floor-offset arrangement, annuity purchase values were
determined under the Enron Retirement Plan as the single life annuity that could be purchased
under the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Group Annuity Contract No. 9373-0 (or any
successor contract) based on a specified date of implementation of the purchase of an annuity
contract, a specified date of the first benefit payment under an annuity contract, and an amount of
distribution from a participant’s ESOP Retirement Subaccount. First Amendment to Enron
Corp. Cash Balance Plan (effective Jan. 1, 1996), EC000020095-EC000020100.

1400 Enron Cash Balance Plan sec. 5.4 (effective Jan. 1, 1996). The exhibits are included
in Appendix D to this Report.

1401 Th the case of participants who are eligible to begin receiving benefits before

reaching normal retirement age, the benefit payable to such participants are reduced to reflect
early commencement of payments in accordance with the schedule for early reduced retirement

470

=== PAGE 499 ===
Table 2.-Example of Benefit Calculation Under
the Phased Out Floor-Offset Arrangement

Date of Birth 07/15/45
Date of Hire 09/15/84
Non-Offsetable Benefit, 12/31/94 $1,620
Offsetable Benefit, 12/31/94 $6,109
Total Final Average Pay Benefit before Offset,
12/31/94 $7,729
Enron ESOP Retirement Account Balance, 12/31/95 800 shares
Share ,
History of ESOP Releases Datelof {shares Price at Market Value of
Release Released Release
Release
Release 1 01/01/1996 160 $31 $4,960
Release 2 01/01/1997 160 $34 $5,440
Release 3 01/01/1998 160 $34 $5,440
Release 4 01/01/1999 160 $37 $5,920
Release 5 01/01/2000 - 160 $39 $6,240
(b)
Fi (c)
(a) Actuarial
5 a Market (c)/(b)
Calculation of ESOP Offset Amount Age at Equiv. Value of | ESOP Offset Amount
Release Annuity
Release
Factor
Release 1 50 and 5 | 5.476355 | $4,960 $2,003
months
Release 2 Sland5 | > 6g684s | $5,440 $2,025
months
Release 3 52and5 | 9.915207 | $5,440 $1,866
months
Release 4 53and5_ | 3 163021 | $5,920 $1,872
months
Release 5 S4and5 | 3.431878 | $6,240 $1,818
months
Total ESOP Offset Amount = $9,584
Calculation of Final Average Pay (1) Non-Offsetable (2) Offsetable (3) Total ESOP Offset
Benefit at Normal Retirement Benefit Benefit Amount
$1,620 $6,109 $9,584
Normal Retirement Benefit = (1) + [(2) - (3), but not less than zero] = $1,620

benefits under the Enron Cash Balance Plan. Enron Cash Balance Plan (effective Jan. 1, 1996),
sec. 5.4(b).

471

=== PAGE 500 ===
In the example shown in Table 2, the benefit payable to the participant is comprised of an
Offsetable Benefit of $6,109 and a Non-Offsetable Benefit of $1,620. The total ESOP Offset
Amount is $9,584 and the normal retirement benefit payable from the Enron Cash Balance Plan
is $1,620. Thus, the final average pay benefit attributable to years of accrual service credited
under the Enron Retirement Plan between January 1, 1987, and December 31, 1994, is entirely
offset by the Enron ESOP Offset Amount.

During 1996 to 2000, Enron stock was trading between approximately $18 and $44,140
At the end of 2002, Enron’s stock was trading at $0.62.'4%

IRS review

Enron’s floor-offset arrangement is currently under review by the IRS. The issues under
review are discussed below.

Discussion of Issues

Calculation of benefits under floor-offset arrangements generally

In a typical floor-offset arrangement, when a participant retires, the value of the
participant’s benefit under the defined benefit plan is determined without regard to the offset.
Then, the value of the participant’s defined contribution plan account is converted to an annuity
starting at retirement. This amount is then offset against the benefit determined under the
defined benefit plan to determine how much of the participant’s benefits will be paid from each
plan. The defined benefit plan provides a floor so that if, for example, there is poor investment
performance in the defined contribution plan, a plan participant will receive a benefit at least
equal to the benefit under the defined benefit plan.

For example, suppose a participant has earned a benefit under the defined benefit plan
portion of a floor-offset arrangement (determined before the offset) equal to an annuity of
$60,000 per year starting at retirement, and that the annuity equivalent of the participant’s
defined contribution plan account is $5,000 per year. Under the floor-offset, the participant
would not receive $65,000 a year -- the combination of the two -- rather only $60,000. The
$5,000 per year annuity equivalent under the defined contribution plan is subtracted from the
annuity under the defined benefit plan, so the participant receives an annuity of $55,000 per year
under the defined benefit plan, plus the account balance under the defined contribution plan.

1402 Split-adjusted stock prices are as reported in the Historical Market Data Center™
from Dow Jones & Company, Inc. According to an attachment to minutes of the November 1,
2001, meeting of the Administrative Committee, the price of Enron stock ranged from $36.63 to
$63.81 during 1996 to 2000. ESOP Facts, attachment to Minutes of the Meeting of the
Administrative Committee (Nov. 1, 2001), EC00001855. Although it is not clear from the
attachment, the Enron stock prices listed in ESOP Facts do not appear to reflect stock splits that
occurred during this time period.

1403 Td.

472

=== PAGE 501 ===
On the other hand, suppose the annuity equivalent of the defined contribution account
was $100,000 per year for offset purposes, the participant would be entitled only to the amount
in the defined contribution plan and would not receive any benefit from the defined benefit plan.

The Enron floor-offset arrangement operated in this general manner, at least until it was
phased out and the value of the offset was set over the period 1996 to 2000. Issues relating to
the termination of Enron floor-offset arrangement, as well as other issues raised by the
arrangement, are discussed below.

“Locking in’’ the offset

The IRS is reviewing the floor-offset arrangement to determine if it meets applicable
qualification requirements. The main issue raised is the “locking in” of the value of the offset
applicable to benefits earned under the Enron Retirement Plan during 1987 to 1994. As
described above, during 1996 through 2000, Enron stock traded at approximately $18 to $44. At
the end of 2002, the price of Enron stock was $0.62. Thus, for example, for a participant retiring
in 2002, the locked in value of the ESOP offset is far higher than the offset would be if it were
computed at retirement under the original terms of the plan.

As a result of its review, the IRS informed Enron that it was intending to issue an adverse
determination with respect to the floor-offset arrangement. The IRS and Enron had a conference
in December 2002, regarding the proposed adverse determination. During the conference, the
IRS explained to Enron that the bases for the proposed adverse determination include that the
locking in of the offset violates the anticutback rule and that the locking in results in an
impermissible forfeiture. Enron has until February 24, 2002, to provide any additional
information or legal arguments in support of its position that the locking in of the offset meets
the qualification requirements.

The effect of the resolution of this issue on plan participants may vary depending on the
participant’s circumstances. For example, whether the locking in of the offset caused a reduction
in a participant’s accrued benefit may depend on whether the participant took a distribution at the
time of the locking in or left his or her account balance in the ESOP.

The final resolution of the issue is made more complicated by the bankruptcy. Enron and
its creditors have an interest in the potential liability Enron might have if the offset is determined
to be invalid. The interest of the creditors may affect the actions Enron takes in connection with
the proposed adverse determination. For example, Enron could agree to correct the problem and
make appropriate additional contributions. However, depending on the amount involved, the
creditors may or may not agree with such an approach. A variety of other resolutions are also
possible at this point in time.

Other issues

In addition to the locking-in, other issues may arise under the floor-offset arrangement.

473

=== PAGE 502 ===
Under the applicable authorities, the defined benefit plan in a floor-offset arrangement
must provide definitely determinable benefits taking into account the offset.“ Thus, the plan
must specify the interest and mortality assumptions, as well as the date as of which the
determination shall be made. Plan documents reviewed by Joint Committee staff indicate that
for purposes of determining the offset amount associated with a particular ESOP release, the
Enron Retirement/Cash Balance Plan used the single life annuity commencing at age 65 that is
actuarially equivalent to the market value of the stock released under the Enron ESOP at the date
of release based on the participant’s age, an 8.5 percent interest rate assumption and post-age 65
mortality assumptions under the 1984 Unisex Pension Mortality Table set back one year, 140°

Further, under a floor-offset arrangement, only the vested benefit in the defined
contribution plan may be used to offset the benefit under the defined benefit plan.“ Materials
reviewed by Joint Committee staff show that under Enron’s floor-offset arrangement, the offset
amount was based on shares of Enron stock in participants’ Enron ESOP Retirement
Subaccounts.'“” Any Enron ESOP participant who was actively employed by Enron as of
December 31, 1994, was 100 percent vested in his Retirement Subaccount.'“° Thus, benefits

accrued under the Enron Retirement Plan were offset by vested benefits under the Enron
Esop.'4”

Additionally, under applicable regulations, the defined contribution portion of a floor-
offset arrangement must comply with qualified joint and survivor requirements even if the plan
would not otherwise be subject to those requirements. Thus, the Enron ESOP may be required to
offer benefits in the form of a qualified joint and survivor annuity because the portion of the
benefit accrued under the final average pay formula of the Enron Retirement Plan during 1996 to
2000 may be offset by a participant’s vested benefit in the Enron ESOP. In some cases, prior to
the November 1996 amendment to the Enron ESOP providing that the standard form of benefit
for married participants generally was a joint and survivor annuity, participants in the Enron
Retirement Plan/Cash Balance Plan whose accrued benefits under the Plan were completely

1404 Rey. Rul. 76-259, 1976-2 C.B. 111.

1405. Sec, 5.2(1), Enron Cash Balance Plan (Jan. 1, 2001, restatement).
1406 See Rev. Rul. 76-259, 1976-2 C.B. 111.

1407 Sec. 5.4, Enron Cash Balance Plan (Jan. 1, 2001, restatement).

1408 The offset-arrangement applies to benefits accrued under the Enron Retirement Plan
from January 1, 1987, through December 31, 1994.

1409 Prior to the phase out of the floor-offset arrangement, in the case of a distribution

prior to retirement, the offset was based on the value of the amount distributed from the ESOP,
which was vested amounts.

474

=== PAGE 503 ===
offset by their benefit under the Enron ESOP may not have been offered a qualified joint and
survivor annuity.'“!°

2. Conversion of the Enron Retirement Plan to the Enron Cash Balance Plan

During 1994, Enron considered changing the design of the Enron Retirement Plan.!4"!

By the end of 1994, plans were in place to convert the benefit formula under the Enron
Retirement Plan to a cash balance formula.

Present Law
Overview

As described above,'*! a cash balance plan is a defined benefit plan with benefits
resembling the benefits associated with defined contribution plans. Under a cash balance
formula, the benefit is defined by reference to a hypothetical account balance, which is credited
with pay credits and interest credits. Although a participant’s benefit under a cash balance plan
is described in terms of a hypothetical account balance, as a defined benefit plan, a cash balance
plan is required to provide benefits in the form of a life annuity commencing at a participant’s
normal retirement age. This annuity is determined as the actuarial equivalent of the participant’s
account balance at normal retirement age, using interest and mortality factors specified in the
plan. The annuity payable at normal retirement age serves as the basis for the participant’s
accrued benefit.

Cash balance plans are subject to the qualification requirements applicable to defined
benefit plans generally. However, because such plans have features of both defined benefit plans
and defined contributions plans, questions arise as to the proper application of the qualification
requirements to such plans, particularly if a defined benefit plan with a typical benefit formula is
converted to a cash balance plan formula. Issues that commonly arise include, in the case of a
conversion to a cash balance plan formula, the application of the rule prohibiting a cutback in
accrued benefits'*!? and the application of the age discrimination rules. These rules are
discussed below. Other issues have been raised in connection with cash balance plans, including

1410 As described above, in Part II.B.5., in November 1996, the Enron ESOP was
amended to provide that the standard form of benefit generally was a joint and survivor annuity
for married participants and a single life annuity for unmarried participants. Under the 1999
restatement of the Enron ESOP, an annuity was an alternative form of benefit to the standard
lump sum. The annuity form of benefit under the Enron ESOP was eliminated effective August
15, 2001.

1411 Minutes of the Meeting of the Administrative Committee (Apr. 13, 1994),
EC0000766692.

1412 See Part II.A.2., above.

1413 Sec. 411(d)(6).

475

=== PAGE 504 ===
the proper method for applying the accrual rules and the proper method for determining lump
sum distributions.

There is little guidance under present law with respect to many of the issues raised by
cash balance conversions. In 1999, the IRS imposed a moratorium on determination letters for
cash balance conversions pending clarification of applicable legal requirements.'4"4 Under the
moratorium, all determination letter requests regarding cash balance plans are sent to the
National Office for review; however, the National Office is not currently acting on these
plans.'4! As described below, the Treasury Department recently issued proposed regulations
addressing certain issues relating to cash balance plans.

Under ERISA, employer decisions regarding plan design are generally considered “settler
functions” that are not subject to ERISA’s fiduciary rules. Implementation of plan design
changes may, however, involve discretionary authority with respect to plan administration and,
thus, may involve fiduciary obligations.

In addition to raising legal questions, conversions of cash balance plans in the 1990’s also
received considerable media attention. A major issue raised in the media was the treatment of
longer-service workers, who were expected to receive greater benefits under a typical defined
benefit plan than under a cash balance plan. Concerns were raised that, under certain plan
designs, longer-service workers (who also tend to be older), were being treated unfairly (even if
legal requirements had technically been met) upon conversion to a cash balance plan.

Protection of accrued benefits

In general

The Code generally prohibits an employer from amending a plan’s benefit formula to
reduce benefits that have already accrued (the “anticutback rule”).'*!° For this purpose, an
amendment is treated as reducing accrued benefits if it has the effect of eliminating or reducing

an early retirement benefit or a retirement-type subsidy or of eliminating an optional form or
benefit.!417

The “anticutback rule” applies in the context of cash balance plan conversions. Because
of this rule, after conversion to a cash balance design, a plan still must provide employees with

1414 nnouncement 2003-1, 2003-2 LR.B. 281, http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/a-03-

Lpdf.
1415 Id.

1416 Sec. 411(d)(6). The provisions do not, however, protect benefits that have not yet
accrued but would have in the future if the plan’s benefit formula had not changed.

1417 Sec. 411(d)(6)(B).

476

=== PAGE 505 ===
the normal retirement benefit that he or she had accrued before the conversion.'*!®> However, the
plan may determine benefits for years following the conversion in a variety of ways, while still
satisfying the anticutback rule. Common plan designs are discussed below.

Wearaway (or “greater of’ approach)

Under a “wearaway” approach, a participant does not accrue any additional benefits after
the conversion until the participant’s benefits under the cash balance formula exceed their
preconversion accrued benefit. Because of this effect, plans with a wearaway are also referred to
as using the “greater of” method of calculating benefits. Plan design can greatly affect the length
of any wearaway period.

Upon a conversion to a cash balance plan, participants are given an opening account
balance. The pay and interest credits provided under the plan are then added to this opening
account balance. The opening account balance may be determined in a variety of ways and is
generally a question of plan design. For example, an employer may create an opening account
balance that is designed to approximate the benefit a participant would have had, based on the
participant’s compensation and years of service, if the cash balance formula had been in effect in
prior years. As another example, an employer may convert the preconversion accrued benefit
into a lump sum amount and establish this amount as the opening account balance. Depending
on the interest and mortality assumptions used, this lump sum amount may or may not equal the
actuarial present value of the participant’s accrued benefit as of the date of conversion,
determined using the statutory interest and mortality assumptions required for lump sum
calculations.

Under the wearaway approach, the participant’s protected benefit is compared to the
normal retirement benefit that is provided by the account balance (plus pay and interest credits),
and the participant does not earn any new benefits until the new benefit exceeds the protected
accrued benefit. For example, suppose the value of the protected accrued benefit is $40,000, and
the opening account balance under the cash balance formula provides a normal retirement benefit
of $35,000. The participant will not earn any new benefits until the hypothetical balance under
the cash balance formula increases to the extent that it provides a normal retirement benefit
exceeding $40,000.

No wearaway (or “sum of ” approach)

Under a plan without a wearaway, a participant’s benefit under the cash balance plan
consists of the sum of (1) the benefit accrued before conversion plus (2) benefits under the cash
balance formula for years of service after the conversion.'“!? This approach is more favorable to

1418 Certain other plan features, such as early retirement subsidies, must also be
protected.

‘419 Th some cases, the plan may convert the protected benefit into a lump sum equivalent
for purposes of the opening account balance. Even if at the time of the initial calculation the
opening balance equals the value of the protected benefit, the account balance may not continue
to reflect the value of the protected benefit over time, depending on the actuarial assumptions

477

=== PAGE 506 ===
plan participants than the wearaway approach, because they earn benefits under the new plan
formula immediately. This approach is also sometimes referred to as the “A + B” method, where
A is the protected benefit and B is benefits under the cash balance formula.

Grandfathering

For older and longer-service participants, benefits under a cash balance formula tend to
be lower than the benefits a participant may have expected to receive under the traditional
defined benefit formula (the “old” formula).'*° The employer might therefore provide some
type of “grandfather” to participants already in the plan or to older or longer-service employees.
For example, the participants might be given a choice between the old formula and the cash
balance formula for future benefit accruals, or, in the case or a final average pay plan, the plan
may stop crediting service under the old formula, but continue to apply post-conversion pay
increases, so the employee’s preconversion benefit increases with post-conversion pay increases.
This approach goes beyond preserving the benefit protected by the anticutback rules.

Age discrimination

In general, the Code prohibits reductions in the benefit accrual rates (including the
cessation of accruals) for defined benefit plan participants on account of attainment of any
age.!"?! Attainment of any age means a participant’s growing older. Similarly, the Code
prohibits a defined contribution plan from ceasing allocations, or reducing the rate at which
amounts are allocated to a participant’s account due to attainment of any age. Parallel
requirements exist in ERISA and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (“ADEA”). 1422

These provisions do not necessarily prohibit all benefit formulas under which a reduction
in accruals is correlated with participants’ age in some manner. Thus, for example, a plan may

limit the total amount of benefits, or may limit the years of service or participation considered in
determining benefits. 1423

In general terms, an age discrimination issue arises under cash balance plans because
there is a longer time for interest credits to accrue on hypothetical contributions to the account.
Thus, for example, a $1,000 hypothetical contribution made when a plan participant is age 30

used. Thus, a cash balance plan may not rely on the cash balance formula to protect accrued
benefits because it may encounter problems under the anticutback rule (depending on the
actuarial assumptions used).

1420 This is sometimes the reduction in benefits that is referred to in connection with cash
balance conversions, i.e., a reduction in expected benefits, not accrued benefits.

1421 Sec. 411(b)(1)(H).

1422 parallel provisions are found in ERISA sec. 204(b)(1)(H) and ADEA, 29 U.S.C. sec.
623(i).

1423 Sec. 411(b)(1)(HV(ii).

478

=== PAGE 507 ===
will be worth more at normal retirement age (e.g., age 65) and thus provide a higher annuity
benefit at normal retirement age than the same contribution made on behalf of an older
participant closer to normal retirement age. This issue is not limited to cash balance plan
conversions, but applies to cash balance plans generally. Other age discrimination issues may

also arise, depending in part on plan design, e.g., whether the plan has a “wearaway” (described
below).

Proposed regulations issued

On December 10, 2002, the Treasury Department issued proposed regulations relating to
the application of age discrimination prohibitions to defined benefit plans, including special rules
for cash balance plans. ‘474 The proposed regulations permit a participant’s rate of benefit accrual
for a year under a cash balance benefit plan to be determined without regard to interest credits,
the right to which accrued before the beginning of the year. Therefore, compliance with the
prohibition on a reduction in the rate of benefit accrual on account of the attainment of any age
may be tested by reference to the pay credits provided under the plan. As a result, a plan that
provides all participants with the same rate of pay credit generally will not violate this
prohibition.’ However, the converted plan must qualify as an “eligible cash balance plan.” In
order to be an “eligible cash balance plan,” a defined benefit plan must satisfy each of the
following requirements for accruals in the current plan year:

dQ) The normal form of benefit is stated as an immediate payment of the balance in a
hypothetical account; and

(2) At the same time the participant accrues an addition to the hypothetical account,
the participant accrues the right to annual (or more frequent) future interest credits
(without regard to future service) at a reasonable rate of interest that does not
decrease because of the attainment of any age. These interest credits must be
provided for all future periods, including after normal retirement age. An eligible
cash balance plan cannot treat interest credits after normal retirement age as
actuarial increases that are offset against the otherwise required accrual.

1424 Prop. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.411(b)-2. The proposed regulations provide guidance on
how to determine the rate of benefit accrual or rate of allocation. The proposed regulations also
address a number of other issues, including nondiscrimination testing for cash balance plans.

1425 This approach is consistent with the court’s interpretation of the age discrimination
prohibition in Eaton v. Onan Corporation, 117 F. Supp. 2d 812 (S.D. Ind. 2000). In that case,
the court rejected plaintiffs’ argument that, for purposes of this prohibition, the rate of benefit
accrual under a cash balance plan for a year should be determined by reference to the increase in
a participant’s normal retirement benefit that results from the pay credit for the year and any
related future interest credits the right to which accrues in that year (similar to the manner in
which the accrual rules apply to a cash balance plan).

479

=== PAGE 508 ===
Additionally, the proposed regulations provide that, if the plan was converted to a cash
balance plan, the conversion must be accomplished in one of two ways. Specifically, the
converted plan must either:

() Determine each participant’s benefit as not less than the sum of the participant’s
benefits accrued under the traditional defined benefit plan and the cash balance
account (the “sum of” method); or

(2) Establish each participant’s opening account balance as an amount not less than
the actuarial present value of the participant’s prior accrued benefit, using
reasonable actuarial assumptions (the “greater of” method).'46

The preamble to the proposed regulations states that the regulations cannot be relied on
until adopted in final form. Even if the proposed regulations are issued in final form, the
preamble indicates that they will apply on a prospective basis only.

The IRS moratorium on determination letters for cash balance plans will not end before
the proposed regulations are issued in final form. '477

Notice of a significant reduction in future benefit accruals

As a result of concerns that participants affected by conversions to cash balance plans had
not received sufficient notice of the effect of the conversion, a specific notice requirement was
enacted in 2001.'*”8 Under present law, the plan administrator of a defined benefit plan or a
money purchase pension plan must provide notice concerning a plan amendment that provides
for a significant reduction in the rate of future benefit accrual, including any elimination or
significant reduction of an early retirement benefit for retirement-type subsidy.” Details of the
notice requirement are contained in Treasury regulations.'“° An excise tax is imposed on
failures to comply with the notice requirement. '**!

1426 Depending on the actuarial assumptions used, this amount may or may not equal the
present value of a participants’ protected accrued benefit, determined using statutory interest and
mortality assumptions.

1427 4 wnouncement 2003-1, 2003-2 LR.B. 281, http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/a-03-

Lpdf.
128 Dub. L. No. 107-16, sec. 659(a)(1) (2001).
1229 Sec. 4980F. There is also a comparable ERISA provision.
1430 Treas. Reg. sec. 54.4980F-1.
1431 Sec, 4980F. The excise tax is generally equal to $100 per day for each person with

respect to whom a failure to comply occurs, subject to a maximum of $500,000 per taxable year
in the case of unintentional failures.

480

=== PAGE 509 ===
Factual Background

Decision to convert to a cash balance formula

In 1994, Enron officials began to consider implementing a new benefit formula under the
Enron Retirement Plan.'*2? The information provided to the Joint Committee staff does not
contain much information regarding the reasons the Enron Retirement Plan was converted to a
cash balance formula. Interviews with former Enron personnel familiar with the issue indicate
that several reasons influenced the decision.

Enron envisioned its work force as increasingly mobile and consisting of “fewer full
career or single career employees.”!4? It was thought that Enron’s employees desired benefits
which were more portable than their benefits under the Enron Retirement Plan.'** A cash
balance formula was viewed as meeting the needs of Enron’s workforce. Additionally, the new
formula was described as better matching Enron’s vision of future workforce benefit plans.”"43
In addition, a cash balance formula would be simpler, making it easier for employees to
understand and track the value of their retirement benefit.'“° The decision was described to

employees as “an effort to align Enron’s retirement program with the company’s approach to
business.”!437

According to materials reviewed by Joint Committee staff, Enron’s decision to convert to
acash balance formula was “not a cost savings decision.”!“3®> However, when the prospect of a
conversion was presented to the Administrative Committee by Enron’s Vice President for
Human Resources, one of Enron’s “benefit objectives” was described as “shared responsibility

1432 Minutes of meeting of Enron Corp. Retirement Plan Administrative Committee
(April 20, 1994), EC00766693-EC000766710.

1433 Dresentation to Administrative Committee - Retirement Plan - from Defined Benefit
to Cash Balance, presented at April 20, 1994, meeting of Enron Corp. Retirement Plan
Administrative Committee, EC000766696-EC000766710.

1434 Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources personnel in responding to
questions from employees (Jan. 1995), included in Appendix D to this Report.

1435 Presentation to Administrative Committee - Retirement Plan - from Defined Benefit
to Cash Balance, presented at April 20, 1994, meeting of Enron Corp. Retirement Plan
Administrative Committee, EC000766696-EC0007667 10.

1436 En Sight (Dec. 1994), EC000020204-EC000020213.

1437 Id.

1438 Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources personnel in responding to

questions from employees (Jan. 1995).

481

=== PAGE 510 ===
for cost,” in a shift away from the historical “paternalistic traditional defined benefit pension
plan” and toward “individual responsibility.” “39

While converting to a cash balance formula would mean a reduction in Enron’s expense
for 1995, for each of the subsequent nine years, the new formula would be more expensive than
the old formula and for the 10-year period going forward, the new formula would be slightly
more expensive for Enron.!“° In fact, a comparative analysis prepared by an outside consultant
showed that Enron was expected to contribute more cash under the new formula than under the
old formula until 2002.'“"

Enron chose a five percent of pay cash balance formula to be competitive with other
companies’ retirement benefits.'“

Plan provisions related to conversion

As of January 1, 1996, participants in the Enron Cash Balance Plan were credited with
accruals of five percent of their monthly compensation as well as interest accruals as of the last
day of each calendar month starting January 1, 1997.14

Under the Enron Cash Balance Plan, normal retirement benefits consist of the actuarial
equivalent of a series of monthly payments for a participant’s life commencing on the first day of
the month coinciding with or next following the date of their retirement. Each monthly payment
is equal to the sum of (1) the monthly amount of the participant’s final average pay benefit
(using the same formula as under the Enron Retirement Plan)!“ and (2) the monthly payment

1439 Id.

1440 Td. Ina letter to the Department of Labor submitted in connection with its 1994
request for an advisory opinion, Enron’s outside counsel explained that because the cash balance
formula would have the effect of accelerating accruals into a participant’s earlier years of
employment with Enron, the effect, from a funding perspective, would be to increase the funding
to the plan in the short run above that which would be required if its original formula were

retained. Letter dated November 23, 1994, from Enron’s outside counsel to the Department of
Labor.

1441 The comparative analysis of Enron’s estimated funding obligations under the final
average pay formula and the cash balance formula is included in Appendix D to this Report.

1442 Questions and answers for use by Enron human resources personnel in responding to
questions from employees (Jan. 1995), included in Appendix D to this Report.

1443 Sec, 4 of Cash Balance Plan (effective Jan. 1, 1996).

1444 The portion of a participant’s final average pay benefit which is attributable to
accruals under the plan during January 1, 1987, through December 31, 1994, are offset by their
interest in their ESOP Retirement Subaccount. The offset does not apply to the benefit the
participant would have received under the plan as of December 31, 1986, or to any benefit

482

=== PAGE 511 ===
derived by converting the participant’s cash balance accrual as of the annuity starting date into a
single life annuity on an actuarially equivalent basis. Thus, under the terms of the converted
plan, a participant’s benefit generally is the sum of the participant’s benefits accrued under the
traditional defined benefit plan and the cash balance account.

Additionally, the Enron Cash Balance Plan includes special provisions for participants in
the Enron Retirement Plan who:

(1) as of January 1, 1995, (a) were employed by Enron; (b) had attained age 50; and
(c) completed five years of service under the Enron Retirement Plan (“Transition
Participants”), and

(2) who retired from Enron on or before January 1, 2002.

The special provisions were intended to provide protection for such Transition Participants
against adverse affects of the conversion to the cash balance formula.'“> According to Enron,
there were approximately 790 such Transition Participants but only about 140 would be
adversely affected by the conversion.“

Under the special provision, the retirement benefit for Transition Participants is the
normal retirement benefit as described above, with the application of some special rules. The
special rules are, in general, that Transition Participants who retired by January 1, 2002, are
entitled to the better of the old or the new benefit formula.through the participant’s last day
worked.'**” That is, benefits for Transition Participants are increased by crediting additional

accrued under the cash balance formula. Enron Cash Balance Plan section 5.1 (Jan. 1, 2001,
restaternent).

1445 1 etter dated October 25, 1994, from Vinson & Elkins to the Department of Labor in
support of its application for an Advisory Opinion. See Department of Labor Adv. Op. 94-42A
(Dec. 9, 1994). Enron represented that it would amend the Retirement Plan to provide that the
benefits accrued by such adversely affected participants on an after January 1, 1995, will be
equal to the greater of (1) benefits under the Cash Balance formula increased by certain
allocations to the ESOP or (2) benefits under the Retirement Plan’s formula as in effect on
December 31, 1994.

1446 T etter dated October 25, 1994, from Enron’s outside counsel to the Department of
Labor in support of its application for an advisory opinion.

47 The Plan provided (1) that a Transition Participant’s accrual service will generally be
increased for the period of employment January 1, 1995, to January 1, 2002, by crediting the
participant with one month of accrual service for each calendar month of employment service
with Enron and (2) that a Transition Participant’s final average pay will be computed on the basis
of a period consisting of the sixty consecutive months of employment within the last one
hundred twenty months of employment with Enron prior to January 1, 2002, which yield the
highest average compensation. Additionally, a Transition Participant who becomes disabled
after January 1, 1995, will be credited with full and partial years of accrual service for each

483

=== PAGE 512 ===
accrual service with Enron under the final average pay formula through January 1, 2002, and by
considering compensation earned up to such date.!“8 The Enron Cash Balance Plan also
includes a special provision for Transition Participants who terminate employment with Enron
before attaining age 55,1449

The Enron Cash Balance Plan was amended effective November 1, 2001, to eliminate the
requirement that the Transition Participant terminate employment prior to January 1, 2002, to
qualify for the special provision.'*°°

Information provided to participants

The decision to convert the Enron Retirement Plan to the Enron Cash Balance Plan was
communicated to participants in EnSight, Enron’s “all-employee publication dedicated to
benefits education”. The November 1994 edition of EnSight described “the decision to change
benefits [as] an effort to align Enron’s retirement program with the company’s approach to
business.” It explained that “[w]hile economics were considered, cost is not the driving factor.
In fact, these enhancements will mean an increase in Enron’s costs over the next decade. But as
Enron continues to thrive in a culture built on change and built to respond positively to change,
the compan yale committed to retirement benefits that are: Fair...Portable...Simple...and
Valuable.”

Enron also described the conversion to participants in the Enron Retirement Program
Guide.\“? The Program Guide includes an example that estimates a participant’s benefit under
the Enron Cash Balance Plan.'*°? Materials reviewed by Joint Committee staff do not contain an
example provided to participants of the special provision for Transition Participants.

period between January 1, 1995, and January 1, 2002, during which the participant was disabled.
Enron Cash Balance Plan sec. 13.2 (effective Jan 1, 1996).

1448 Exhibit V to the Enron Cash Balance Plan is an example of the calculation of regular
and transition benefits under the Plan. The exhibit is included in Appendix D to this Report.

1449 Enron Cash Balance Plan sec. 13.2(a) (Jan. 1, 2001, restatement).

1450 Fifth Amendment to Enron Corp. Cash Balance Plan (effective Jan. 1, 1996).
1451 EnSight, November 1994, EC000020206.

1452 Pnron Retirement Program Guide, included in Appendix D to this Report.

1453 Id.

484

=== PAGE 513 ===
IRS technical advice pending

An IRS examination of the Enron Cash Balance Plan’s 1996 year resulted in a request by
IRS examiners for technical advice from the IRS National Office.'** The technical advice
raised the concern that as a result of the floor-offset arrangement, in some instances, the final
average pay benefit was completely offset so that participants are offered no qualified joint and
survivor annuity, notwithstanding Code requirements that benefits accrued under the final
average pay formula be offered in the form of a qualified joint and survivor annuity.’ > IRS
examiners also asked the IRS National Office to review the effect of the conversion of the Enron
Retirement Plan to a cash balance formula, in accordance with the September 15, 1999, directive
that all open cases involving conversions of defined benefit plans to cash balance plans be
submitted for review by the National Office.'4%

The request arrived in National Office of the IRS on March 17, 2000, and is currently
under review. On April 12, 2000, Enron submitted to the IRS a request for a determination of
the tax-qualified status of the Enron Cash Balance Plan.'*°’ The IRS notified Enron that its
request for a determination letter would be associated with the request for technical advice from
IRS examiners. The request is currently pending.

Discussion of Issues

Changes in retirement plan design, including significant changes in benefit structure and
formulas, are not uncommon. Plan design changes can occur for a variety of reasons, including
employer cost considerations, employer views regarding appropriate retirement benefits, the
popularity of an alternative plan design among employees, and mergers of plans with disparate
provisions due to corporate transactions. The timing of any particular plan design changes may
also depend on a variety of factors, including administrative convenience to the employer and
others involved in the change.

During the 1990s, conversions of typical defined benefit plans to cash balance formulas
were common among mid- to large-size employers. There was considerable media attention
regarding such conversions, particularly in cases in which the plan contained a “wearaway” or in
which older or longer-service employees close to retirement were denied the opportunity to

1454 The advice requested from the IRS National Office concerned a technical issue that
arose with respect to the examination of the Enron Cash Balance Plan, as described in Part
IL.B.6.

1455 At the time the technical advice was requested, the Enron Corp. ESOP did not offer
benefits in the form of a joint and survivor annuity.

1456 | nnouncement 2003-1, 2003-2 LR.B. 281, http://www. irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/a-03-

Lpdf

1457 As described above at Part II.B.6., an application for determination of the tax-
qualified status of the Enron Cash Balance Plan was also submitted on February 15, 2002.

485

=== PAGE 514 ===
continue to accrue benefits under the old plan formula.'4*8 While perhaps complying with the
law, such plan designs were viewed by many as unfair to certain participants. There was concern
that some employers were adversely affecting participants in order to reduce costs. There was
also concern that participants might not understand the effect of the conversion on their benefits
(including future benefits the participant may have accrued under the old formula).!*°°

The conversion to a cash balance plan may be motivated by a variety of factors. From
the employer’s perspective, the change may result in reduced pension costs. Because the level of
contributions and earnings under a cash balance plan are predetermined, a cash balance plan may
also make it easier for employers to manage pension liabilities. Some employers are concerned
about the level of contributions that may be required to fund typical defined benefit plans and
cash balance plans can provide an attractive alternative.

Cash balance plans may also have advantages for employees. Unlike typical defined
benefit plans, which tend to benefit long-service participants who remain with a company until
retirement, cash balance plans often benefit shorter service, more mobile workers. Thus, cash
balance plans may be popular in industries or markets in which workers are relatively mobile or
among groups of workers who go in and out of the workforce. Cash balance plans also provide a
more portable benefit than the typical defined benefit plan. Some participants also find cash
balance plans easier to understand than a typical defined benefit plan--their benefit statement
shows an account balance.

In Enron’s case, the conversion to a cash balance formula appeared to be motivated
primarily by a desire to provide a more attractive plan for most of its workers. Enron executives
viewed the future of the Enron as consisting of a highly trained, mobile workforce. In many
cases, such workers would find a cash balance plan more attractive that in a typical defined
benefit plan. In addition, converting to a cash balance plan was consistent with Enron’s image as
an innovator; at the time, cash balance plans were viewed as an emerging, new type of benefit
plan. While Enron benefit costs may be reduced due to the conversion over time, materials
prepared by Enron indicate that, at least initially, the conversion would result in increased
pension costs.

In effecting the conversion, Enron did not adopt the plan design features that garnered
most of the media attention. Enron did not adopt a wearaway, but rather used a “sum of”
approach in protecting accrued benefits. In addition, Enron took steps to protect the
expectations of workers who were nearing retirement by providing that they would, in effect,
receive benefits under whichever formula gave the greatest benefit.

1458 cee, e. g., Albert B. Crenshaw, Companies Embrace New Pension Plan, THE
WASHINGTON Post, Jan. 31, 1999, at H1; Richard A. Oppel, Jr., Companies Cash in on New
Pension Plan; But Older Workers Can Face Penalties, N.Y. TIMES, Aug. 20, 1999, at C1; Ellen
E. Schultz & Elizabeth MacDonald, Retirement Wrinkle: Employers Win Big with a Pension
Shift; Employees Often Lose, WALL ST. J., Dec. 4, 1998, at Al.

1459 As mentioned above, these concerns led to the enactment of the present-law notice
requirements regarding future reductions in benefit accruals. Sec. 4980F.

486

=== PAGE 515 ===
Enron’s cash balance plan is under review by the IRS National Office pursuant to the IRS
directive regarding cash balance plan conversions. The Plan has been pending in the National
Office since March 2000. The Enron Cash Balance Plan conversion does not appear to raise any
issues other than those that generally arise with respect to such plans, particularly in the absence
of definitive guidance with respect to such issues. As mentioned above, given the Enron plan
design, the Enron conversion may raise fewer issues than many cash balance conversions.

Recommendations

Present law is not clear with respect to many issues that may be raised under cash balance
plans. During the 1990s when conversions were receiving considerable attention, there was
significant debate in Congress and elsewhere as to whether cash balance plans should be
permitted as a plan design and, if so, what rules should apply (e.g., whether the wearaway
approach should be permitted). While some thought that strict limits should be placed on such
plans, others were concerned that strict limits would have a harmful effect on the voluntary
retirement plan system. Under present law, employers are not required to adopt qualified plans
for employees, and whenever new restrictions on plan design or other aspects of plan operation
are considered, there is generally an issue of whether the changes will cause employers to reduce
or eliminate qualified plan benefits. Thus, in the retirement plan area, there is often a tension
between providing adequate safeguards for employees and allowing employers freedom to adopt
the type of plan they deem appropriate.

Under the current state of the law with respect to cash balance plans, including the
proposed Treasury regulations, cash balance plan conversions will be permitted, subject to
certain requirements, unless statutory changes are made. While the proposed regulations answer
certain questions regarding cash balance plans, there are other issues still outstanding.

The Joint Committee staff believes that both employers and employees would benefit
from certainty in the law regarding cash balance plans and that the Congress or the Treasury
Department should adopt appropriate rules. Thus, the Joint Committee staff recommends that
specific rules be provided with respect to cash balance plan conversions and cash balance plans
generally.

3. Enron ESOP Investment in Enron Stock
Present Law

ESOPs are defined contributions plans which are designed to invest primarily in
qualifying employer securities. This generally refers to securities issued by the employer
sponsoring the ESOP. Like other investments in securities, benefits under ESOPs are subject to
the risks inherent in investing.

ERISA imposes broad duties governing all plan fiduciaries. Among them are the
requirements that plan fiduciaries discharge their duties with respect to plans solely in the
interest of plan participants and beneficiaries for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits and
that such fiduciaries act with reasonable care, skill, prudence, and diligence under the
circumstances. A fiduciary must also diversify plan investments so as to minimize the risk of

487

=== PAGE 516 ===
large losses unless, under the circumstances, it is clearly not prudent to do so.!4°° Under ERISA,
fiduciaries must also refrain from engaging in prohibited transactions.

Fiduciaries of ESOPs, like fiduciaries of other retirement plans subject to ERISA, are
subject to ERISA’s broad fiduciary duties.'“©! However, ESOP fiduciaries are generally not
subject to the ERISA rule that plan investments must be diversified so as to minimize the risk of
large losses. 4 Specifically, under an ESOP, the diversification requirement and the prudence
requirement (only to the extent that it requires diversification) is not violated by acquisition or
holding of qualifying employer securities. 4°

Notwithstanding, participants in ESOPs have challenged the actions of ESOP fiduciaries
for failure to diversify ESOP investments. Courts have attempted to delineate the duties of
ESOP fiduciaries under ERISA while remaining mindful of the purposes of ESOPs. In some
instances, courts have acknowledged that ERISA’s strict fiduciary standards could override plan
provisions directing the investment of ESOPs in employer securities.“

The difficulty of determining the ERISA responsibilities of ESOP fiduciaries has been
acknowledged by courts facing this issue.“ In part, the difficulty arises, according to one
court, because ESOPs are basically trusts created to invest in the stock of a single company. !*

1460 ERISA sec. 404(a)(1)(C).

1461 See, e.g., Donovan v. Cunningham, 716 F.2d 1455, 1467 (5" Cir. 1983); Kuper v.
Iovenko, 66 F.3d 1447, 1457 (6" Cir. 1995); Moench v. Robertson, 62 F.3d 553, 566 (3d Cir.
1995); Eaves v. Penn, 587 F.2d 453, 459-60 (10" Cir. 1978).

1462 Soe ERISA sec. 404(a)(2)
1463 ERISA sec. 404(a)(2).

1464 See e.g., Moench v. Robertson, 62 F.3d 553, 556 (3d Cir. 1995) (The court said “[I]n
limited circumstances, ESOP fiduciaries can [breach ERISA’s fiduciary duty requirements] for
continuing to invest in employer stock according to the plan’s direction.” In Moench, the court
vacated the district court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of defendant, ESOP fiduciaries,
and remanded the case. The court concluded that in limited circumstances, ESOP fiduciaries
could be liable under the ERISA for continuing to invest in employer securities according to the
plan’s direction. Ultimately, the parties reached a settlement agreement which was approved by
the court.) Moench v. Robertson, 1996 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 21898 (D.N.J. 1996). Also see Kuper
v. Iovenko, 66 F.3d 1447, 1458 (6" Cir. 1995).

1465 See Moench v. Roberston, 62 F.3d at 569 (noting the difficulty in “delineating the
responsibilities of ESOP trustees.”); Kuper v. Iovenko, 66 F.3d at 1458.

1466 Td. at 568-69.

488

=== PAGE 517 ===
Nonetheless, there may be a point at which investments in employer securities no longer are
justified under the purposes of the trust.!47

In cases dealing with the ERISA-imposed duties of ESOP fiduciaries, courts have
recognized that because ESOPs are generally designed to invest primarily in the stock of the
employer, “an ESOP fiduciary who invests the assets in employer stock is entitled to a
presumption that it acted consistently with ERISA by virtue of that decision.”!“°° That
presumption does not, however, foreclose review of the actions of ESOP fiduciaries.'“© While
an ESOP fiduciary may be released from certain per se violations on investments in employer
securities, ERISA requires that in making an investment decision of whether or not to invest a
plan’s assets in employer securities, an ESOP fiduciary is governed by ERISA’s “solely in
interest” and “prudence” tests.!4”

Under ERISA, directed trustees may also have fiduciary responsibility for ESOP
investments in certain limited circumstances.'*”! Generally, a directed trustee is a person who
has custody of the plan assets but is not charged with discretionary authority over the disposition
or management of those assets. Usually, a directed trustee follows instructions of a plan
fiduciary with discretion over plan assets. A directed trustee’s liability for a fiduciary breach
generally is limited because the directed trustee:lacks the requisite authority over the plan or its
assets. Nonetheless, if a directed trustee has actual knowledge of the named fiduciary’s breach

M467 Kuper v. Iovenko, 66 F.3d 1447, 1457 (6" Cir. 1995) (The court said that a plan
provision that completely prohibits diversification of ESOP investments violates ERISA.
Accordingly, fiduciaries who continue to invest in employer securities even when the plan
sponsor’s value is declining should not rely on ERISA’s requirement that fiduciaries discharge
their duties in accordance with plan provisions that are not inconsistent with ERISA for
protection. ERISA exempts ESOPs from its diversification requirements but the purpose of an
ESOP “cannot override ERISA’s goal of ensuring the proper management and soundness of
employee benefit plans” imposed by ERISA’s prudence and loyalty standards).

1468 Moench v. Robertson, 62 F.3d 553.

1469 See, e.g., Kuper v. lovenko, 66 F.3d 1447 (The court said that a proper balance
between the purpose of ERISA and the nature of ESOPs requires review of an ESOP fiduciary’s
decision to invest in employer securities for an abuse of discretion.); also see In re McKesson
HBOC Inc. ERISA Litigation, 2002 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 19473 (N.D. Cal. 2002) (The court said
that while fiduciaries of ESOPs “may not blindly follow an ESOP plan’s directive to invest in
company stock,” the plaintiffs needed to establish that the fiduciaries of the ESOP abused their
discretion in permitting a high level of investment in employer securities.)

1470 Soe Eaves v. Penn, 587 F.2d 453, 459 (10" Cir. 1978).

1471 So¢ FirstTier Bank v. Zeller, 16 F.3d 907 (8th Cir. 1994). See also 29 CFR sec.
2509.75-8, FR-14.

489

=== PAGE 518 ===
of fiduciary duty, the directed trustee may have a duty to determine that the instructions it
receives and carries out are proper.'47”

Factual Background

The terms of the Enron ESOP provide that each year, Enron will contribute directly to the
trustee for the Enron ESOP the amount, if any, authorized by Enron’s Board of Directors.
Enron’s contributions to the Enron ESOP were payable in cash or in shares of Enron stock, as
determined by the Board. To date, Enron has never made a direct contribution to the Enron
ESOP.

Participants in the Enron ESOP were neither required nor permitted to make
contributions to the Enron ESOP.

The Enron ESOP provides that plan assets are to be invested primarily in shares of Enron
stock. For purposes of complying with the Code requirement that such assets are invested
“primarily” in shares of such stock, the Enron ESOP provides that plan assets will be deemed to
be so invested if 80 percent or more of the aggregate plan assets are invested in Enron stock.
However, plan assets attributable to Enron stock which was purchased with the proceeds of the
reversion transferred to the Enron ESOP when it was created in 1986 must be 100 percent
invested in Enron stock to qualify for the exception to the excise tax on reversions.

The Enron ESOP provides that the duties, obligations, and responsibilities of the Enron
ESOP trustee are governed by the trust agreement. The trust article entitled “Investment of Trust
Fund” provides that the named fiduciary under the Enron ESOP has all discretionary authority
for the management and control of the trust fund and is responsible for determining the
diversification policy and for monitoring adherence by the investment manager to such policy.
Under the trust agreement, the named fiduciary generally is the plan administrator, in this case,
the Administrative Committee.

Materials presented by Enron’s ERISA counsel to members of the Administrative
Committee at the March 9, 2000, meeting generally describe the Administrative Committee’s
trustee duties. For example, the materials explain the general rules pertaining to appointment,
removal and replacement of the plan trustee and the payment of plan expenses. In a section on
the Enron ESOP’s special provisions, the materials state that the trustee may invest up to 100
percent of the trust in Enron stock but that the Administrative Committee determines the extent
to which the trust fund will be invested in Enron stock and determines the price at which the
stock will be bought or sold.'4"4

1472 So FirstTier Bank v. Zeller, 16 F.3d 907 (8th Cir. 1994), Ershick v. United Missouri
Bank of Kansas City, 948 F.2d 660 (10" Cir. 1991), Newton v. Van Otterloo, 756 F. Supp. 1121
(N.D. Ind. 1991).

1473 The assets of the ESOP are attributable to the stock purchased with the 1986 loan
and 1987 reversion.

1474 These materials are included in Appendix D to this Report.

490

=== PAGE 519 ===
As discussed above,!*” the Administrative Committee generally did not evaluate Enron

stock as an appropriate investment under the Enron ESOP. As described by one Administrative
Committee member, the Enron ESOP plan terms provided for investment of plan assets in Enron
stock, so there was no need to review that investment. The Administrative Committee
questioned for the first time whether it should be examining Enron stock as an investment under
any of the Enron qualified plans on November 1, 2001 1476

Documents provided by Enron indicate that, due to the volatility of Enron’s stock and the
fiduciary responsibility of the Administrative Committee, a special meeting of the
Administrative Committee was held on November 1, 2001, to discuss the prudent steps that the
Administrative Committee might need to consider with respect to the Enron Savings Plan, as
well as other Enron qualified plans.

The Administrative Committee was presented with a snapshot of the current Enron stock
holdings in the Enron Savings Plan and Enron ESOP as of October 26, September 30, and
January 1, 2001. The Administrative Committee was advised that it had no duty to issue
cautionary advice on the value or risk of holding Enron stock because the Administrative
Committee does not act in the capacity of an investment advisor, but is charged with
administering the plans in accordance with the terms of the plan documents and in compliance
with ERISA. It was decided that the Administrative Committee should hire an independent

investment advisor to monitor Enron stock, and a member of Enron’s treasury department was
directed to conduct the search.

With respect to the Enron ESOP, it was determined that the Administrative Committee
had no duty to take action since adequate communication has been given to participants over the
years. The Administrative Committee would review the recommendations of the investment
advisor as to what, if any, action might be required.

Table 3 shows the number of active, retired, or separated participants with account
balances and the number of beneficiaries of deceased participants entitled to benefits under the
Enron ESOP during the period 1990 to 2000.'*"7 Additionally, it shows how many shares were
held by the Enron ESOP and the total value of the Enron ESOP assets during each year of the
period. At the end of 2000, the total value of the ESOP assets exceeded $1 billion. As a result of
the bankruptcy, the value of the ESOP assets was minimal.

1475 Dart II. B.3.

1476 Minutes of the Meeting of the Administrative Committee (Nov. 1, 2001),
EC000001847.

1477 1990 was the first year for which Joint Committee staff reviewed data.

491

=== PAGE 520 ===
Table 3.-The Enron ESOP—Number of Participants,
and Shares Held and Total Value of Assets

Number of Active, Retired, or Separated

Participants with Account Balances or Shares of Enron Stock | Total Value of ESOP

Year Beneficiaries of Deceased Participants at End of Year Assets at End of Year
Entitled to Benefits (millions) (millions of dollars)
at End of Year

1990 9,396 17.2 469.2
1991 10,111 25.6 602.4
1992 10,664 33.8 788.0
1993 11,463 49.6 952.7
1994 11,262 32.5 827.6
1995 11,172 20.1" 197.1
1996 11,056 36.9" 689.9
1997 10,826 29.5 562.8
1998 10,585 as 624.6
1999 8,209 18.1 807.3
2000 6,920 12.8 1,062.9

Source: Forms 5500 for the Enron ESOP for the applicable years, unless otherwise indicated.

*Source: Tittle v. Enron Corp., S.D. Texas, No. H-01-3913, First Consolidated and Amended Complaint (filed
April 8, 2002), at paragraphs 173-174.

**No data available.

Discussion of Issues

The precipitous decline in the value of Enron stock raises the question of whether, at
some point, plan fiduciaries have an obligation to question whether employer securities is an
appropriate investment for a plan despite plan provisions directing such investment. As noted
above, courts have sometimes found this issue to be difficult, because ERISA’s general fiduciary
standards and the policies underlying the present-law rules relating to employer securities have
some inherent conflict. The questions raised in this regard in the case of the Enron ESOP are
similar to those raised in other cases in which this issue has arisen.

These issues may include questions of law as well as fact, including: who are the relevant
plan fiduciaries and what were their respective roles under the terms of the Enron ESOP and the
related trust; the specific terms of the Enron ESOP and trust regarding investment authority and
the types of investments that could be made; and at what point fiduciaries should have acted.
These issues are being addressed in litigation. A discussion of the Enron ESOP and the relevant
law has been provided here in order to provide a more complete picture of Enron qualified plans.

In addition to the issues raised specifically with respect to the Enron ESOP, the overall
structure of Enron’s qualified plans raises issues regarding appropriate levels of diversification in
retirement plans, and ways to achieve such levels. These issues are addressed in Part ILC.5.,
below.

492

=== PAGE 521 ===
4. Change of recordkeepers under the Enron Savings Plan
Present Law
In general

The selection and change of third party service providers to qualified retirement plans are
subject to ERISA’s general fiduciary provisions. '*78 At the time of the Enron bankruptcy, there
were no specific rules addressing blackout periods, so the general fiduciary rules were the only
governing provisions. Advance notice of blackouts with respect to plans, i.e., periods during
which participants are unable to engage in certain transactions due to a change in recordkeepers
or other reasons, is now required under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.'*”? These specific
notice provisions now apply in addition to the general fiduciary rules. Even though the notice

requirement did not apply at the time of the Enron blackout, a description is provided here for
completeness.

In addition to the notice requirement, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act also included a provision
prohibiting a director or executive officer of a publicly traded corporation from trading in the
stock of the employer during a blackout period in certain circumstances. '“*°

Notice of blackout periods under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
In general

The Sarbanes-Oxley Act amended ERISA to require the plan administrator of an
individual account plan'*®! to provide advance notice of a blackout period (a “blackout notice”)
to plan participants and beneficiaries to whom the blackout period applies. ‘4° Generally, notice
must be provided at least 30 days before the beginning of the blackout period. In the case of a
blackout period that applies with respect to employer securities, the plan administrator must also
provide timely notice of the blackout period to the employer (or the affiliate of the employer that
issued the securities, if applicable).

Definition of blackout period

A blackout period means any period during which any ability of participants or
beneficiaries under the plan, which is otherwise available under the terms of the plan, to direct or

~ 148 These provisions are discussed in Part II.A.4., above.
1479 Pub. L. No. 107-204, enacted July 30, 2002.
1480 Td, at sec. 306(a).

1481 n “individual account plan” is the term generally used under ERISA for a defined
contribution plan. The notice requirement does not apply to one-participant plans.

1482 ERISA sec. 101(i), as enacted by section 306(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.

493

=== PAGE 522 ===
diversify assets credited to their accounts, or to obtain loans or distributions from the plan, is
temporarily suspended, limited, or restricted if the suspension, limitation, or restriction is for any
period of more than three consecutive business days. However, a blackout period does not
include a suspension, limitation, or restriction that (1) occurs by reason of the application of
securities laws, (2) is a change to the plan providing for a regularly scheduled suspension,
limitation, or restriction that is disclosed through a summary of material modifications to the
plan or materials describing specific investment options under the plan, or changes thereto, or
(3) applies only to one or more individuals, each of whom is a participant, alternate payee, or
other beneficiary, under a qualified domestic relations order.

Timing of notice

Notice of a blackout period is generally required at least 30 days before the beginning of
the period. The 30-day notice requirement does not apply if (1) deferral of the blackout period
would violate the fiduciary duty requirements of ERISA and a plan fiduciary so determines in
writing, or (2) the inability to provide the 30-day advance notice is due to events that were
unforeseeable or circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the plan administrator and a
plan fiduciary so determines in writing. In those cases, notice must be provided as soon as
reasonably practicable under the circumstances unless notice in advance of the termination of the
blackout period is impracticable.

Another exception to the 30-day period applies in the case of a blackout period that
applies only to one or more participants or beneficiaries in connection with a merger, acquisition,
divestiture, or similar transaction involving the plan or the employer and that occurs solely in
connection with becoming or ceasing to be a participant or beneficiary under the plan by reason
of the merger, acquisition, divestiture, or similar transaction. Under the exception, the blackout
notice requirement is treated as met if notice is provided to the participants or beneficiaries to
whom the blackout period applies as soon as reasonably practicable.

The Secretary of Labor may provide additional exceptions to the notice requirement that
the Secretary determines are in the interests of participants and beneficiaries.

Form and content of notice

A blackout notice must be written in a manner calculated to be understood by the average
plan participant and must include (1) the reasons for the blackout period, (2) an identification of
the investments and other rights affected, (3) the expected beginning date and length of the
blackout period, and (4) in the case of a blackout period affecting investments, a statement that
the participant or beneficiary should evaluate the appropriateness of current investment decisions
in light of the inability to direct or diversify assets during the blackout period, and (5) other
matters as required by regulations. If the expected beginning date or length of the blackout
period changes after notice has been provided, the plan administrator must provide notice of the
change (and specify any material change in other matters related to the blackout) to affected
participants and beneficiaries as soon as reasonably practicable.

Notices provided in connection with a blackout period (or changes thereto) must be
provided in writing and may be delivered in electronic or other form to the extent that the form is

494

=== PAGE 523 ===
reasonably accessible to the recipient. The Secretary of Labor is required to issue guidance
regarding the notice requirement and a model blackout notice.

Penalty for failure to provide notice

In the case of a failure to provide notice of a blackout period, the Secretary of Labor may
assess a civil penalty against a plan administrator of up to $100 per day for each failure to
provide a blackout notice. For this purpose, each violation with respect to a single participant or
beneficiary is treated as a separate violation.

Factual Background

In 2001, Enron Corp. changed recordkeepers under the Enron Savings Plan from
Northern Trust Retirement Consulting (“Northern Trust”) to Hewitt Associates (“Hewitt”). As
part of this change, there was a period of approximately 2-'2 weeks during which plan
participants could not make investment changes (the “blackout”). During the blackout, the price
of Enron stock fell.

Background--prior recordkeeper searches!“

During the period which was the subject of the Joint Committee staff review, Enron
undertook a number of searches for new third party service providers for various benefit plans,
including the Enron Retirement Plan, the Enron Savings Plan, and health and welfare benefit
plans (i.e., plans other than retirement plans). In some, but not all cases, these searches resulted
in a change of recordkeeper. Some of these searches related to efforts by Enron to outsource
more of its benefit plan administration. For example, the Enron Retirement Plan had been
administered in-house and was outsourced in 2000. Enron also looked for new third party
service providers with respect to all its benefit plans, in 2000, including pension and welfare
plans, but decided not to change recordkeepers for the Enron Savings Plan at that time.

With respect to the Enron Savings Plan specifically, a new recordkeeper search was
begun in 1998 as a result of the acquisition by Enron of Portland General Electric (“PGE”) in
1997. PGE also had a 401(k) plan, and Enron wanted to merge the two plans. While similar in
many respects, the two plans had a number of differences. For example, the PGE match was at a
higher level than the match in the Enron Savings Plan; the Enron Savings Plan had daily
valuations, whereas PGE had monthly valuations. Many other plan features also varied.

The plans also had different recordkeepers. The Enron Savings Plan had Northern Trust
Retirement Consulting (“Northern Trust”) as recordkeeper, and the PGE plan recordkeeper was

1483 Background information relating to prior searches for recordkeepers is based
primarily on documents provided by Enron in response to the Joint Committee staff requests for
information. Documents relating to prior recordkeepers encompasses almost an entire box of
information. Relevant document numbers include a range of documents from EC000022700-
23700. Information was also obtained from minutes of Administrative Committee meetings,
interviews with Enron employees, and the Timeline Presented to the Administrative Committee
(EC000001909-16), which is included in Appendix D to this Report.

495

=== PAGE 524 ===
Towers Perrin. While merging the two plans did not necessarily require hiring a new
recordkeeper, in mid-1998, Enron engaged Watson Wyatt Worldwide (“Watson Wyatt”) to assist
in the search for a new recordkeeper. A letter to Enron from Watson Wyatt regarding the search
process states the understanding that Enron was not at that time dissatisfied with the services
being provided by Northern Trust, but would like to “test the waters” to see what other options
might be available for the combined Enron/PGE plan.'484 At that time, Enron records indicate

the goal was to have the search completed by October 31, 1998, with a proposed implementation
date of July 1, 1999.

According to documents provided by Enron, requests for information were sent out to 33
vendors in July 1998. The requests for information sought responses to a variety of questions
relevant to the plans, such as the ability to perform daily valuations and administer self-directed
accounts. Enron received responses from 17 vendors (10 of whom declined to provide service if
assets did not change to their respective funds), seven vendors declined to participate, and nine
vendors did not respond. Watson Wyatt compiled the responses and provided analysis and
evaluations to Enron.

During the next few months, requests for proposals were sent to a number of vendors,
with follow-up questions in some cases. Watson Wyatt again compiled and analyzed the
responses in a number of areas. A weighted quantitative evaluation of the responses was
provided. This process led to site visits by Enron to the top two candidates Fidelity Institutional
Retirement Services Company (“Fidelity”)--Fidelity and Northern Trust. Documents provided
by Enron indicate that the decision to hire Fidelity was made at the end of October 1998.
However, as described in more detail below, it was then decided to postpone any change in
recordkeepers until after the merger of the two plans.

The merger of the plans went forward starting in June 1999. The merger resulted in a
blackout period for PGE plan participants that was expect to last about 8-12 weeks, during the
period from June 15 through September 3. Documents provided by Enron indicate there was a
trust reconciliation issue that caused the blackout period to extend until September 15, 1999.
Plan participants were apparently notified of the change in the blackout period by mail. Enron
plan participants also had a blackout period that lasted from August 30, 1999, to September 3,
1999, even though they did not have a trustee or recordkeeper change. The blackout was said to

be necessary in order to complete the merger of the approximately 3,400 PGE participants into
the plan.

_ The involvement of the Enron Savings Plan Administrative Committee in the search for
the new recordkeeper and the merger of the two plans is unclear. The first reference to the
merger appears in the Administrative Committee meeting minutes of September 17, 1998,
wherein it was reported that a member of the Enron Benefits Department updated the
Administrative Committee on the work being done by the Enron and PGE Human Resources and
Treasury Departments relating to the merger of the two plans. At that time, a joint meeting of

1484 Enron Corp. Service Provider Vendor Search RFI Teleconference notes prepared by
Watson Wyatt, EC000022724-27.

496

=== PAGE 525 ===
the Administrative Committees of both plans on savings plan issues was scheduled for
November 11, 1998.

According to Enron, there are no minutes of Enron Savings Plan Administrative
Committee meetings from October 19, 1998, through October 26, 1999. However, a document
prepared by Enron employees and provided to the Administrative Committee in connection with
the recordkeeper search in 2001, indicates that the Administrative Committee was briefed on the
transition on November 4, 1998. This document says that in November 1998, the “[d]ecision [to
change recordkeepers] was reviewed for impact to Non-Qualified Deferral (NQ) Plans wherein it
was determined that the recent vendor change for the NQ plans was to go live 3/99 at Northern
Trust. A new recommendation was made to not move the 401(k) recordkeeping until after the
PGE plan merger and [Enron’s] Qualified and Non-Qualified plans were stabilized.” The
document also says that on November 4, 1998, “Presentations were given to both the PGE and
[Enron’s] administrative committees notifying both of the recommendation. In subsequent
meetings, the recommendation to stay with Northern Trust was approved until the plans were
stable. At this point, there was no more work on the move away from Northern Trust until after
the PGE plan had been merged.”!*%

Documents provided by Enron to the Joint Committee staff include a document dated
November 1998 titled: “Presentation to the Administrative Committees: The 1999
Enron/Portland General Savings Plan.” This document includes a schedule of events, which
indicates that in November 1998 there would be “presentation to the Committees for approval.”
The document also includes information relating to differences between the two plans,
background on the recordkeeping search (including a list of possible service providers and their
rankings based on responses to requests for information), the recommendation to hire Fidelity
and background information regarding why, fee comparison information, discussion of adding a
self-directed account, and implementation issues. It is unclear whether this document was
presented to the Administrative Committee. Despite the fact that Administrative Committee
minutes do not reflect discussion of this process, one committee member interviewed by the
Joint Committee staff described the merger process as one of two major events that occurred
during his tenure on the Administrative Committee.

2001 search process

Reasons for looking for new recordkeeper

Enron personnel and records indicate that the search for a new recordkeeper stemmed
from customer service issues with respect to the prior recordkeeper (Northern Trust), such as
difficulty dealing with the number of employees and transactions and data issues with respect to
government filings. Enron personnel also felt that the level of technology services provided by
Northern Trust in connection with the Savings Plan was not sufficient to satisfy the demands of
Enron employees. Northern Trust personnel have testified regarding Enron comments on
customer service issues and stated that Northern Trust had been working with Enron to correct

1485 Timeline Prepared for Administrative Committee, EC000001869-EC000001875.
This document is included on Appendix D to this Report.

497

=== PAGE 526 ===
identified problems, such as responses to telephone inquiries, and that progress in correcting
problems had been made. Northern Trust personnel also testified to their understanding that
Enron prided itself on its own technology and that Enron felt that the Northern Trust trading desk
was not as advanced as the Hewitt operations. '4* Enron personnel told the Joint Committee staff
that although they had been working with Northern Trust to correct problems, they eventually
determined that it would be appropriate to look for a change of recordkeepers.

Selection process for new recordkeeper (Enron stock price: $78.79 on February 1,
2001: $68.68 on March 1, 2001; $56.57 on April 2, 2001; $63.41 on May 1, 2001)

Enron employees told the Joint Committee staff that Enron had a task force consisting of
four to five employees involved in the process of engaging a new recordkeeper for the Enron
Savings Plan. While much of the detail work was handled by a single person, Enron personnel
have stated that the decision-making process was a joint process. At the same time, Enron was
also interested in a new recordkeeper with respect to the 1994 Deferral Plan and Expat Deferral
Plan. According to Enron personnel, they had been experiencing customer service issues with
respect to the 1994 Deferral Plan for some time. However, the volume of business generated by
that plan was low so that most companies were not willing to bid for that plan alone, they would
bid only in conjunction with a larger plan such as the Enron Savings Plan. When a decision was
made to go forward with a change in recordkeepers for the Enron Savings Plan, personnel
responsible for the 1994 Deferral Plan and Expat Plan were also involved and the search was a
joint search. “8” :

. As they had before, Enron engaged Watson Wyatt to assist in the search process and to
update the work from the earlier searches. The search process began in early 2001 1488 Watson
Wyatt did a research screening of at least six companies, including Northern Trust and Hewitt.
As part of this process, they sent a list of questions to companies that might be interested in
bidding. They rated each of the companies in a variety of areas, such as administration,
background, customer service, communication and education, implementation, investments,
reporting, legal and compliance, and systems and technology. The rating was based on
responses to questions in all of these areas.'“® This process narrowed down the number of firms
considered in the search process.

1486 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity:
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 51 (Feb. 5, 2002).

1487 ‘The change in recordkeepers under the deferral plans is also discussed in Part
TII.C.1., below.

1488 1 etter from Watson Wyatt to Cynthia Barrow, dated January 26, 2001,
EC000022055-58.

1489 Dre Screen Vendors, EC00022066-78. Pre Screen Vendors, EC000022110-28.

498

=== PAGE 527 ===
A request for proposal was sent to four vendors in 2001, with an initial date for the
response of March 9, 2001.'4°° The date was extended to March 13, 2001, due to adverse
weather conditions in the Northwest United States.'“°"! The 16-page request for proposal
included a statement of objectives, requirements for the service provider, plan summary
information, and questions to be answered with respect to a variety of administrative and
investment issues. For example, the request for proposal indicates a need for daily valuation,
interactive voice response systems, transactional and information web access, and a brokerage
investment option. The request for proposal indicated July 1, 2001, as the date the conversion
was to be completed and the system operational. The request for proposal asked respondents to
describe the blackout period that was expected to occur during the conversion process. 4°?

The process was similar to the process for the 1998 recordkeeper search. Watson Wyatt
evaluated responses and provided quantitative weighted ratings overall and in specific areas.
Follow-up questions were provided in some cases. Specific questions were asked with respect to
concerns Enron had identified with the current recordkeeper. After Watson Wyatt consolidated
responses, an Enron task force met to evaluate the responses from a cost and service standpoint.
This led to the selection of two finalists--Hewitt'*”’ and another company.'4"4 Enron employees
made site visits to both potential recordkeepers. Among other things, they looked at the
computer capabilities and customer service. They listened to customer service calls to monitor
the quality of responses.

Enron personnel told the Joint Committee staff that, after making the site visits, the team
working with the Enron Savings Plan met with the group working with the 1994 Deferral Plan
and Expat Deferral Plan and a joint decision was made. Documents provided by Enron say that
the last firm, other than Hewitt, was eliminated due to cost to the program for the nonqualified
deferred compensation plans.

1490 000022082. Other documents indicate requests for proposals were sent to six
companies. Timeline prepared for Administrative Committee, EC000001872.

91 0000022099.
1492 Enron Corp. Savings Plan Request for Proposal, EC000022083-98.

1493 Enron was seeking a service provider for both recordkeeping and trust services.
Because Hewitt does not provide trustee services, Hewitt obtained a quote from Wilmington
Trust Company, and Hewitt and Wilmington Trust Company made submissions in response to
the Enron request for proposal. Wilmington Trust Company was chosen as the new trustee to
replace Northern Trust Company. Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate.
Retirement Insecurity: 401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 107 (Feb. 5, 2002).

1494 See Summary of All Proposals Total Weighted Score Comparison, EC000022164-
66.

499

=== PAGE 528 ===
The Administrative Committee was notified on May 3, 2001, of the decision to hire
Hewitt as the new recordkeeper. Northern Trust was notified in July 2001 that Enron would
transfer recordkeeping services for the Enron Savings Plan to Hewitt.!45

The response to the request for proposal submitted by Hewitt contains the following
regarding the blackout period:

There will be a blackout period while the final valuation is performed on the prior
recordkeeping system, balances are reconciled, and accounts are established on
the system. The duration of the blackout is dependent on the prior valuation cycle
and the timeliness of final balances from the prior recordkeeper. Typically,
Hewitt does not require a blackout period of longer than two weeks (this includes
one week the prior recordkeeper needs to send us the conversion data and

reports) [.]!4"°

The 2001 transition process

Deciding on the blackout dates (Enron stock price: $53.04 on June 1, 2001; $48.30 on
July 1, 2001; $45.61 on August 1, 2001; $29.15 on September 1, 2001)

According to testimony of Hewitt, Hewitt and Enron signed a letter of intent in June
2001. The letter of intent contemplated that Hewitt would begin work immediately, and would
be compensated for the work it performed if a final contract was not agreed to. Pursuant to the
letter of intent, during June 2001, Enron and Hewitt worked on what Hewitt refers to as the
“Delivery Model,” which describes the services Hewitt would normally expect to provide as a
recordkeeper, additional services they would provide to Enron, and services that Hewitt would
not provide. M497

During July 2001, Hewitt began what they refer to as the “Requirements Process.” They
describe this as a “detailed and comprehensive” process intended to identify precisely the
services to be performed and how and when they would be provided. Transition issues with
respect to the change of recordkeepers was addressed at this time as well. Hewitt stated that
Enron had proposed a “live date” of October 23, 2001, and that Hewitt identified all work needed
to effect the transition and target dates for completion in order to meet the proposed live date.'*"8

1495 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity:
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 101 (Feb. 5, 2002).

1496 Hewitt Associates, Request For Proposal - Savings Plan Enron Corporation (March
12, 2001). EC000022242-91, at EC000022246.

1497 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity:
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 107-08 (Feb. 5, 2002).

1498 Td. at 108.

500

=== PAGE 529 ===
During this time, there were discussions involving Enron and the old and new trustees
and recordkeepers. After discussion, Enron decided on a blackout period that would begin on
September 14, 2001, and end on the live date of October 23, 2001. The planned blackout period
was two-tiered: (1) participants would be restricted from taking loans or withdrawals or making
rollover contributions, and making similar transactions from the close of trading on September
14, 2001, to October 23, 2001; and (2) participants would be restricted from changing
investments from the close of trading on September 26, 2001, through October 23, 2001. Under
this schedule, the asset transfer from Northern Trust to Wilmington Trust Company was to take
place on October 1,14

According to Hewitt, transition issues were revisited in mid-August 2001. Hewitt says
they were informed that Enron had decided to make some plan design changes that would affect
recordkeeping requirements and of which Hewitt was not previously aware. These changes
included (1) replacing three Vanguard investment funds with Fidelity funds, and (2) eliminating
Enron Oil and Gas Stock Fund as an investment option.

Enron personnel told the Joint Committee staff that they wanted to eliminate the Enron
Oil and Gas Stock Fund because Enron Oil and Gas (“EOG”) had been sold and was no longer
part of the Enron group. Since Enron had no further connection with EOG, it was not believed to
be an appropriate fund. Enron benefits department personnel determined that plan amendments
needed to be made to eliminate the fund, and did not want to proceed until the Administrative
Committee had acted on the amendments. These issues were initially discussed at the May 3,
2001, meeting of the Administrative Committee,!™"' and were approved at the Administrative
Committee meeting on August 15, 2001.15?

Hewitt indicated that they would need approximately two to three weeks of additional
time to make the necessary adjustments to their systems to reflect these changes. Enron decided
to provide more time, and moved the proposed target dates back by about one month. Under the
revised timetable, the new live date was November 23, 2001. The asset transfer to the new
trustee was scheduled for November 1, 2001. The blackout period was now as follows: (1)
participants would be restricted from taking loans or withdrawals or making rollover
contributions or making similar transactions from the close of trading on October 19, 2001, to

1499 Td. at 109-110.

1500 Id.

1501 At that meeting, the Administrative Committee requested additional information
with respect to the change from Vanguard Funds to Fidelity funds, including further information
regarding comparability of the funds.

1502 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity:

401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 110 (Feb. 5, 2002); interviews by Joint Committee
staff of Enron employees.

501

=== PAGE 530 ===
November 19, 2001: and (2) participants would be restricted from changing investments from the
close of trading on October 26, 2001, to November 19, 2001 oe

October 4, 2001: initial notice of blackout periods mailed to plan participants (Enron

stock price $33.10)

Hewitt representatives testified that, at Enron’s request, they prepared a draft
communication to employees regarding the change in trustee, recordkeeper, and certain changes
in investment options. This draft was reviewed by Enron and Hewitt incorporated changes from
Enron into their draft. The communication was mailed to participants by Hewitt on October 4,
2001, using address lists provided by Enron and Northern Trust. Hewitt testified that at this
point it had not received the data necessary to prepare mailing labels. Hewitt personnel have
testified that Hewitt did not participate in the preparation of mailing of any other
communications materials regarding the blackout, although they are aware that other
communications were sent."

This initial communication, titled “Enron Corp. Savings Plan Changes, Money in
Motion” a six-page document.!%* It includes the following under “What’s New?”

“In late November, Hewitt Associates will become our new administrator for the Enron
Corp. Savings Plan, providing improved customer service and quicker processing of your
requests.” It states that on November 20, the Fidelity Freedom Funds will replace the Vanguard
LifeStrategy Funds. The communication also states that all investment funds will now be listed
by asset class in order of risk factor, from the least risky to the most risky. It shows the mapping
of the Vanguard funds to the Fidelity funds, i.e., the comparable Vanguard funds to which assets
in each of the Fidelity funds will be transferred.'°"

Under “Transaction Action Items” the document includes the following. “During the
transition period, you will NOT have access to your funds. Your fund balances will remain
invested in the market based on your fund choices as of 3:00 PM October 26.”!°° The document
states that all activity must be completed by the dates indicated and explains that the reason for
this transition is that fund balances of approximately $1.4 billion for 24,000 participants will be
moved and balanced and that each record must be correct. It explains that once the records are
balanced, investment returns and November payroll contributions will be added.!°°

1503 Id.

1504 Td. at 110.

1505 This document is included in Appendix D. EC000021560-65.

1506 Id.
1507 &C000021564. (Emphasis in original.)

1508 Id.

502

=== PAGE 531 ===
The document includes the following as blackout dates:

e October 19, 3:00 PM CST as the last date for loan requests, in-service withdrawals
and distributions, hardship withdrawals, loan payoffs, rollovers into the plan and SDA
Schwab Fund Liquidation;

e October 26 3:00 PM CST as the last date for investment fund balance
transfers/allocation changes and contribution rate changes;

e November 20 8:00 AM CST as the date transition ends. Savings plan system opens
with all the great new features.'°°

The document also describes changes that will take place, including a new online
investment education and advice tool that is described as helping to turn financial dreams into
reality.'° 10

October 16, 2001: Enron reports a loss (Enron stock price $33.84)

On October 16, 2001, Enron reported that it had lost $618 million for the quarter ended
September 30, 2001, after taking into account after-tax nonrecurring charges of $1.01 billion.
Enron also announced it was making a $1.2 billion reduction to shareholders’ equity.

October 16, 2001, 11:10 PM: electronic mail to employees (Enron stock price

$33.84)

An electronic mail message was sent to “All Enron Employees United States Group @
Enron.”!5!! stating that, for all Enron Savings Plan participants, Friday, October 19 at 3:00 p.m.
will be the last day to request a loan or a loan payoff or requests an in-service or hardship
withdrawal. For self-directed account participants, Friday, October 19, 3:00 p.m. is given as the
last day to make trades in the brokerage account to move holdings in kind.

The message states that other transactions, such as contribution rate changes and
investment fund transfers, will continue until 3:00 p.m. on October 26.

October 19, 2001: blackout period with respect to distributions begins (Enron stock

price $26.05)

On October 19, 2001, the blackout period with respect to loans and distributions began as
scheduled.'*!

1509 py
'519 BC000021562.
1511 0000021573. A copy of this message is included in Appendix D to this Report.

1512 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity:
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 111 (Feb. 5, 2002). Timeline provided to

503

=== PAGE 532 ===
October 22, 2001, 10:28 pm: electronic mail message sent to employees (Enron stock

price $20.65)

On October 22, 2001, an electronic mail message was sent to same group as the October
16 electronic mail message.'*'? The message cautioned that “October 26 is fast approaching,”
and reminded plan participants that Friday October 26 at 3:00 p.m. will be the last day to transfer
investment fund balances and make contribution allocation changes, change the contribution rate
for the November 15" payroll deductions, and enroll if the employee was hired before October 1.

The message contains a reminder regarding the change in investment funds from
Vanguard to Fidelity, and states that funds will remain invested in the funds chosen as of 3:00
p.m. October 29 until 8:00 a.m. November 20, when the Enron Savings Plan reopens with “great
new features.”

The message provides contact information for those needing help during the transition.

October 25, 2001: Reconsideration of decision to move forward with blackout period
for investment changes; electronic mail reminding employees of pending blackout

(Enron stock price $16.35)

On the eve of the beginning of the blackout period for investment changes, there was
concern in the benefits department about the timing of the blackout and the falling stock price.
Mikie Rath, Benefits Manager, Enron Corp., testified that one employee had commented that the
timing on the blackout was horrible, and that she tended to agree, but that the process had been
well underway for some time.'*'* In addition, an employee had submitted an advance question
for an all employee meeting to be asked Mr. Lay, “Now that I have lost all my retirement, what
do Ido? Ihave been here 20 years.” Ms. Rath also indicated that there had been an all
employee meeting in October and the facts had started to come out regarding problems of
Enron.

In response to these concerns, Ms. Rath contacted Northern Trust on October 25, 2001,
regarding the possibility of postponing the blackout date for investments until January 2002.
Northern Trust personnel responded (on that date) that the date could be postponed, but that a
January date could be problematic due to year-end demands on recordkeepers. They suggested
as an alternative March 31, 2002.'°!

Administrative Committee, EC000001913. This timeline is included in Appendix D to this
Report.

1513 000021574. A copy of this message is included in Appendix D to this Report.

1514 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity:
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 55-56 (Feb. 5, 2002).

1515 Tq. at 50, 56-57.

1516 Tq. at 101-102.

504

=== PAGE 533 ===
Ms. Rath also contacted Hewitt on October 25, 2001, regarding either postponing the
blackout date or shortening the period of the blackout. Hewitt responded on the same day that
accelerating the live date would present a number of risk issues, including adverse effects of plan
participants of restarting plan activities in the event the shortened period resulted in accurate plan
records and possible compromising of the services that Hewitt could provide. They also pointed
out a number of factors that Enron should consider in determining whether to delay the blackout,

including extra cost, staffing implications, and the inability to predict when Enron stock would
be less volatile.'°!”

After discussions with Hewitt and Northern Trust, Ms. Rath consulted her superior, the
Senior Director of Benefits, Cynthia Barrow. They consulted their superior, Cindy Olson, the
Executive Vice President, Human Resources, Employee Relations and Building Services as to
whether to go forward with the blackout. Ms. Olson consulted two other Human Resources Vice
Presidents and another Enron employee, and also contacted Enron’s ERISA counsel. Ms. Olson
said that she consulted with the other Human Resources Vice Presidents because of their general
experience and that she consulted with the other Enron employee because that person had made
comments regarding the timing of the blackout. All of these persons thought that the blackout
should go forward. The ERISA counsel advised that they should go forward with the blackout
because of the difficulty of notifying all plan participants of the postponement, particularly the
inactive employees who did not have access to electronic mail. One employee suggested that
another electronic mail be sent reminding participants about the blackout.'*'8

The decision was made to go forward with the blackout as planned and Enron notified
Hewitt and Northern Trust by telephone that a decision had been made to go forward with the
blackout period as planned. 9

According to documents provided by Enron, on October 25, at 11:44 p.m. another
electronic mail message was sent to the same group of active employees reminding them that the
blackout was going to take place. Enron personnel indicated that no additional communication
was sent to other plan participants at that time.

The electronic mail message contained the following notice: “If you are a participant in
the Enron Corp. Savings Plan, please read this very important message.” The message indicated
that there had been concern about the timing of the move to a new administrator and the
restricted access to funds during the transition period. The message stated “We have been
working with Hewitt and Northern Trust since July. We understand your concerns and are

517 Tq. at 54-55, 111-112; interviews of Enron employees by Joint Committee staff.

1518 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity:
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 55-58; interviews of Enron employees by Joint
Committee staff.

1519 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity:
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 102, 112. (Feb. 5, 2002).

505

=== PAGE 534 ===
committed to making this transition period as short as possible without jeopardizing the
reconciliation of both the Plan in total or your account in particular.”!>

The message also included “reminders” that “the Enron Corp. Savings Plan is an
investment vehicle for your long-term financial goals” and that “the Enron plan will continue to
offer a variety of investment opportunities with different levels of risk.”'*?! The message
reminds participants to review their overall investment strategy and weigh the potential earnings
of each investment choice against its risks before making decisions.

The message concludes: “For that reason, it is critical that ALL trades among your
investment funds be completed by 3:00 PM CST Friday, October 26 before the transition
period begins.” !>””

October 26, 2001: 11:58 AM; electronic mail message to Enron employees'*” (Enron

stock price $15.40)

On the morning of October 26, 2001, an electronic mail message was sent to same group
as the earlier electronic mail messages. The message contained a “final reminder” of the October
26 blackout date and said that investment funds would be frozen as of 3:00 p.m. on that date for
the duration of the transition period.'>™4

October 30, 2001: Hewitt requested to come to meeting of Administrative Committee

(Enron stock price $11.16)

A Hewitt representative testified that she was contacted by the Enron Benefits
Department on October 30, 2001, and asked to come to a meeting of the Administrative
Committee on November 1, 2001. She said Hewitt was asked to be prepared to discuss the

feasibility of shortening the blackout period and accelerating the live date to November 13,
2001.'?

November 1, 2001: Administrative Committee meeting (Enron stock price $11.99)

Documents provided by Enron indicate that, due to the volatility of Enron’s stock and the
fiduciary responsibility of the Administrative Committee, a special meeting of the

1520 0000021575. A copy of this message is included in Appendix D to this Report.
1521 Id.

1522 7g
523 BC000023713.
1524 0000021576. A copy of this message is included in Appendix D to this Report.

525 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity:
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 113 (Feb. 5, 2002).

506

=== PAGE 535 ===
Administrative Committee was held on November 1, 2001, to discuss the prudent steps that the
Administrative Committee might need to consider with respect to the Enron Savings Plan, as
well as other Enron qualified plans. Minutes of the meeting indicate that it was attended by four
of the Administrative Committee members, a newly engaged attorney representing the
Administrative Committee,'**° Benefits Department personnel, three representatives from
Hewitt, and Enron’s ERISA counsel.

The Administrative Committee was presented with a snapshot of the current Enron stock
holdings in the Enron Savings Plan and Enron ESOP as of October 26, September 30, and
January 1, 2001. The Administrative Committee was advised that it had no duty to issue
cautionary advice on the value or risk of holding Enron stock because the Administrative
Committee does not act in the capacity of an investment advisor, but is charged with
administering the plans in accordance with the terms of the plan documents and in compliance
with ERISA. It was decided that the Administrative Committee should hire an independent
investment advisor to monitor Enron stock, and a member of the Enron Treasury Department
was directed to conduct the search.'*””

At the Administrative Committee meeting, Hewitt summarized the decision to move
forward with the Enron Savings Plan transfer and discussed the implications of attempting to
unwind the transaction, i.e., have Northern Trust return to their prior role and postpone the date
of transferring recordkeeping to Hewitt. Hewitt indicated that the asset transfer from Northern
Trust to the new trustee had already taken place, and the old trustee would have to be contacted
if that were to be undone. Hewitt stated that unwinding would extend the blackout period
beyond November 20.

Hewitt was asked if it were possible to speed up the process to grant limited access to
accounts by all participants by November 13. Hewitt stated that it was to receive data from
Northern Trust on November 7, and that it would take five days to review and that the ability to
shorten the blackout period was dependent on the quality of data received,!°"

Administrative Committee minutes state that the Administrative Committee agreed that it
was most prudent to move forward with the transition and asked the Benefits Department to set
up an external website and to mail a postcard to all participants informing them to check for
updates on the transition. It was decided that this was the most prudent and reasonable action to
take under the circumstances. The minutes also state that, with respect to the Enron ESOP, it
was determined that the Administrative Committee had no duty to take action since adequate

1526 The previous legal counsel for the Administrative Committee had had to resign due
to conflicts of interest-that had developed. It was agreed that the November 1, 2001,
Administrative Committee meeting that the new attorney would represent the Administrative
Committee at this meeting and the next pending a further agreement regarding his services.

1527 Minutes of the Meeting of the Administrative Committee (Nov. 1, 2001).

1528 Tq. Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement

Insecurity; 401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 113 (Feb. 5, 2002).

507

=== PAGE 536 ===
communication has been given to participants over the years. The Administrative Committee
would review the recommendations of the Investment Advisor as to what, if any, action might be
required.

The Administrative Committee also determined that weekly meetings should be held
during the transition period, and the next meeting date was scheduled for November 6. At that
time, candidates for investment advisor to the Administrative Committee would be presented.

November 6, 2001: Administrative Committee meeting!°”° (Enron stock price $9.67)

The November 6, 2001, meeting of the Administrative Committee was attended (by
person or via phone) by five members of the Administrative Committee, Benefits Department
personnel, Enron ERISA counsel, counsel for the Administrative Committee, and two
representatives from Hewitt.

The Administrative Committee discussed retaining an investment advisor to give
guidance to the Administrative Committee on Enron stock in relation to the blackout period as
well as current market conditions surrounding Enron stock.

Benefits Department personnel provided an update of the status of participant
communications and the transition process. It was reported that the website for participants to
check for updates was operational as of the time of the Administrative Committee meeting, and
that a notification postcard would be mailed to all participants on November 8. Hewitt informed
the Administrative Committee that the transition was on target and that Hewitt would make
every prudent effort possible to shorten the blackout period.

Pending lawsuits were also discussed.

November 7, 2001: data transfer from Northern Trust to Hewitt (Enron stock price

$9.05)

On November 7, 2001, Hewitt received the data transfer from Northern Trust./57°

November 8, 2001: post card mailed to plan participants (Enron stock price $8.41)

At the request of Enron, Hewitt mailed a post card to plan participants on November 8,
2001. Hewitt says that they used participant address lists provided by Northern Trust and Enron
in making the mailing.!**! The post card stated that “Enron and Hewitt are committed to making
this period as short as possible so we have established a phone number and a web address that

1529 cee Minutes of Administrative Committee Meeting (Nov. 6, 2001).

1530 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity;
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 37 (Feb. 5, 2002).

1531 Tq. at 113-114.

508

=== PAGE 537 ===
enables you to get current information in a timely manner.” The postcard also stated: “Stay
connected to watch for an earlier access date.”’*”

November 13, 2001: blackout ends, Administrative Committee meeting (Enron stock

price $9.98)

Enron and Hewitt report that the plan went “live” on November 13, 2001, at 8:00 am.

An Administrative Committee meeting was held on November 13, 2001, at which the
Administrative Committee received an update of the status of the Enron Savings Plan transition.
Benefits Department personnel reported that the Enron Savings Plan was “live” as of 8:00 am
that morning and that the transition update website and phone line reflected this information. It
was noted that the blackout had ended five days earlier than originally planned.

It was reported that on that day prior to the time of the Administrative Committee

meeting, the plan website had experienced 200-250 hits and that the plan had not seen large
movements in accounts.

The Administrative Committee chair requested that another electronic mail message be
sent to employees to remind them that the transition period had ended.

An update on the investment advisor search was also provided at that time. It was
reported that the selection process was expected to be finished by Friday, November 16, 2001.

Pending lawsuits were also discussed.

November 14, 2001, 9:07 PM:!°?3 electronic mail to Enron employees notifying them
that the blackout had ended on November 13 (Enron stock price $10.00)

An electronic mail message dated November 14, 2001, at 9:07 p.m. was sent to the same
group of employees as previous electronic mail messages. The message announces an early end
to the transition period and says that the internet site went live as of 8:00 a.m., November 13, the
previous morning. It tells employees to log on to benefits.enron.com, to enjoy the new features.

This notice was sent 36 hours after the blackout had ended. Enron personnel interviewed
by the Joint Committee staff were not able to specifically explain the delay. Joint Committee
staff were told that the process for sending electronic mails to all employees was to send the
message to a center for transmittal, and they were sent when they got around to them.

1532 Iq. at 122.

1533 C000023719.

509

=== PAGE 538 ===
Miscellaneous employee communications

Documents provided to the Joint Committee staff by Enron include additional employee
communications that are not dated. These appear to be printouts from a website. They are as
follows.

Undated web printout’® 34

This document tells people to stay connected to watch for an earlier access date.

Undated web printout'***

This document appears to be printout from a web page. Heading: “Welcome to your
Enron Corp. Savings Plan Transition Update Site”--a website designed to bring you the most up-
to-date news on the progress of the Savings Plan move to Hewitt Associates.

The document says: Update November 13, 2001, “The Savings Plan system is up and live
as of 8:00 AM!” Provides wed address and telephone number to check on account, check out the
new website or make changes.

The document also contains the following (historical) information:

¢ November 7: All participant information for approximately 24,000 participants will
transfer.
e Activities for week ending 11/2/01:

a. November 1: Savings Plan and ESOP balances transferred to new trust,
remaining assets in the three Vanguard LifeStrategy funds mapped to the new
Fidelity Freedom Funds;

b. October 26: 187 investment transfers completed by the 3:00 PM deadline;

c. October 22: The self-directed brokerage account began its migration from
Schwab to CSFBdirect. With the exception of some mutual funds, no holdings
were liquidated.

Involvement of the Administrative Committee

The first mention of a search for a new recordkeeper specifically for the Savings Plan
appears in the Administrative Committee meeting on May 3, 2001. The minutes state that Ms.
Rath reviewed the reasons for and status of the Enron Savings Plan recordkeeper and trustee
vendor search.!°°° Ms. Rath presented the decision for the move to Hewitt Associates as

'534 6000023718.

835 BC000023721.

1536 The minutes refer to an Attachment III for this agenda item. The documents
supplied by Enron in response to Joint Committee staff request do not label Attachment III or

describe either the reasons for or the status of the search. The Joint Committee staff has been
unable to determine whether we have the complete documents provided to the Administrative

510

=== PAGE 539 ===
recordkeeper and Wilmington Trust as trustee. She recommended that the Administrative
Committee approve the elimination of the Enron Oil and Gas Stock Fund and the switch from
Vanguard LifeStrategy Funds to Fidelity Freedom Funds. The Administrative Committee
requested Ms. Rath to work with another Enron employee to determine whether the Fidelity
Funds are a comparable class and optimal fee structure. It was decided that these matters would
be brought back to the committee at the August 15" meeting for a vote.

The materials provided to the Administrative Committee in connection with this agenda
item are:

(1) A one-page paper titled “Vendor Search” which says “Revised 1998 request for
proposal and sent to”: Hewitt Associates, Fidelity, Prudential,
PaineWebber/Putnam, Merrill Lynch, Invesco, Citistreet, JP Morgan/American
Century (emphasis in original).

(2) A one-page paper titled “Investment Offerings” which refers to the elimination of
the Enron Oil and Gas Stock Fund and the recommended investment switch from
Vanguard to Fidelity Funds. Also says “Increase rebate from Fidelity by
$59,172.57/qtr.”

(3) A one-page paper titled “Enron Corp. Savings Plan Fund Performance Average
Annual Total Returns For The Period ended March 31, 2001,” which compares
certain Vanguard funds with Fidelity funds.

(4) Four pages of materials which describe the Fidelity Freedom Funds.

(5) Three pages of materials describing Vanguard LifeStrategy Funds.

While not clear, the first document referenced above appears to mean that, in making the

search, the 1998 request for proposal was revised and sent to the listed service providers. The
two bolded names were the two final providers considered in the process, with Hewitt being

chosen.

As discussed above, the Administrative Committee discussed the status of the blackout at
the November 6, 2001, meeting.

Subsequent Administrative Committee meetings

Issues relating to the change of recordkeeper were discussed at some subsequent
Administrative Committee meetings. At the Administrative Committee meeting on November

Committee on this matter. The materials described here were included with the minutes and
relate to this item, so it is assumed they were provided for this item.

511

=== PAGE 540 ===
20, 2001, a timeline of the events leading to the change of recordkeepers was discussed.'537

At the Committee meeting on December 11, 2001, copies of the following were provided
to the Committee: employee communications and an updated timeline documenting the
sequence of events relating to the blackout; a copy of the prior presentation by in-house counsel
regarding the roles and responsibilities of the Administrative Committee; and a copy of a draft
analysis by of the history of the stock price and the transition period.

Enron Savings Plan holdings of Enron stock and transactions in Enron stock

According to information provided by Ms. Rath to the Senate Committee on
Governmental Affairs, at the time the blackout of investments began under the Enron Savings
Plan on October 26, 2001, approximately 26 percent of the assets of the Enron Savings Plan were
invested in Enron stock. At this time, approximately 58 percent of the Enron Savings Plan
investment in Enron stock was due to participant investment elections with respect to participant
contributions and 42 percent was due to Enron matching contributions. Approximately 22
percent of plan participants at that time were eligible to reinvest the matching contributions in
something other than Enron stock.'5%8

For the two weeks preceding October 26, 2001, Enron Savings Plan participants were net
buyers of Enron stock. During this period, Enron Savings Plan participants purchased $15.770
million of Enron stock and sold $11.553 worth of Enron stock. Also during this period, the
number of Enron Savings Plan participants who bought Enron stock (501 participants)
outnumbered plan participants who sold Enron stock (224 participants) by more than a two to
one margin.!° °

In contrast, for the two week period after the blackout period ended on November 13,
2001, Enron Savings Plan participants were net sellers of Enron stock.!*4°

Enron Savings Plan provisions relating to third party service providers

1537 &C000001909-16. An updated copy of this timeline was presented at the December
11, 2001, Administrative Committee Meeting. A copy of this document is included in Appendix
D to this Report.

1538 Responses to questions for the record submitted on behalf of Mikie Rath by Swidler
Berlin Shereff Friedman, LLP, Retirement Insecurity: 401(k) Crisis at Enron, Hearing before the
Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, S-Hrg. 107-378, at 188-89 (Feb. 5,
2002).

1539 Responses to questions for the record submitted by Northern Trust Retirement
Consulting, LLC, Retirement Insecurity: 401(k) Crisis at Enron, Hearing before the Committee
on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, S.Hrg. 107-378, at 191 (Feb. 5, 2002).

1540 Responses to questions for the record submitted by Hewitt Associates, Retirement

Insecurity: 401(k) Crisis at Enron, Hearing before the Committee on Governmental Affairs,
United States Senate, S.-Hrg. 107-378, at 200 (Feb. 5, 2002).

512

=== PAGE 541 ===
Section XV.6 of the Enron Savings Plan (as amended and restated effective July 1, 1999)
provides as follows:

Notwithstanding any provision of the Plan or the Trust Agreement to the contrary,
the Company may, in its sole discretion, engage any service provider which is not
an employee or a subsidiary of the company to perform identified administrative
serves with respect to the Plan (“Third-Party Administrative Services”). In the
event that the Company so engages any such service provider to perform Third-
Party Administrative Service, then notwithstanding any provision of the Plan to
the contrary, the Company shall be fully responsible and accountable for
selecting, credentialing, overseeing, and monitoring such service provider,
including without limitation, evaluating the quality of performance, determining
whether the fees charged are reasonable, and removing or replacing such service
provider, as the Company deems to be necessary or appropriate in its discretion.
Upon engaging a service provider to perform Third-Party Administrative
Services, the Company shall advice the Committee in writing regarding such
engagement identifying the service provider and the Third-Party Administrative
Services which are to be performed by such service provider. Thereafter the
Committee shall have not power, duty, or responsibility with respect to such
Third-Party Administrative Services and shall have no power, duty or
responsibility to monitor the performance of such service provider.

Discussion of Issues

Changes in third party service providers, including plan recordkeepers, are a normal part
of qualified plan operation. Changes in recordkeepers may be made for a variety of reasons,
including mergers of plans due to corporate transactions, problems with a current recordkeeper,
fee differences between comparable providers, and investment or other plan changes. A change
in recordkeepers generally will involve some interruption or blackout of normal plan operations;
the extent and duration of the interruption will depend on a variety of factors, including the
nature of services provided, plan features (e.g., whether loans are permitted and how often
investment changes can be made), the number of plan participants and accounts, and the
accuracy of the information being transferred. Some recordkeepers have commented that the
latter feature is often a key element determining the length of any blackout period, because if the
transferred data is not accurate, then the reconciliation process will take longer.

The decision of when to implement a change, i.e., when to impose a plan blackout, may
also depend on a variety of factors, including when a change is likely to have the least effect on
plan operations and administrative convenience for the new and old recordkeeper and others
involved in plan administration. Once chosen, blackout dates may be changed due to necessity
or convenience. For example, as described above, the blackout for the Enron Savings Plan was
originally scheduled to begin on September 14, 2001. The date was deferred (prior to the time
participants were notified of the change) because of a perceived need to make additional plan
amendments. In some cases, unanticipated problems discovered either before a blackout has
begun or during a blackout may result in a delay in implementing the blackout or a delay in
restarting full normal plan operations.

513

=== PAGE 542 ===
Actions relating to a change in plan recordkeepers are subject to ERISA’s general
fiduciary provisions. Thus, if ERISA’s fiduciary standards are not met in connection with a
change in recordkeepers, including implementation of any blackout period, fiduciary liability for
losses may be imposed.

The blackout associated with the Enron Savings Plan in November 2001 has received
considerable attention due to the timing of the blackout and the decline in the value of Enron
stock during this period. At the beginning of the blackout, Enron stock was $15.40 per share,
compared to $9.98 per share at the end of the blackout. This is a 35 percent loss in value during
the blackout period. However, Enron’s stock price was falling before the blackout, and
participants who wished to could have sold stock previously. For example, on February 1, 2001,
Enron stock price was $78.79, and on October 25, 2001, the day before the blackout began,
Enron stock price was $15.35. During this period, the price of the stock fell 81 percent. Until
the blackout, there is some indication that Enron employees viewed Enron stock as a good
investment. As described above, Enron Savings Plan participants were net buyers of Enron stock
just before the blackout. During the blackout, attitudes regarding the future of the company may
have changed; Enron Savings Plan participants were net sellers of Enron stock.

The main issue raised with respect to the change in recordkeepers under the Enron
Savings Plan is whether plan fiduciaries, including the Enron Savings Plan Administrative
Committee, acted in accordance with their fiduciary obligations in implementing the blackout
period or whether they should have stopped the blackout from occurring given the falling price
of Enron stock and its financial circumstances, thereby possibly allowing plan participants to
reduce their losses. In hindsight, the blackout was ill-timed. However, the actions of plan
fiduciaries should be evaluated based on what was known (or should have been known) at the
time.

One issue is whether the Administrative Committee (or other plan fiduciaries) should
have acted to postpone the blackout. The Administrative Committee, although informed about
matters related to the change in recordkeepers, did not become actively involved until the
blackout was underway. At that point, the Administrative Committee became concerned with
the possibility of accelerating the end of the blackout period.

On the eve of the blackout, the possibility of postponing the blackout due to volatility of
Enron stock was considered by Enron personnel. Although the Administrative Committee was
not formally involved in this decision, Cindy Olson, a member of the Administrative Committee
and also, at the time, Executive Vice President, Human Resources and Community Relations,
Enron Corp., was involved. In deciding to go forward with the blackout, she consulted with two
other human resources vice presidents and Enron’s ERISA counsel.'*4!

1541 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate. Retirement Insecurity:
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 57. (Feb. 5, 2002); interview of Cindy Olson by Joint
Committee staff.

514

=== PAGE 543 ===
According to Ms. Olson, the blackout was not postponed due to the difficulty of
providing notice of the postponement to all plan participants. '° 42 Part of this reasoning appears
to be a concern that different groups of participants not be treated differently, and part of this
appears to be due to the thought that if not all participants could be notified, the blackout would
go into effect as a practical manner in any case for some participants. The first concern is
undermined somewhat by the fact that during the transition process to the new recordkeeper,
Enron routinely provided different notices to different groups of plan participants.

Issues involving possible fiduciary liability relating to the blackout are being addressed in
litigation.

Another issue that arises with respect to the blackout is whether plan participants
received notice of the blackout sufficient to allow them to make appropriate decisions in
anticipation of the blackout. The information reviewed by the Joint Committee staff indicates
that Enron provided a variety of notices to plan participants regarding the blackout. The Joint
Committee staff did not undertake to determine whether all plan participants received notice of
the blackout; however, the Joint Committee staff determined that various groups of plan
participants received different notices regarding the blackout. In particular, active plan
participants (i.e., those currently employed by Enron) were sent numerous electronic mail
messages regarding the blackout. Inactive plan participants (i.e., those not currently employed
by Enron) were not sent such electronic messages, nor comparable messages regarding the
blackout. Thus, active employees received more reminders of the blackout than other plan
participants. The exact group of employees to whom the messages were sent is unclear, as Enron
did not respond to the Joint Committee staff request to explain the group electronic mail address.

Even active employees did not all receive the same notices. In particular, it appears that
PGE employees did not receive all the electronic mail messages addressed to Enron employees
generally. Enron employees indicated to the Joint Committee staff that this was due to
technical error, and that it was not uncommon for electronic mail links to break down between
Enron and its related companies.

5. Investments under the Enron Savings Plan
Present Law
ERISA
As discussed above,!*“ ERISA generally provides that a person is a plan fiduciary to the

extent the fiduciary exercises any discretionary authority or control over management of the plan
or exercises authority or control over management or disposition of its assets, renders investment

1542 Id.

1543 note from a PGE employee to Ms. Rath states that PGE employees did not receive
the electronic mail messages of October 16, October 22, and October 26, 2001. EC000021566.

1544 Soe Part II.A.3., above.

515

=== PAGE 544 ===
advice for a fee or other compensation, or has any discretionary authority or responsibility in the
administration of the plan. Under ERISA, the person deciding how to invest the assets of a
pension plan or selecting an investment manager generally is a fiduciary by virtue of those
actions. ERISA imposes a number of specific fiduciary obligations on that person or entity,
including the duty to diversify plan investments. Limited exceptions permit certain defined
contribution plans to hold an unlimited amount of plan assets in employer securities. '**°

Additionally, ERISA requires that plan assets be held in trust and that the trustee (or the
named fiduciary that directs the trustee) have “exclusive authority and discretion to manage and
control the assets of the plan.”!°46

Under a so-called safe harbor rule, ERISA fiduciary liability does not apply to investment
decisions made by plan participants if plan participants control the investment of their individual
accounts.'°47 Many employers design plans to meet the safe harbor in order to minimize
fiduciary responsibilities. If the safe harbor applies, a plan fiduciary may be liable for the
investment alternatives made available, but not for the specific investment decisions made by
participants. This includes investments in employer securities made at the direction of a
participant. Failure to satisfy the safe harbor rule means that plan fiduciaries may be held liable
for the investment decisions of participants.

In order for the safe harbor to apply:

e the plan must provide at least three different investment options, each of which is
diversified and has materially different risk and return characteristics;

e the plan must allow participants to give investment instructions with respect to each
investment option under the plan with a frequency that is appropriate in light of the
reasonably expected market volatility of the investment option;

® ataminimum, participants must be allowed to give investment instructions at least
every three months with respect to at least three of the investment options, and those
investment options must constitute a broad range of options (the three-month
minimum rule);

e participants must be provided with detailed information about the investment options,
information regarding fees, investment instructions and limitations, and copies of
financial data and prospectuses; and

e specific requirements must be satisfied with respect to investments in employer
securities to ensure that employees’ buying, selling, and voting decisions are
confidential and free from employer influence.!*“®

$45 See Part II.A.4., above.

146 ERISA sec. 403(a).

1547 ERISA sec. 404(c).

1548 4 dditional limitations on the safe harbor include that it generally does not apply to

any investment instruction of a participant which, if implemented, would result in an acquisition
or sale of any employer security except to the extent that the securities are publicly traded and

516

=== PAGE 545 ===
In addition, the safe harbor applies only with respect to a transaction if a participant
exercises independent control in fact with respect to the assets in his or her account. Whether a
participant has exercised independent control in fact with respect to a transaction depends on the
facts and circumstances of the particular case. However, a participant’s exercise of control is not
independent in fact if:

the participant is subjected to improper influence by a plan fiduciary or the employer
with respect to the transaction;

a plan fiduciary has concealed material nonpublic facts regarding the investment from
the participant, unless the disclosure of the information by the plan fiduciary to the
participant would violate other law not preempted by ERISA; or

the participant is legally incompetent and the responsible plan fiduciary accepts the
participant’s instructions knowing this.

If the safe harbor is being relied upon, then participants must be permitted to change
investment decisions in a manner consistent with that safe harbor or the safe harbor will not
apply. Unless the safe harbor is being relied upon, there are no specific rules regarding how often
a plan must permit participants to change investments.

Rules relating to investments in employer securities!”

In general, the assets of either a defined contribution plan or a defined benefit plan may
be invested in employer securities. The rules relating to such investments differ for defined
benefit plans and defined contribution plans. ERISA rules applicable to defined benefit plans
prohibit such plans from acquiring employer securities if, after the acquisition, more than 10
percent of the assets of the plan would be invested in employer securities. Most defined
contribution plans, such as profit-sharing plans, stock bonus plans, pre-ERISA money purchase
plans, 401(k) plans and ESOPs, generally are not subject to this limitation. In general, there is
no limit on the amount that an employee can choose voluntarily to invest in employer securities
in a defined contribution plan.

A defined contribution plan can generally require that some or all plan contributions must
be invested in employer securities, with no opportunity to change investments. It is common for
401(k) plans to require that the employer match be invested in employer securities.

are traded with sufficient frequency and in sufficient volume to assure that participant and
beneficiary directions to buy or sell the security may be acted upon promptly and efficiently.
ERISA reg. sec. 2550.404c-1(d)(2)(ii). In connection with such an acquisition or sale, the
regulations also include requirements pertaining to the provision of information about such
securities to participants and beneficiaries as well as voting, tender, and similar rights with
respect to such securities. Id.

1549 For a more detailed discussion of these rules, see Part II.A.4., above.

517

=== PAGE 546 ===
Factual Background
In general

Under the Enron Savings Plan, participants generally may contribute from one to 15
percent!*® ° of their base pay in any combination of elective deferrals!*! or after-tax
contributions, subject to the limits prescribed by the Code. Materials reviewed by Joint
Committee staff showed that participants generally could change the amount of their
contributions monthly and could stop their contributions at any time.'*? Such changes generally
would be effective within one month.'*?

Participants may also roll over amounts from other plans to the Enron Savings Plan in
certain circumstances (“rollover contributions”).

Enron contributed as matching contributions amounts equal to a percentage of
participants’ contributions to the Enron Savings Plan to participants’ company contribution
accounts.!>** Enron’s matching contributions under the Enron Savings Plan historically were
invested “primarily” in Enron Corp. common stock and could not be reinvested by employees in
another investment until they turned age 50.)5

The amount of Enron’s matching contribution varied over time. Under the 1994 version
of the Enron Savings Plan, Enron contributed 100 percent of participants’ elective deferrals and
after-tax contributions, up to six percent of their base pay, depending on the participant’s years

1550 At one point, 14 percent was the maximum permitted contribution. Summary of
Enron Savings Plan (undated), at 118. The Enron Savings Plan provides that the contribution

amount must be an integral percentage. Sec. 3.2, Enron Savings Plan (July, 1, 1999,
restatement).

551 Fora description of elective deferrals, see Part II.A.2., above.
1552 See The Enron Retirement Program Guide, included in Appendix D to this Report.

1553 Changes made to the amount of a participant’s contribution before the 15" of any
month would be effective within one to two payroll periods following the change. Changes
made after the 15" would be effective the following month. Money in Motion - 401(k) Plan
Details, DOLO20522.

te Additionally, in November 1996, Enron announced a special $300 contribution to
the Enron Savings Plan on behalf of regular full-time Enron employees. Participants would
automatically be 100 percent vested in the contribution, which would be made in mid-January
1997 and would be invested in Enron stock. EnSight (Nov. 1996), EC000020134-EC000020137.

1555 The Enron Savings Plan provides that matching contributions to the accounts of

participants who are Enron Oil & Gas employees are to be invested primarily in shares of Enron
Oil & Gas stock. Sec. 5.1(a) of Enron Savings Plan (July 1, 1999, restatement).

518

=== PAGE 547 ===
of service.!°° Effective January 1, 1998, the Enron Savings Plan was amended to provide that
notwithstanding participants’ years of service, for 1998, Enron would contribute a matching
contribution equal to 50 percent of a participant’s elective deferrals, up to two percent of base
pay. The January 1, 1999, version of the Enron Savings Plan provides that Enron’s matching
contribution for 1999 was equal to 50 percent of participants’ elective deferrals up to four
percent of base pay. For 2000 and 2001, the limit was six percent of compensation. These
contributions were discontinued effective November 28, 2001.'°°”

Role of the Administrative Committee

The Enron Savings Plan Administrative Committee is the plan administrator and named
fiduciary for purposes of ERISA,'** except with respect to the investment of assets of the trust
fund, for which the plan trustee is the named fiduciary.'° ° The trust agreement under the Enron
Savings Plan provides that the named fiduciary thereunder is the organization, entity, or other
person responsible for benefit administration under the Enron Savings Plan.!°® Further, it
provides that the named fiduciary is responsible for management and control of the Enron
Savings Plan trust fund and is responsible for determining the “diversification policy.”!°°! The
trust agreement also provides that the named fiduciary may delegate discretionary authority for
the management and control of all or any portion of the trust to investment managers. 5°

As discussed above in Part II.B.3., above, the Administrative Committee generally did
not evaluate Enron stock as an appropriate investment under the Enron Savings Plan. The
Administrative Committee questioned for the first time whether it should be examining Enron
stock as an investment under the Enron qualified plans at a special meeting of the Administrative

1556 Sec 3.4. Enron Corp. Savings Plan (Jan. 1, 1994, restatement).

1557 Third Amendment to Enron Corp. Savings Plan (July 1, 1999, restatement),
DOL02035 1-DOL020354.

1558 Sec. 13.1 of Enron Savings Plan (July 1, 1999, restatement).
1559 Sec, 14.1(a) of Enron Savings Plan (July 1, 1999, restatement).

1560 Sec. 1.1 of the Trust Agreement between Enron Corp. and the Wilmington Trust
Company, as Trustee (effective Nov. 1, 2001) (“Trust Agreement”). The Trust Agreement
between Enron and Wilmington Trust was effective November 1, 2001. Documents reviewed by
Joint Committee staff indicate that The Northern Trust Company previously served as trustee to
the Enron Savings Plan. The trust agreement also allocates the authority of the named fiduciary
to the organization, entity, committee or other person who has authority to perform the functions
allocated to it under the trust agreement. Id.

1561 Id.

1562 Tq. at sec. 4.1.

519

=== PAGE 548 ===
Committee on November 1, 2001 1563 Documents provided by Enron indicate that, due to the
volatility of Enron’s stock and the fiduciary responsibility of the Administrative Committee, the
special meeting was called to discuss the prudent steps that the Administrative Committee might
need to consider with respect to the Enron Savings Plan, as well as other Enron qualified plans.
Minutes of the meeting indicate that it was attended by four of the Administrative Committee
members, a newly engaged attorney representing the Administrative Committee,'*™ Benefits
Department personnel, three representatives from Hewitt, and Enron’s ERISA counsel.

The Administrative Committee was presented with a snapshot of the current Enron stock
holdings in the Enron Savings Plan on January 1, September 30, and October 26, 2001. The
Administrative Committee was advised that it had no duty to issue cautionary advice on the
value or risk of holding Enron stock because the Administrative Committee does not act in the
capacity of an investment advisor, but is charged with administering the plans in accordance with
the terms of the plan documents and in compliance with ERISA. It was decided that the
Administrative Committee should hire an independent investment advisor to monitor Enron
stock.

At a November 6, 2001, meeting, the Administrative Committee discussed retaining an
investment advisor to give guidance to the Administrative Committee on Enron stock in relation
to the Administrative Committee’s operation of the plans.'° 5 Minutes of the meeting indicate
that the Administrative Committee agreed that the role of the advisor would be to give advice on
Enron stock and to assist the Administrative Committee in operating the plans in the best
interests of its participants.'° 6° Additionally, it was decided that the Administrative Committee
should select an independent investment advisor to monitor Enron stock, and an Enron Treasury
Department employee was directed to conduct the search.!°°7

Investment authority and investment decisions under the Enron Savings Plan

Upon enrolling in the Enron Savings Plan, participants select the fund or funds in which
they want to invest their contributions. The Plan provides that participants’ elective deferrals
and after-tax contributions may be invested into any combination of funds offered by the

1563 Minutes of the Meeting of the Administrative Committee (Nov. 1, 2001),
EC000001847-EC000001855.

1564 The previous legal counsel for the Administrative Committee had had to resign due
to conflicts of interest that had developed. It was agreed that the November 1, 2001,
Administrative Committee meeting that the new attorney would represent the Administrative
Committee at this meeting and the next pending a further agreement regarding his services.

1565 Minutes of the Meeting of the Administrative Committee (Nov. 1, 2001),
EC000001858-EC000001860.

1566 Id.

1567 Id.

520

=== PAGE 549 ===
Plan.!°® Participants’ rollover contributions may also be invested in any combination of
investments available under the Plan.'*

The Enron Savings Plan provides that participants may change their investment
selections prospectively as well as with respect to amounts already invested under the Plan.'°”°
The Plan provides that the manner and frequency of such changes are subject to procedures
established by the Enron Savings Plan Administrative Committee.'>”!

Participants generally can make changes in investment choices for future contributions
and transfer current balances from one fund to another on any business day.!°” Participants
wishing to make a change from one fund to another could call a phone line for the Enron Savings
Plan or make the change electronically, through a website for the Plan.'57° Participants would
receive written confirmations of transactions.'*”*

With respect to Enron’s matching contributions, the Enron Savings Plan generally
provided that upon turning 50, participants may elect to reallocate their company contribution
account balances among other investment options offered under the Enron Savings Plan. For
this purpose, participants could designate one investment fund for all the amounts allocated or
may split the investment of such amounts between investment funds. However, effective
November 28, 2001, the Enron Savings Plan was amended to provide that notwithstanding their

age, participants could reinvest the amounts in their company contribution accounts in the
investment funds offered under the Plan.

Effective February 15, 2002, the Plan was amended to provide that the portion of a
rollover contribution including Enron stock or other “employer securities” will continue to be so
invested until the participant elects to convert it into another investment under the Plan.'°”°
Effective March 15, 2002, the Plan was amended to provide that participants may not elect to

'568 Participants can invest in any or all funds offered under the Plan as long as the
investment allocations are made in one percent increments and total 100 percent. See The Enron
Retirement Program Guide.

1569 Sec. 5.3 Enron Savings Plan (July 1, 1999, restatement); Money in Motion, DOL
020252.

1570 Sec. 5.2 Enron Savings Plan (July 1, 1999, restatement); Money in Motion, DOL
020252.

1571 I ‘d.
1572 Money in Motion, DOL020252.
1573 Id.

1574 Id.

‘575. Sixth Amendment to Enron Corp. Savings Plan (July 1, 1999, restatement).

521

=== PAGE 550 ===
convert any investment of any portion of their accounts under the Plan into an investment in
Enron stock or any other “employer security.” 76

Plan investment options available to participants

During the period reviewed by Joint Committee staff, participants could invest their
contributions to the Enron Savings Plan in up to 20 investment options!*”” as long as the whole
percentages chosen totaled 100 percent.'* 78 The options included several mutual funds, Enron
stock, and beginning in 1999, a Schwab account that functioned like a self-directed brokerage

account,>” through which participants could invest in almost any individual stock or mutual
fund.

The particular funds available under the Enron Savings Plan varied over time. During the
period covered by the Joint Committee review, they included Enron stock as well as funds
sponsored by a variety of financial institutions.'**°

Information provided to participants

Enron produced a variety of employee benefit education materials for Enron Savings Plan
participants. These included periodic newsletters, occasional special newsletters, electronic
communications, and materials designed to meet legal requirements, such as summary plan
descriptions.'° 81 Materials provided to the Joint Committee staff show that Enron also
periodically produced publications for participants which describe the investment options under
the Enron Savings Plan. Examples of prospectuses for the funds available under the Enron
Savings Plan were provided to Joint Committee staff.

1576 1g
‘577 The number of investment options varied over time.
1578 See generally “Enron Savings Plan summary description.”

1579 SRC 1999 Form 11-K. Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate,
Retirement Insecurity: 401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 33 (Feb. 5, 2002).

1580 See Table 4 through Table 9, below, for the identity of the various investment
options under the Enron Savings Plan for 1996 through 2000.

1581 Yoney in Motion - 401(k) Plan Details, a summary plan description for the Savings
Plan, describes for participants the Plan features and details, as well as their rights under the
Plan. DOL020532. In a section called “ERISA Rights,” Money in Motion tells participants that
ERISA requires the individuals responsible for managing the plan to act prudently and in their
best interests. Id.

522

=== PAGE 551 ===
For example, Enron produced Only You - Enron Retirement Planning - Tools and
Information for Your F. uture. 1° Only You includes information to assist employees with
determining how much to contribute to the Enron Savings Plan and how to invest their
contributions.'**? Additionally, an accompanying Resource Guide'™™ identifies resources
through which employees could learn about investing. The Resource Guide lists the following
types of assistance as provided by Enron:

e Information about Enron retirement benefits so that employees know what to expect
when they retire;
The “Wealthy Barber” video which provides advice about saving and investing;

e Future$aver, interactive retirement planning software, customized for Enron’s benefit
plans; and

e “Investing in Your Future” workbooks, emphasizing the importance of saving for
retirement and focusing on the fundamentals of investing and the relationship
between risk and return, the importance of diversification and the impact of time on
investment results.

Employee meetings and company culture

Enron held periodic “‘all-employee” meetings. Depending on the location of the
meetings, employees could attend the meetings in person. In addition, the meetings were
typically broadcast to all employee locations. While the purpose of these meetings generally was
not to discuss investment options under the Enron Savings Plan, the future of Enron and
projected prices of Enron Corp. common stock were discussed.

The Joint Committee staff reviewed videotapes of nine employee meetings for the period
February 1, 1999, to October 23, 2001. The meetings had a common format. Information
regarding the most recent financial information, the future of the company, and any current
changes or planned changes were addressed. The discussion was typically led by the Chairman
(either Mr. Lay or Mr. Skilling, depending on the time frame) and two or three other high-
ranking Enron officials, such as Mr. Skilling, Joseph Sutton and Mark Frevert. A question and
answer session followed the presentations by such individuals. In many cases, the questions had
been submitted in advance of the meeting.

1582 Only You - Enron Retirement Planning - Tools and Information for Your Future,
EC000020214-EC000020237.

1583 For example, the Only You Resource Guide states that there is “no better way to save
money than on a before-tax basis through payroll deduction. Thanks to the plans’ tax advantages
and wide variety of investment options, it simply can’t be beat...Make the most of your
investment options. Most of us are long-term investors and can take advantage of the more
aggressive investment funds. Enron has also recently introduced three new “Lifestyle”
investment funds designed to fit a variety of investor profiles,” EC000020241.

1584 Only You Resource Guide, EC000020238-EC000020257.

523

=== PAGE 552 ===
With two exceptions, described below, Enron stock was not discussed in the employee
meetings specifically in the context of the Enron Savings Plan. However, the future of Enron
and the projected value of Enron stock was always addressed. A positive picture of the future
was generally presented. The view that all employees should be owners of Enron was also
frequently addressed.

For example, at the employee meeting on July 13, 1999, Mr. Lay told employees that
“Cw]e think it’s critical that every body has an ownership position in the company” and that it is
“very possible before year end” that the stock price would reach $100 per share and that “there is
a fairly good chance we could see the stock price double again in the next year to 18
months...Do that math on your Enron stock.”!5®5 On August 16, 2001, Mr. Lay explained to
employees, “we think we’re at the bottom of the cycle and want you [the employees] to enjoy the
ride back up. And more importantly, we want you to work hard so we get that ride back up.”1°8
The previous day, Enron stock closed at $40.25. Mr. Lay added, “we are a deep value stock”
and “the company is doing extremely well.” Also on August 16, 2001, Mr. Lay told Enron
employees that “the next several months, the next few years are going to be great for Enron,

great for Enron’s employees...And that’s all starting now.” Enron stock closed at $36.85 that
day.

As mentioned above, Enron stock was addressed in the context of the Enron Savings Plan
at two employee meetings. At the February 1, 1999, meeting, Cindy Olson, Enron’s Executive
Vice President for Human Resources and Community Relations was asked to join Mr. Lay, and
respond to the question “Should we invest all of our 401(k) in Enron stock?,” submitted by an
employee. She replied, “Absolutely!”1°*”

According to Ms. Olson, the question was impromptu and her reply, which was intended
to be humorous, was “greeted with laughter by those running the meeting and by the
audience.”!*8* In her view, when taken in the context of the meeting, it is clear that this was not

1585 July 13, 1999, employee meeting.

1586 Mr. Lay was explaining to Enron employees that an additional issuance of stock
options would be made to them. The options would vest in one year, instead of over five years
as under previous similar programs.

1587 Th an interview with Joint Committee staff, Ms. Olson said she had no “on-the-
ground detailed knowledge” of the Savings Plan despite the fact that she served on the
Administrative Committee from January 2001 to March 2002. According to Ms. Olson, her
responsibilities were more in the nature of customer service: to ensure that the Savings Plan was
administered properly “in accordance with the culture” and that participants “got the services
they needed.” She said that she was not involved with the Savings Plan from a technical
standpoint.

1588 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity:
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 182-183 (Feb. 5, 2002).

524

=== PAGE 553 ===
intended as a serious statement. She also stated that she generally stressed diversification of
investments.!°*

At an employee meeting on October 23, 2001, Mr. Lay directly answered employee
questions. To the question “I’m showing little in my 401(k). Any speculation on whether there
will be any guarantee of pensions for those with 10 or 20 years of service?”, Mr. Lay included as
part of his answer, “Enron stock--we’ll bring it back. We’re gonna bring it back.”

A few weeks following the meeting, on November 8, 2001, Enron announced its
intention to file restated financial statements for the years December 31, 1997, through 2000, and
for the first and second quarters of 2001 1590

Current and former employees interviewed by the Joint Committee staff indicated that
there was a general culture encouraging employee ownership of Enron stock and that it was part
of the Enron philosophy that all employees should also be owners of the company. Employees
interviewed by the Joint Committee staff generally expressed continued loyalty to Enron, despite
their own financial losses. One former employee of an Enron subsidiary gave the following
testimony at a Congressional hearing:

Throughout my time with Enron, the top management of the company constantly
encouraged us to invest our savings in Enron stock. I took the fact that the company
matched our savings only with Enron stock as a further endorsement of the stock as a safe
retirement investment. More recent statements made by Enron’s top management,
including e-mails from Ken Lay, about the company’s stock also caused me to keep
investing my savings into the stock. I remember, in the Fall of 2000, Enron’s top
executives telling us at an employee meeting and by company e-mail that Enron’s stock
price was going to increase to at least $120 per share. When Mr. Skilling resigned last

1589 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity:
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 40, 44 (Feb. 5, 2002). Additionally, Ms. Olson
provided Joint Committee staff with examples of her responses to questions e-mailed to her by
Enron employees about their benefits. In answering one such question, Ms. Olson wrote: “We
encourage employees to discuss these questions with a financial advisor or tax expert. Because
everyone’s situation, risk tolerance and diversification goals are different, there is no one
solution that works for everyone.” Printout of Enron Options, Featuring Cindy Olson, executive
vice president, Human Resources & Community Affairs (Nov. 2, 2000). Committee on
Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity: 401(k) Crisis at Enron, S.
Hrg. 107-378, at 177-78 (Feb. 5, 2002).

1590 SEC Form 8-K, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 8,
2001.

525

=== PAGE 554 ===
August, Mr. Lay told us that the company was stronger than it had ever been....Our stock
ownership was encouraged by Enron’s top management.'**!

The Joint Committee staff was told that Enron employees were constantly aware of the

price of Enron stock, and that, until the bankruptcy filing, the current stock price was displayed
on a monitor in the lobby of the Enron building.

Historical information regarding distribution of plan investments by type of investment

Table 4 through Table 9, below, show the general distribution of investments under the
Enron Savings Plan by type of investment for the years 1996 to 2000 and as of October 26, 2001.
The source of the data for 1996 to 2000 is the Forms 11-K°” as filed with the SEC for those
years. The source of the data for 2001 is an attachment to minutes of the November 1, 2001,
meeting of the Administrative Committee.'°”?

1591 Committee on Education and the Workforce, United States House of
Representatives, The Enron Collapse and Its Implications for Worker Retirement Security, H.
Hrg. 107-42, at 100-101 (Feb. 7, 2002).

1592 The Form 11-K is an annual report for employee stock purchase, savings, and similar
plans, interests in which constitute securities registered under the Securities Act of 1933. The
Form 11-K is required to be filed pursuant to section 15(d) of the Securities Act of 1933 even
though the issuer of the securities offered to employees under the plan also files annual reports in
accordance with the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The Form 11-K is generally due to the
Securities Exchange Commission within 180 days after the end of an ERISA plan’s fiscal year.
See 17 CFR 249.311.

1583 Enron Corp. Savings Plan Fund Information, attachment to Minutes of the Meeting
of the Administrative Committee (Nov. 1, 2001), EC000001854.

526

=== PAGE 555 ===
Table 4.-Distribution of Enron Savings Plan Investments
by Type of Investment for 1996

Investment

Year-End Value
(millions of dollars)

Total Year-End Value
(millions of dollars)

Short-Term Investments:

Northern Trust Collective Stock Index Fund 78
SEI Stable Asset Fund 0.0
Total 78
Stock:
Enron Corp. Common Stock 308.1
Enron Corp. Cumulative Second Preferred 41.2
Convertible Stock
Enron Oil & Gas Company Common Stock 24.0
Total 373.3
Investment Funds:
Fidelity Investments Equity Income Stock 27.6
Fidelity Investments OTC Fund 9.2
Fidelity Investments Balanced Fund 3.7
Fidelity Investments Growth & Income Fund 19.6
Fidelity Investments Magellan Fund 15.9
Fidelity Investments Growth Company Fund 16.3
Fidelity Investments Overseas Fund 6.1
Vanguard Growth Portfolio 2.4
Vanguard Moderate Growth Portfolio 0.9
Vanguard Conservative Growth Portfolio 14
Total 103.1
Fixed Income Deposit Contracts:
Allstate #GA-5826 4.4
Canada Life Contracts #P-45770 12.3
J.P. Morgan Enron-02 3.7
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. #GAC 7374 TA
Lincoln National #GA-9597 7.2
New York Life #GA-30282 49
Peoples Security BDA00149TR-1 8.0
Peoples Security BDA00149TR-2 3.9
Peoples Security BDA00149TR-5 3.8
Peoples Security BDA00437FR 8.3
Principal Mutual #4-20383 4.3
Protective Life #GA-1206 42
Provident Life and Accident Insurance #627-5578 5.0
Sun Life of Canada Insurance #S-0885-G 10.0
Transamerica Occidental Life #51362 0.0
Transamerica Occidental #51313-00 3.3
Total 90.6

Note: Items may not sum to total due to rounding.

Source: 2000 SEC Form 11-K for the Enron Corp. Savings Plan, Schedule of Assets Held for Investment Purposes,

available at www.sec.gov.

527


=== PAGE 556 ===
Table 5.—Distribution of Enron Savings Plan Investments
by Type of Investment for 1997

Investment

Year-End Value
(millions of dollars)

Total Year-End Value
(millions of dollars)

Short-Term Investments:

Northern Trust Collective Stock Index Fund 9.6
SEI Stable Asset Fund 5.2
Total 14.8
Stock:
Enron Corp. Common Stock 276.9
Enron Corp. Cumulative Second Preferred 39.7
Convertible Stock
Enron Oil & Gas Company Common Stock 28.4
Total 345.0
Investment Funds:
Fidelity Investments Equity Income Stock 39.7
Fidelity Investments OTC Fund 10.7
Fidelity Investments Balanced Fund 5.4
Fidelity Investments Growth & Income Fund 31.8
Fidelity Investments Magellan Fund 20.8
Fidelity Investments Growth Company Fund 20.1
Fidelity Investments Overseas Fund 8.3
Vanguard Growth Portfolio 4.8
Vanguard Conservative Growth Portfolio 1.5
Vanguard Moderate Growth Portfolio 2.0
Total 145.1
Fixed Income Deposit Contracts:
Allstate #GA - 5826 47
J.P. Morgan Enron-#02 3.8
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. GAC # 7374 7.6
New York Life #GA-30282 5.2
Peoples Security BDA00149TR-1 8.0
Peoples Security BDA00149TR-2 3.9
Peoples Security BDA00149TR-5 3.8
Peoples Security BDA00437FR 45
Principal Mutual #4-20383 4.6
Protective Life GA-#1206 4.2
Provident Life and Accident Insurance #627-5578 5.2
State Street Bank #97053 8.0
Sun Life of Canada Insurance #S-0885-G 10.6
Transamerica Occidental Life #51362 0.0
Transamerica Occidental #5 1313-00 1.7
Total 75.8

Note: Items may not sum to total due to rounding.

Source: 1997 SEC Form 11-K for the Enron Corp. Savings Plan, Schedule of Assets Held for Investment Purposes,

available at www.sec.gov.

528


=== PAGE 557 ===
Table 6.-Distribution of Enron Savings Plan Investments
by Type of Investment for 1998

Investment

Year-End Value
(millions of dollars)

Total Year-End Value
(millions of dollars)

Short-Term Investments:

Morgan Stanley Stable Value II 6.2
Northern Trust Collective Stock Index Fund 14.0
SEI Stable Asset Fund 21.2
Total 41.4
Stock:
Enron Corp. Common Stock 311.1
Enron Corp. Cumulative Second Preferred 54.5
Convertible Stock
Enron Oil & Gas Company Common Stock 38.9
Total 404.5
Investment Funds:
Fidelity Investments Equity Income Fund 45.1
Fidelity Investments OTC Fund 17.0
Fidelity Investments Balanced Fund 10.1
Fidelity Investments Growth & Income Fund 55.9
Fidelity Investments Magellan Fund 33.2
Fidelity Investments Growth Company Fund 26.2
Fidelity Investments Overseas Fund 9.4
The Vanguard Group Growth Portfolio 9.6
The Vanguard Group Conservative Growth Portfolio 3.1
The Vanguard Group Moderate Growth Portfolio 3.4 _
Total 213.0
Fixed Income Deposit Contracts:
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. #GAC 7374 8.1
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. #14447 6.0
Peoples Security BDA00149TR-1 9.7
Peoples Security BDA00149TR-8 3.9
Peoples Security BDA00149TR-6 3.6
Peoples Security BDA00437FR 48
Peoples Security BDA00149TR-11 3.4
Principal Mutual #4-20383 4.9
Provident Life and Accident Insurance #627-5578 5.5
State Street Bank 97-053B 718
Sun Life of Canada Insurance #S-0885-G 11.1
Transamerica Occidental Life #51362-00 0.0
Transamerica Occidental Life #51313-00 1.9
Total 70.7

Note: Items may not sum to total due to rounding.

Source: 1998 SEC Form 11-K for the Enron Corp. Savings Plan, Schedule of Assets Held for Investment Purposes,

available at www.sec.gov.

529


=== PAGE 558 ===
Table 7.-Distribution of Enron Savings Plan Investments
by Type of Investment for 1999

Year-End Value

Total Year-End Value

Investment (millions of dollars) (millions of dollars)
Short-Term Investments:
Northern Trust Company Short-Term Investment 8.8
Fund
SEI Trust Company Stable Asset Fund 23.1
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter Stable Value II 12.5
Total 44.4
Stock:
Enron Corp. common stock 662.1
Enron Corp. Cumulative Second Preferred 84.8
Convertible Stock
Enron Oil & Gas Resources, Inc. Common Stock 25.2
Charles Schwab Self-Directed Brokerage Account 16.1
Total 788.2
Investment Funds:
Fidelity Investments Equity Income Fund 43.2
Fidelity Investments OTC Funds 43.4
Fidelity Investments Balanced Fund 13.8
Fidelity Investments Growth & Income Fund 55.0
Fidelity Investments Magellan Fund 52.1
Fidelity Investments Growth Company Fund 66.1
Fidelity Investments Overseas Fund 15.5
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter International Equity 12.9
Portfolio
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter Institutional Fund 69.1
The Vanguard Group Growth Portfolio 59.5
The Vanguard Group Conservation Growth Portfolio 15.1
The Vanguard Group Moderate Growth Portfolio 56.5
The Vanguard Group Index Trust 500 Portfolio 17.4
The Vanguard Group Windsor II Fund 39.3
T. Rowe Price Small Cap Fund 20.9
PIMCO Total Return Fund 12.0
PIMCO Low Duration Fund 10.2
PIMCO Total 6.3
UAM Trust Company Dwight Target 2 Fund 24.8
UAM Trust Company Dwight Target 5 Fund 44.0
Total 677.1
Fixed Income Deposit Contracts:
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. GAC #7374 43
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. #14447 6.4
Principal Mutual Life Insurance Co. #4-20383 5.2
Sun Life of Canada Insurance #S-0885-G, 5.42 11.7
percent
Transamerica Occidental Life #51362-00, 6.10 0.0
percent
Allstate Insurance Co. #5926P 43
Allstate Insurance Co. #6229 6.0
GE Life & Annuity Assurance Co. #3322 5.1
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. #3322 5.0
Monumental Insurance Co. #ADA00757FRP 6.6
New York Life Insurance Co. #30505P 5.2

530


=== PAGE 559 ===
Table 7.-Distribution of Enron Savings Plan Investments
by Type of Investment for 1999

Investment

Year-End Value
(millions of dollars)

Total Year-End Value
(millions of dollars)

New York Life Insurance Co. #31036
CDC Financial Synthetic #1032-01-P
Transamerica Life Insurance Co. #76644-P

32.7
0.7
1.0

Total

94.2

Note: Items may not sum to total due to rounding.

Source: 1999 SEC Form 11-K for the Enron Corp. Savings Plan, Schedule of Assets Held for Investment Purposes,

available at www.sec.gov.

531


=== PAGE 560 ===
Table 8.-Distribution of Enron Savings Plan Investments
by Type of Investment for 2000

Year-End Value Total Year-End Value
Investment (millions of dollars) (millions of dollars)
Short-Term Investments:
Northern Trust Company Short-Term Investment 17.8
Fund
SEI Trust Company Stable Asset Fund 18.3
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter Stable Value II 13.4
Total 49.5
Stock:
Enron Corp. Common Stock 1,157.5
Enron Corp. Cumulative Second 158.9
Preferred Convertible Stock
Enron Oil & Gas Resources, Inc. common stock 26.4
Charles Schwab Self-Directed Brokerage Account 30.8
Total 1,373.6
Investment Funds:
Fidelity Investments Equity Income Fund 34.9
Fidelity Investments OTC Funds 37.6
Fidelity Investments Balanced Fund 12.2
Fidelity Investments Growth & Income Fund 43.3
Fidelity Investments Magellan Fund 46.5
Fidelity Investments Growth Company Fund 84.0
Fidelity Investments Overseas Fund 14.8
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter International Equity 11.7
Portfolio
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter Institutional Fund 45.9
The Vanguard Group Life Strategy Growth 44.9
The Vanguard Group Conservation Growth Portfolio 12.6
The Vanguard Group Moderate Growth Portfolio 41.1
The Vanguard Group Index Trust 500 Portfolio 23.2
The Vanguard Group Windsor II Fund 28.0
T. Rowe Price Small Cap Fund 25.5
PIMCO Total Return Fund II Institutional 8.0
PIMCO Low Duration Fund 11.0
PIMCO Total Return Fund 7.0
UAM Trust Company Dwight Target 2 Fund 27.1
UAM Trust Company Dwight Target 5 Fund 49.6
Total 608.9
Fixed Income Deposit Contracts:
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. #14447 6.8
Canada Life Investment #P46067 12.5
Canada Life Investment #P46058 13.8
People’s (Aegon) Life Co. #NDA0017SFR 10.2
People’s Benefit Life Investment #173FR 10.4
Allstate Insurance Co. #5926P 46
Allstate Insurance Co. #6229 6.5
GE Life & Annuity Assurance Co. #3322 5.5
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. #9600P 5.0
New York Life Insurance Co. #31036 5.9
CDC Financial Synthetic #1032-01-P 0.2

532


=== PAGE 561 ===
Table 8.-Distribution of Enron Savings Plan Investments
by Type of Investment for 2000

Year-End Value

Total Year-End Value

Investment (millions of dollars) (millions of dollars)
Transamerica Occidental Life Insurance Co. #76644-P (0.4)
State Street Bank Synthetic #97053 0.3
Monumental Insurance Co. #BDA00390TR (0.1)

Total

81.2

Note: Items may not sum to total due to rounding.

Source: 2000 SEC Form 11-K for the Enron Corp. Savings Plan, Schedule of Assets Held for Investment Purposes,

available at www.sec.gov.

533


=== PAGE 562 ===
Table 9.-Enron Savings Plan Fund Information at
October 26, 2001, as Reported at the November 1, 2001,
Meeting of the Administrative Committee

Value Total Value
Investment (millions of dollars) (millions of dollars)
Enron Corp. Stock 246.7
EOG Resources 16.3
Self-Directed Account 26.5
SEI Trust Company Stable Asset Fund 223.5
Fidelity Investments Equity Income Fund 31.4
Fidelity Investments OTC Funds 22.8
Fidelity Investments Balanced Fund 15.1
Fidelity Investments Growth & Income Fund 36.7
Fidelity Investments Magellan Fund 37.1
Fidelity Investments Growth Company Fund 49.9
Fidelity Investments Overseas Fund 10.4
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter International Equity 10.6
Portfolio
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter Equity Growth 34.2
The Vanguard Group Life Strategy Growth 36.3
The Vanguard Group Conservation Growth Portfolio 9.9
The Vanguard Group Moderate Growth Portfolio 36.2
The Vanguard Group Index Trust 500 Portfolio 26.7
The Vanguard Group Windsor II Fund 31.1
T. Rowe Price Small Cap Fund 27.7
PIMCO Total Return Fund II Institutional 17.0
Total 946.1

Note: Items may not sum to total due to rounding.

Source: Enron Corp. Savings Plan Fund Information, attachment to Minutes of the Meeting of the Administrative
Committee (Nov. 1, 2001), EC000001854.

534


=== PAGE 563 ===
Based on the data reported on the SEC Forms 11-K for the Enron Savings Plan for 1996
to 2000, as shown in Table 4 through Table 8, the portion of the assets under the Enron Savings
Plan that was invested in Enron stock was 65 percent in 1996, 59 percent in 1997, 55 percent in
1998, 48 percent in 1999, and 62 percent in 2000.!5** In 2000, these securities were valued at
over $1.3 billion.!”°

According to an attachment to the minutes of the November 1, 2001, meeting of the
Administrative Committee, as of October 26, 2001, as shown in Table 9, 28 percent, or $246.7
million, of the assets under Enron Savings Plan were invested in Enron stock. Of this amount,
$102 million was attributable to Enron’s matching contribution and $144.7 million was
attributable to participants’ contributions.!°°°

Discussion of Issues

Enron stock was a significant portion of the assets held under the Enron Savings Plan in
the period before Enron’s bankruptcy. As a result, many Enron Savings Plan participants lost
considerable amounts of retirement savings when Enron’s stock price plummeted.'° ° There are
a variety of factors which may have contributed to such significant investment in Enron stock,
including plan design, a company culture that may have induced participants to invest in (and
keep assets invested in) Enron stock, statements by hi gh ranking Enron officials even as the
Enron stock price fell regarding the bright future for Enron, a lack of understanding of the
importance of diversification, and the actions (or inactions) of plan fiduciaries, including the
Administrative Committee.

The design of the Enron Savings Plan is not atypical. Many defined contribution plans
allow participants to direct the investment of their account balances, particularly elective
deferrals under a 401(k) plan. Participants’ varying tolerances for investment risk can be
accommodated if plans offer a variety of investment options. It is not uncommon for stock of the
employer sponsoring a plan to be offered as an investment option under a defined contribution
plan.

1594 For purposes of these calculations, because Enron Oil & Gas (“EOG”) was
established as a public company independent of Enron in 1999, investment in EOG is not
considered in determining the overall amount of assets invested in Enron stock beginning in
2000. See Part II of Part Two of this Report; also see Committee on Governmental Affairs,
United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity: 401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 45 (Feb.
5, 2002). Notwithstanding, EOG was retained as an investment option under the Enron Savings
Plan. Id.

1595 9900 SEC Form 11-K for the Enron Corp. Savings Plan, Schedule of Assets Held for
Investment Purposes.

1596 Enron Corp. Savings Plan Fund Information, attachment to Minutes of the Meeting
of the Administrative Committee (Nov. 1, 2001), EC000001854.

1597 Many participants also lost their jobs. Tittle v. Enron Corp., S.D. Texas, No. H-01-
3913, First Consolidated and Amended Complaint (filed Apr. 8, 2002), at paragraph 20.

535

=== PAGE 564 ===
Some employers make all or part of their contributions to defined contribution plans in
employer securities.'°? Many employers favor contributing their stock to their defined
contribution plans because newly-issued stock and treasury stock generally do not reduce the
employer’s cash flow. Many employers also believe that contributing company stock to a
retirement plan places the stock in the hands of persons who are more likely to retain their shares
through the company’s downcycles and vote with current management. However, employees
whose defined contribution account balances are heavily invested in employer securities are
vulnerable to losing both their job and their retirement security if the company’s fortunes
decline. Employees often like the opportunity to have an ownership interest the company they
work for, having the opportunity to share directly in profits of the company.

When an employee chooses to allocate a large percentage of his or her defined
contribution plan assets to a single investment such as employer securities, that employee is
generally assuming more risk than under a diversified asset allocation. The level of employee
investment in Enron stock under the Enron Savings Plans and the losses in retirement savings
resulting from the decline in Enron’s stock price emphasizes the importance of prudent
investment principles such as diversification. Diversification helps to mitigate investment risk
by reducing excessive exposure to any one source.

The high concentration of Enron Savings Plan investments in Enron stock resulted from
both employee investment choice and Enron’s matching contributions being made in the form of
Enron stock.'5” Enron Savings Plan participants clearly did not invest their elective deferrals in
Enron stock due to a lack of other alternatives. The Enron Savings Plan offered approximately
20 investment options other than Enron stock, consisting of a broad range of alternatives offering
various risk and return characteristics, including a self-directed brokerage account. Overall
losses experienced by Enron employees may have been limited if employees had diversified their
elective deferral and after-tax contribution accounts and if the plan permitted them to diversify
their company contribution accounts earlier than age 50. However, even if Enron Savings Plan
participants had had this opportunity, it is not clear that many participants would have taken
advantage of it, given the overall level of voluntary Enron Savings Plan investment in Enron
stock. Current and former Enron employees interviewed by the Joint Committee staff
demonstrated a tremendous loyalty to Enron, despite the bankruptcy and their own personal
financial losses and experiences. While this loyalty certainly may not be universal, the degree to
which many of the individuals interviewed by the Joint Committee staff still had faith in Enron
was striking.

1598 Many plans require that at least some portion of any employer contribution be in
stock.

1599 However, the high level of investment in Enron stock under the Enron Savings Plan
was not altogether anomalous. One study of 401(k) plans with company stock showed that 25
out of 219 plans had more than 60 percent of their assets invested in company stock. Enron
Debacle Will Force Clean Up of Company Stock Use in DC Plans, DC Plan Investing (Institute
of Management & Administration), at 1-2 (Dec. 11, 2001).

536

=== PAGE 565 ===
Investment in Enron stock by employees was generally encouraged by Enron, both
through plan design and statements by management. During the period reviewed by the Joint
Committee staff, Enron employees could acquire Enron stock through several company-
sponsored arrangements, including the Enron Savings Plan, the Enron ESOP, and stock options.
This variety of opportunities to purchase company stock is not uncommon among large
employers.

In addition, Enron officials and Enron’s “company culture” actively encouraged
employee ownership of Enron stock, both through the Enron Savings Plan and in general. A
central premise of Enron’s philosophy seemed to be that all employees should be company
owners.

Even as the price of Enron stock declined during 2001, management told employees of a
bright future for Enron. For example, Mr. Lay was optimistic in his predictions for the future of
Enron stock, even when an employee specifically asked about Enron stock in the context of the
Enron Savings Plan. Similarly, Enron’s Executive Vice President for Human Resources and
Community Relations, Cindy Olson, said that employees should “Absolutely!” invest their
contributions to the Enron Savings Plan in Enron stock. Even if management’s positive
predictions to employees about the future of Enron stock were not intended to be anything more
than inspirational company pep talks, statements regarding Enron stock--especially in the context
of the Enron Savings Plan--could have been understood by some employees to be an
endorsement that a significant portion of their assets should be invested in Enron stock.

Additionally, the Administrative Committee may have played a role in the ultimate losses
sustained by participants under the Enron Savings Plan. The Administrative Committee was the
named fiduciary under the plan with responsibility for plan assets and had the power to direct the
trustee, which held the plan assets./°° Under the Enron Savings Plan and the accompanying
trust agreement, the Administrative Committee was responsible for selecting the investment
alternatives available to participants in the Enron Savings Plan.!©! While the trust agreement
included Enron stock as an investment fund alternative, it also stated that the Administrative
Committee had the authority to terminate any existing investment alternatives at any time. ©?
Notwithstanding, the Administrative Committee did not seem to view its role as including the
obligation to review the suitability of Enron stock as an investment under the Enron Savings
Plan. Minutes of Administrative Committee meetings show that the first time the Administrative
Committee undertook such a review was at their meeting on November 1, 2001.

1600 Sec. 15.2 of the Enron Savings Plan (July 1, 1999, restatement).
1601 Tq. see Trust Agreement, Art. 4.

1602 Trust Agreement, Art. 4; Under the Trust Agreement, the Committee has discretion
to eliminate an investment option at any time. Additionally, the Committee is authorized to
direct the Trustee as to the level of investment in Enron stock “as the Committee may deem
appropriate.” Enron Savings Plan, Article VIII, 7(j) July 1, 1999, restatement).

537

=== PAGE 566 ===
If the Administrative Committee had acted sooner, losses under the Enron Savings Plan
may have been limited. Provisions of the plan could be interpreted to give them the authority to
act in this regard. These issues are currently the subject of litigation. '© 3

Recommendations

The Joint Committee staff believes that the main principle that can be drawn from the
Enron experience is that the importance of diversification of retirement savings assets cannot be
overemphasized. The Joint Committee staff recommends that that a variety of legislative
changes should be made to reduce the likelihood that plan participants in plans that allow
participant directed investments will have high concentrations of assets in a single investment.

The Joint Committee staff also recommends that plans should provide participants with
investment education in a manner consistent with fiduciary standards. This should include.
notices describing sound investment practices, with a focus on the importance of diversification.
The notice might include, for example: (1) information regarding diversification of investments;
(2) information on the essential differences, in terms of risk and return, of available investments,
including stocks, bonds, mutual funds and money market investments; (3) information on how
investment fees may affect the return on an investment; and (4) a description of the factors that
may be relevant to determining the appropriate investment allocations under the plan, such as an
individual’s age and years to retirement.

The Joint Committee staff also recommends that plan participants should be notified
when plan assets are over concentrated in a single asset. The notification could include a
statement that the participant should review their plan investments to make sure they are properly
diversified.

The Joint Committee staff recommends that plans should not be permitted to require that
employee elective deferrals or after-tax contributions be invested in employer securities. In
addition, plan participants should be given greater opportunity to diversify the investment of
employer matching and certain other employer contributions made in the form of employer
securities. In adopting specific rules, the Congress should consider the scope of any new
diversification requirement as applied to employer contributions, for example, whether it should
be limited to contributions related to elective deferrals (such as matching and nonelective
employer contributions used to satisfy applicable nondiscrimination requirements) or whether it
should have a broader application.

Finally, the Joint Committee staff recommends certain changes with respect to ERISA
fiduciary rules. The experience at Enron pointed out the difficulties that may arise when plan

1603 Some participants in the Enron Savings Plan have alleged that the plan’s
administrators violated their fiduciary duties by allowing participants to continuc investing in
Enron stock and continuing to make matching contributions in Enron stock even after they knew
or should have known that Enron faced difficult financial straits. As discussed above, several
Enron Savings Plan participants have filed suit against Enron in federal court seeking relief for
losses sustained to their balances under the Plan. See Part I.B.2., above.

538

=== PAGE 567 ===
fiduciaries play more than one role, particularly a role as a fiduciary and a role as an employee or
executive of the employer. These two roles may conflict and cause confusion among plan
participants. In addition, fiduciaries may not fully understand their dual roles.

In Enron’s case, senior management, including Mr. Lay, made numerous statements in
employee meetings and in electronic mail messages to employees regarding the future of Enron
and the price of Enron stock. Most of these statements were not made specifically in the context
of the Enron qualified plans; however, in at least two instances statements were made in the
context of the Enron Savings Plan as to the appropriateness of Enron stock as an investment. In
one case, Cindy Olson replied to the question “Should we invest all of our 401(k) in Enron
stock?” by saying “Absolutely.” In the other case in response to a question regarding the Enron
Savings Plan and whether Enron would act to replace lost retirement benefits, Mr. Lay said
“Enron stock, we’ll bring it back.”

There are legal and factual questions as to whether Ms. Olson and Mr. Lay were plan
fiduciaries at the time of these statements and, if they were, whether they were acting in a
fiduciary capacity. These issues are the subject of litigation.

Regardless of the outcome of this litigation, the statements were at best ill advised and
certainly may have created the impression on the part of Enron Savings Plan participants that
Enron stock was a safe investment. Corporate executives may generally be expected to present a
positive view of the company, and should be free to do so. However, in the context of qualified
retirement plans, the Joint Committee staff believes that senior executives, whether or not they
are otherwise plan fiduciaries, should not make statements regarding the plan or plan
investments, particularly employer securities, that are not in accord with generally accepted
investment principles or general fiduciary standards. Thus, the Joint Committee staff
recommends that fiduciary rules should apply to such statements.

Enron also demonstrates that plan fiduciaries may have difficulty determining what
actions are consistent with their dual roles. The Congress should direct the Department of Labor
to assist in this effort, including for example, making additional efforts to educate plan
fiduciaries who are also employees regarding their duties, particularly in the context of real life
situations. The materials could include, for example, a description of actions that might make a
company executive a plan fiduciary, even if the individual is not named a fiduciary under plan
documents.

While these recommendations may help prevent future losses such as those experienced
by Enron employees, given the factors in Enron’s case, particularly the culture that encouraged
Enron stock ownership, it is not clear that the situation would have been any different if these
measures had been in place prior to the bankruptcy. Further, Enron is not alone it the high
concentration of investment in employer stock. A recent study of 219 large 401(k) plans found
25 plans that had over 60 percent of their assets invested in employer securities.

1604 See, Enron Debacle Will Force Clean Up of Company Stock Use in DC Plans, DC
Plan Investing (Institute of Management & Administration), at 1-2 (Dec. 11, 2001).

539

=== PAGE 568 ===
Given these factors, the Joint Committee staff is concerned that, absent legal restrictions
on the amount of employer securities that can be held in defined contribution plans, situations

such as Enron’s may occur again. Such restrictions would involve a major policy change from
present law.

Enron also illustrates a general shift away from defined benefit plans toward defined
contribution plans, particularly defined contribution plans that provide for participant directed
investments. This shift can reduce retirement income security for plan participants, both because
participants bear the risk of investment loss in defined contribution plans and because plan
participants may not make appropriate investment decisions, regardless of the level of
investment education they receive. Thus, the Congress may wish to consider broader approaches
to addressing retirement income security under defined contribution plans. A range of options
are possible; some suggestions that have been proposed by commentators include providing a
Federal government guarantee of a minimum rate of return on defined contribution plan assets
and placing some restrictions on the ability of plans to require that participants direct
investments.

6. Allegations of misuse of benefit funds
Present Law

A number of present-law rules may be relevant with respect to misuse of pension plan
assets by an employer or plan fiduciary.

Under the Code, a qualified retirement plan must be maintained for the exclusive benefit
of the employees (the “exclusive benefit rule”).!©° In particular, the trust established in
connection with the plan must prohibit the diversion of assets for purposes other than exclusive
benefit of employees and their beneficiaries.'©°

Through similar provisions of ERISA, the exclusive benefit rule applies to all employee
benefit plans subject to ERISA without regard to their tax-qualified status. ERISA prescribes
that plan fiduciaries shall discharge their duties with respect to a plan solely in the interest of the

beneficiaries and for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to participants and their
beneficiaries.’

ERISA also contains a “noninurement” rule which requires that, subject to certain
exceptions, the assets of a plan shall never inure to the benefit of any employer and shall be held
in a trust for the exclusive purposes of providing benefits to participants in the plan and their
beneficiaries.!® For this purpose, the assets of the plan include contributions that are withheld

1605 Sec. 401(a).
1606 Sec. 401(a)(2).
1607 ERISA sec. 404(a)(1).

1608 ERISA sec. 403(c)(1).

540

=== PAGE 569 ===
from a participant’s wages, which must be contributed to the plan as soon as they can reasonably
be segregated from the employer’s general assets.!©? Employers who fail to promptly transmit
participant contributions, and plan fiduciaries who fail to make diligent efforts to collect those
amounts in a timely manner, may violate the requirement that plan assets be held in trust and
may be engaging in prohibited transactions.'°!°

Under criminal law provisions of the U.S. Code, embezzlement, conversion, abstraction,
or stealing of “any of the moneys, funds, securities, premiums, credits, property, or other assets
of any employee welfare benefit plan or employee pension benefit plan, or any fund connected
therewith” is a criminal offense punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both.'*!

Factual Background’

In early 2002, Robin Hosea, a former Enron contract employee and full-time employee,
publicly alleged that payments were made from Enron’s employee benefit funds for purposes
unrelated to employee benefits. Specifically, Ms. Hosea alleged that, during 2000,
approximately $15 million was improperly paid out of Enron Benefits Department accounts for
purposes unrelated to employee benefits. She also claimed that her superiors at Enron told her
that the payments were made to friends of executives and that she should not pursue the issue.
Ms. Hosea’s claims were reported in the national media, including in an interview on the
television program, the CBS Evening News, which aired on February 4, 2002.

Because Ms. Hosea’s allegations are under investigation by Federal government
enforcement agencies, the Joint Committee staff has not attempted to independently investigate
their veracity.

Ms. Hosea was hired by Enron in August 2000 on a contract basis to work in the Enron
Benefits Department. Jobs she previously held with other employers included human resource,
payroll, and accounting positions. In November 2000, Ms. Hosea was hired for the full-time
position of Senior Benefits Specialist in the Enron Benefits Department. This was her only
position while at Enron. While working for Enron, Ms. Hosea assisted with benefit compliance
and budgeting work. Her specific responsibilities included accounting for employee benefit
plans and the Benefits Department compliance and budgeting work.

Ms. Hosea reported to Enron’s Senior Director of Benefits and one other manager at
different times during her employment at Enron. Ms. Hosea took medical leave from Enron
beginning May 24, 2001. She did not return to Enron and was laid off on December 5, 2001, as
part of a general layoff following Enron’s bankruptcy filing.

1609 99 C.RR. 2510.3-102.
1610 cee Preamble to regulations at 29 C.F.R. 2510.3-102.

1611 18 U.S.C. sec. 664.

1612 Unless otherwise indicated, the background information described herein is based on
an interview of Ms. Robin Hosea conducted by Joint Committee staff on September 20, 2002.

541

=== PAGE 570 ===
According to Ms. Hosea, a general ledger account for the Enron Benefits Department was
composed of several subaccounts, including subaccounts for medical benefits, dental benefits,
life insurance, the Savings Plan, and vision benefits. Each month, Ms. Hosea would receive a
statement of the account (including subaccounts) from Enron’s Finance Department. The
statement included a line for unallocated or unrecognized payments. These were payments that
came out of the general account but were not assigned to a subaccount. According to Ms. Hosea,
the unallocated payments were not initiated by the Benefits Department.

Sometime before taking medical leave, Ms. Hosea started to review the unallocated
payments. She tracked two to three items that appeared in the accounts each month for three or
four months running and determined that the payments had been made over a period of a few
years. She obtained copies of the check requests but was unable to determine the purpose of the
requisition. She showed them to her supervisor as well as the Benefit Department’s
administrative assistant, who did not recognize them. She also showed them to the Senior
Director of Benefits, who did not recognize them. On instructions from the Senior Director of
Benefits, Ms. Hosea contacted the person who approved the payments and learned that the
payments originated in the Legal Department. According to Ms. Hosea, the Senior Director of

Benefits told Ms. Hosea that she vaguely remembered the payments, and instructed Ms. Hosea to
disregard the issue. ;

Additionally, in May 2001,.Ms. Hosea identified a payment that originated with the
Benefits Department and had the approval of the Department. A check in the amount of
approximately $1,000 to $5,000 payable to an individual as a “consulting fee” was paid out of
thé medical or dental subaccount. Ms. Hosea’s supervisor and the Benefits Department
administrative assistant told Ms. Hosea that the fee was not unusual and that the payee was a

friend of a highly-placed Enron executive. Ms. Hosea stated that she was again instructed to
disregard the issue.

Former Enron Executive Vice President for Human Resources and Community Relations
Cindy Olson, and former Enron Benefits Manager Mikie Rath were asked about Ms. Hosea’s
claims in hearings before the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee and the House Education
and the Workforce Committee which were held in February 2002.'°!3 Ms. Olson testified that
she did not have first hand knowledge of Ms. Hosea’s claims. Ms. Rath, who handled day-to-
day administration of Enron’s retirement plans, testified that no funds were diverted from the
Savings Plan. Further, Ms. Rath explained that any payment from the Savings Plan trust would
be reported in the plan’s annual filing with the Department of Labor, the Form 5500, which
requires a listing of payments from the plan. According to Ms. Rath, those audited financial
statements appended to the Form 5500 showed no payments to individuals.

Ms. Hosea contacted the Department of Labor about these issues at the end of November
or the beginning of December 2001. After contacting the Department of Labor, Ms. Hosea

1613 Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Retirement Insecurity:
401(k) Crisis at Enron, S. Hrg. 107-378, at 59 (Feb. 5, 2002); Committee on Education and the
Workforce, United States House of Representatives, The Enron Collapse and Its Implications for
Worker Retirement Security, H. Hrg. 107-42, at 121-22 (Feb. 7, 2002).

542

=== PAGE 571 ===
claimed that she began to receive threats “almost daily” in the form of “threatening” phone calls
and “hang up calls.” Although she could not remember the callers’ exact words, she perceived
the threats to be physical. Ms. Hosea’s stated that her husband answered a call to their home in
which the caller admonished Ms. Hosea to “be quiet.” Ms. Hosea also stated that she was being
followed but did not report it to the police because she perceived “no real physical threat” or
destruction of property.

Ms. Hosea feels that the threats she alleges she received were connected to her actions in
relation to Enron. She claims that, at the time she received the calls, she had contacted the
Department of Labor, but that contact had not been made public. Because of this timing, she
believes that the threats could only have originated with Enron. She contacted the press about
one month later.

Mr. Mark Lindsey, Enron’s Vice President for Corporate Accounting and Planning told
Joint Committee staff that he first learned of Ms. Hosea’s allegations from a television
program.'6" He said that he recognized a schedule displayed during the program. The
Corporate Accounting and Planning staff approached Mr. Lindsey about Ms. Hosea’s
allegations. They discussed her allegations and looked into them. According to the Mr. Lindsey,
the allegations related to monthly reconciliations of benefits liabilities accounts for welfare
benefits as well as for Enron’s qualified plans. The staff, together with the Benefits Department,
assembled an analysis of 14 to 15 subaccounts as part of their review.

In looking into her allegations, the Corporate Accounting and Planning staff did not
speak directly with Ms. Hosea or attempt to contact her. Mr. Lindsey said there was “no reason”
to contact her. He also said that the facts did not warrant speaking with anyone else about Ms.
Hosea’s claims. In the wake of Enron’s bankruptcy filing, he explained, numerous allegations
surfaced, many of which were sensationalized. Against this backdrop, he said, Ms. Hosea’s
claims were not compelling. Mr. Lindsey stated that he does not believe Ms. Hosea’s claims that
amounts allocated to other departments were diverted. He also said that there was no evidence
that benefits funds were misused or that consulting fees were paid to friends of Enron executives
but noted that consultants were occasionally retained by Enron in connection with special hiring
initiatives.

Enron’s Accounting Department responded to a subpoena issued by the Department of
Labor in February 2002 in its investigation of Ms. Hosea’s claims. According to Mr. Lindsey,
the Department of Labor sent three or four investigators to audit Enron’s employee benefits
accounts during March or April of 2002. Mr. Lindsey and his staff spoke with the auditors and
reviewed a reconciliation of employee benefits accounts with them.

Ms. Hosea’s allegations were reported to the Administrative Committee of the Enron
Qualified Plans by Enron’s Director of Benefits at a February 12, 2002, meeting of the
Committee. The Director of Benefits told the Committee that Ms. Hosea’s allegations appeared
to relate to accounting reserves for welfare benefit plans maintained by Enron, rather than assets

1614 Joint Committee staff interviewed Mr. Mark Lindsey, Enron’s Vice President for
Corporate Accounting and Planning, on January 23, 2002.

543

=== PAGE 572 ===
of any of the plans. He reported that the Department of Labor recently concluded a review of
certain plans maintained by Enron and found no irregularities.

The Department of Labor is investigating Ms. Hosea’s allegations.
Discussion of Issues

The allegations made by Ms. Hosea, if established as true, might have serious legal
consequences for Enron officials, Enron itself, and certain Enron employee benefit plans.
Specifically, violations of the exclusive benefit rule of the Code and ERISA could lead to plan
disqualification or the imposition of prohibited transaction penalties. However, the allegations,
even if true, do not necessarily represent an illegal or improper diversion of funds. Payments
from unallocated subaccounts do not, taken alone, constitute improper or illegal payments.

Further, any violations of ERISA fiduciary responsibility provisions could result in the
imposition of penalties by the Department of Labor. Criminal sanctions could be imposed.
Additionally, participants, beneficiaries, or cofiduciaries could make legal claims against
responsible persons for which they would be personally liable for plan losses or other court-
ordered relief including punitive and extracontractual damages.'*!

Based on interviews conducted by Joint Committee staff as well as the staff review of the
media reports regarding Ms. Hosea’s claims, there appear to be a variety of interpretations of
what may have happened with respect to accounting practices of the Enron Benefits Department.
The unallocated or unrecognized payments from the general ledger account identified by Ms.
Hosea may have been legitimate entries consistent with the Benefits Department’s bookkeeping
practices. When she made the allegations in early 2001, Ms. Hosea was barely six months into
her employment with Enron. It is possible that she was not yet familiar with the legitimate
accounting practices of her employer.

When asked about her claims during an interview with Joint Committee staff, Ms.
Hosea’s answers to questions about the specifics of her allegations were vague. She stated that
she could not recall the specific accounts from which the alleged improper payments were made
nor could she recall the amounts involved. When asked about the threats she alleged were made
against her, she could not provide any specific details.

Because there is an ongoing Federal investigation into Ms. Hosea’s claims, the Joint
Committee staff did not pursue Ms. Hosea’s allegations issues further.

1615 See Mass. Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Russell, 473 U.S. 134 (1985).

544

=== PAGE 573 ===
II. OTHER COMPENSATION-RELATED ISSUES
A. General Overview of Compensation
In general

Enron had a pay for performance compensation philosophy. Employees who performed
well were compensated well. The amount of compensation that Enron paid to employees,
especially executives, increased significantly over the years immediately preceding the
bankruptcy. The amounts of compensation paid in 2000, the year immediately preceding the
bankruptcy, are extraordinary.

Tax return data for Enron Corp. and its subsidiaries shows how compensation of officers,
salaries and wages, and employee benefit program expenses increased. Table 10, below, shows
the deduction taken by Enron Corp. and its subsidiaries for such expenses on its Federal income
tax returns for 1998, 1999, and 2000.'°!° Enron’s total compensation deduction dramatically
increased from 1998 to 2000. The increase in compensation expense was, in part, due to the
substantial increase in Enron’s deduction attributable to stock options.'6!7

The deduction for compensation of officers increased exponentially. The compensation
- of officers doubled from 1998 to 1999 and tripled from 1999 to 2000. As shown in Table 10, in
2000 the deduction for compensation of officers was almost twice the deduction for salaries and

wages, 618

1616 The deductions for 1998 and 2000 are from the originally-filed returns. The
deduction from 1999 is from Enron’s amended return. The Joint Committee staff is not aware of
amended returns for 1998 or 2000.

1617 Upon exercise of a nonqualified stock option, the difference between the fair market
value of the stock and the option price is generally includible in the gross income of the

employee. This amount is also deductible as a business expense by the employer.

1618 Tt is unclear how many employees were considered officers for purposes of the
compensation deduction.

545

=== PAGE 574 ===
Table 10.-Enron Compensation Deductions for 1998, 1999, and 2000'°”

1998 1999, as amended 2000
Compensation of $149,901,000 $313,312,000 $952,492,000
officers!
Salaries and wages” | _ $499,746,000 $702,725,000 $557,550,000
Pension, profit- $628,000 $834,000 $20,000
sharing, etc., plans!©”
Employee benefit $344,676,000 $569,278,000 $1,456,796,000
program'©?
Total’®* $994,951,000 $1,586, 149,000 $2,966,858,000

As discussed below in further detail, executives of Enron were extremely highly
compensated. Table 11, below, shows information compiled by the IRS, which is based on
information provided by Enron, on compensation of the top-200 highly compensated employees
for 1998 through 2000.16 Compensation for the top-200 increased over recent years,
particularly in the area of stock options.

Appendix D includes a list of compensation paid to the top-200 highly compensated
employees for 1998 through 2001, which was provided by Enron. As in many instances, the data
provided by Enron to the IRS and to the Joint Committee staff does not reconcile.

1619 Amounts are rounded.

1620 Includes deductible officers’ compensation. Instructions for Forms 1120 (U.S.
Corporation Income Tax Return) and 1120-A (U.S. Corporation Short Form Income Tax
Return).

1621 Thcludes salaries and wages paid for the tax year, reduced by certain employment
credits. Id.

1622 Includes deduction for contributions to qualified pension, profit-sharing, or other
funded deferred compensation plans. Id.

1623 Tcludes contributions to employee benefit programs not claimed elsewhere on the
return (e.g., insurance, health and welfare programs) that are not an incidental part of a pension,
profit-sharing, etc., plan deducted in the previous line. Id.

1624 This is not a line item on the tax return, but was computed for purposes of this table.

1625 The compensation of the top-200 does not reconcile with the deduction for the
officers as shown in Table 10, as the group of employees included in each category is different.
For example, an employee could be one of the top-200 highly compensated employees, but not
be an officer for purposes of the compensation deduction. Additionally, the compensation of the
top-200 also includes nondeductible compensation.

546


=== PAGE 575 ===
Table 11.-Compensation Paid to the Top-200 Highly
Compensated Employees for 1998-2000'°

Year Bonus Stock options | Restricted Wages Total
stock

1998 $41,193,000 $61,978,000 | $23,966,000 | $66,143,000 | $193,281,000

1999 $51,195,000 | $244,579,000 | $21,943,000 | $84,145,000 | __$401,863,000

2000 $56,606,000 | $1,063,537,000 | $131,701,000 | $172,597,000 | $1,424,442,000

Enron used a market pricing approach to compensation. Enron frequently used outside
consultants, principally Towers Perrin, to determine compensation practices in the market place.
The role of outside consultants is discussed below. Total compensation was determined based
on job level, job type, individual performance, and company performance. Total compensation
targets were established using external benchmarking practices. The components of
compensation generally included base pay, bonus, special programs, and long-term incentive
compensation. These components are discussed below in further detail.

Enron used a variety of forms of compensation in recent years, including cash, stock,
stock options, restricted stock, phantom stock, performance units, and participation interests.
Enron also offered employees standard benefits such as participation in retirement plans (as
previously discussed) and health and life insurance. Executives were also offered special

compensation arrangements, including nonqualified deferred compensation, employee loans, and
split-dollar life insurance.

Enron used stock-based compensation as a principle form of compensation. As discussed
below in further detail, Enron compensated executives through stock options, restricted stock and
phantom stock. All-employee stock option grants were also periodically made. Enron did not
grant qualified stock options (i.e., incentive stock options or options under employee stock
purchase plans). Stock appreciation rights were granted in the past, but were not granted in
recent years.

As shown in Table 12, below, tax return information demonstrates that Enron’s stock
option deduction dramatically increased over recent years, !677 The deduction in 2000 was more
than 1,000 percent greater than the deduction taken just two years prior.

1626 The information provided by the IRS includes some inconsistencies. In reproducing
the summary data, the Joint Committee staff attempted to reconcile inconsistencies and include
the data that appears to be accurate. Amounts are approximates.

1627 Information from Schedule M1. See Table 11, below, for summary information
from the IRS stating that stock option income resulting from the exercises of nonstatutory stock
options for the top-200 most highly compensated employees was $62 million for 1998, $244.6
million for 1999, and $1,063.5 million for 2000.

547


=== PAGE 576 ===
Table 12.--Enron Stock Option Deductions for 1998, 1999, and 20008

1998 1999 2000
$125,343,000 $585,000 (as filed) $1,549,748,000
$367,798,000 (as amended)

Enron’s revised compensation system

Enron’s compensation system was revised in the late 1990’s.'®” Prior to 1999, each
operating company had its own base pay, annual incentive, long-term incentive, and employment
contract arrangements. It was seen as beneficial for Enron for there to be more fungibility
between the various operating companies and business units. The new structure was
implemented to create one centralized compensation structure for all business units so that
employees could move easily between the business units. The new compensation structure was
designed with the intention to decrease competition within the various business units for
employees resulting from differing compensation structures and plans.

The new compensation structure consisted of standardized base salary, bonus, and long-
term incentive. Suggested compensation ranges for each executive by job type and performance
rating were developed. In connection with the new structure, Enron developed standardized
performance measures and ratings of individual executive performance across business units.
The new compensation structure also included buyouts of certain business units’ equity plans.
Buyouts generally were done in order to move executives out of the older business unit plans and
into centralized Enron plans and programs.

Enron had an incentive structure in place for middle and upper management. The revised
compensation structure brought a long-term incentive plan that was used throughout the entire
company. Before implementation of the new process, business units had their own version of
long-term incentives. For example, the international group used the Project Participation Plan,
while Enron Capital & Trade Corp. and Enron Energy Services, LLC, each used their own
phantom equity plans.

In connection with the new compensation structure, the Compensation Committee also
approved the creation and delegation of authority to an administrative committee consisting of

1628 A mounts are rounded.

1©29 The possibility of changing Enron’s compensation structure was first presented at the
May 3, 1999, meeting of the Compensation Committee. The changes were again presented by
Mr. Skilling at the June 28, 1999, Compensation Committee meeting and were approved by the
Compensation Committee on August 9, 1999. The status of the program was reviewed by the
Compensation Committee throughout 1999. The Compensation Committee minutes show that
the status of the program was reviewed at the October 11, 1999, and November 16, 1999,
Compensation Committee meetings.

548

=== PAGE 577 ===
Mr. Skilling and Mr. Lay, 1630 19 make grants under the long-term incentive program, except for
grants to Section 16 officers. 13!

The new compensation structure was intended to result in uniform compensation
packages. ©? Nevertheless, after the implementation of the new compensation structure,
individualized compensation arrangements for executives did exist. For example, the minutes to
the Compensation Committee meeting of February 14, 2000, show that an officer of recently
reorganized Enron Broadband Services was to receive short-term stock options as compensation
in lieu of salary and bonus. As discussed below, one executive was compensated with a
fractional interest in an airplane. Despite these individualized arrangements, the new
compensation structure did result in a more uniform compensation system.

The new compensation system introduced the new performance evaluation process
(referred to as “PEP”) for employees, which was a web-based performance evaluation
system. !°? The new performance evaluation process introduced the performance review
committee (“PRC”) process throughout Enron. Before it was implemented on a company-wide
basis, the performance review committee process was used by Enron Capital & Trade Resources.
Subject to a few exceptions, the performance review committee process was generally used for
all Enron employees. 634

At the initial stage of the performance review process, employees were able to choose
individuals who were familiar with their work to be reviewers of their performance, subject to
the approval of their supervisors. Feedback forms would be completed on-line by the selected
teviewers. Performance criteria included business skills, innovation/entrepreneurship,
communication/vision and values, team work/interpersonal, leadership, analytical/technical, and

1630 ty August 2001, the Compensation Committee approved changing the administrative
committee to be composed of Mr. Lay and one member of the Compensation Committee.

‘631 Throughout this document, “Section 16 officers” refers to individuals subject to the
requirements of section 16 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These requirements include
disclosure requirements and restrictions on short-swing profits.

1632 See Attachments to the February 9, 1998, Compensation Committee meeting which
outline the executive compensation structures used by the various operating companies.

1633 Joint Committee staff discussed the performance review process in an interview with
Mr. Skilling, who was responsible for establishing the process on a company-wide basis.

1634 Th an interview with Joint Committee staff, Mr. Skilling said that the performance
review committee process was not used for non-executives of the pipeline organization. Enron
documents state that the following job groups were not required to participate in a formal
performance review committee meeting, but would be reviewed at the business unit’s discretion.
This included junior specialists, specialists, senior specialists, and non-exempt positions. PEP
Performance Management HR Guide Year End 2001. ECu000077031. Documents for the 2001
Midyear review state that all active exempt employees are rated in a performance review
committee meeting. ECu000077115.

549

=== PAGE 578 ===
professional and career development.'**° Performance would be rated in one of the following
categories: highly effective, effective, acceptable, and ineffective.'° It appears that before
2001, the performance ratings were superior, excellent, strong, satisfactory, needs improvement,
and issues.!°” Supervisors would develop a preliminary rating for their employees based on the
reviewers’ feedback, which would be used by the performance review committee. Employees
were allowed to submit self-assessments to be considered in a performance review committee
meeting. '©8

After the preliminary review was complete, a performance review committee would meet
to evaluate individual employee performance. According to Mr. Skilling, there were
approximately 30 performance review committees throughout Enron.'®” Each employee was
ranked from one to five, with a ranking of five being the lowest.'° According to Mr. Skilling,
there was a target distribution of how many employees should fall within each category. Enron
documents for the 2001 review state that there was no preferred distribution for performance
review committee meetings, but that each unit was required to submit their top 10 percent and
bottom 10 percent of employees.’ Earlier dated documents state that there was a preferred
distribution.”

According to Enron documents, the purpose of the performance review committee
meeting was to identify the top 10 percent and bottom 10 percent of performers of each job level
based on the intrinsic skills, competencies and potential of employees relative to their peers.'©?
According to documents provided by Enron, the placement of each employee would provide a
guide for compensation decisions for year-end bonuses, but the purpose was not to determine
compensation, but to determine employee performance and potential. '°*

1635 DEP Process Guide 2001. ECu000077160.

1636 DEP Performance Management HR Guide, Year End 2001. BCu000077031.
1637 Cy000077017; ECu000077063.

1638 DEP Performance Management HR Guide, Year End 2001. ECu000077031.

1639 Enron documents show that there would be no more than 30 meetings in total.
ECu000077 162.

1640 DEP Performance Management Midyear 2001 HR Guide. ECu000077129.
1641 DEP Performance Management Midyear 2001 HR Guide. ECu000077031.
1642 DEP Performance Management Midyear 2001 HR Guide. ECu000077 130.
1643 DEP Performance Management HR Guide, Year End 2001. ECu000077032.

1644 DEP Performance Management HR Guide, Year End 2001. ECu000077032.

550

=== PAGE 579 ===
According to Mr. Skilling, after employees were ranked into the five categories, matrixes
were developed. The theory was that all employees in a certain category at a particular job level
should be compensated similarly, subject to some modification. According to Mr. Skilling,
employees with a ranking of category five were encouraged to “look elsewhere.”'© Enron
documents state that there was no prescribed action for employees in the bottom 10 percent, but
that managers would identify which employees need to be part of a performance improvement
plan!“ According to Mr. Skilling, this group was the only group of Enron employees who did
not receive annual bonuses. As part of the revised compensation structure, all other employees
received annual bonuses. According to Enron documents, typically promotion candidates
typically would come from the top 10 percent, but discretion was given to promote candidates
outside of the top 10 percent.

The performance review committees met twice per year, once in June or July and once in
January. The January review determined compensation. According to Mr. Skilling, the mid-
year review allowed employees to know how they were ranked so that they would have time to
improve before the January review. After the completion of the performance review committee
process, employees would receive one-to-one feedback from their supervisors. There have been
media reports that some employees viewed the performance review committee process as harsh

- or unfair. One former Enron executive interviewed by the Joint Committee staff indicated that
the process may have created tension among employees.

Enron’s Compensation Committee
In general

The Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors'™” (the “Compensation
Committee”) was responsible for developing the Enron executive compensation philosophy.'**
The Compensation Committee’s focus was stated to be on ensuring that there is a strong link
between the success of the shareholder and the rewards of the executive.’ According to
interviews with Compensation Committee members, the charge of the Committee was to make
sure that the executive officers of Enron were adequately compensated in a way to increase
shareholder wealth. The Compensation Committee believed in “pay for performance.” The

1645 The media has reported that employees in the lowest ranking group were fired.
Enron executives interviewed by Joint Committee staff stated that employees in category five
were not fired, but were advised of the ranking they received and may have been encouraged to
leave.

1646 DEP Performance Management HR Guide, Year End 2001. Ecu000077032.

1647 Tn some years, the Committee was named the Compensation and Management
Development Committee.

1648 9001 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

1649 001 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

551

=== PAGE 580 ===
Compensation Committee also believed that a great deal of executive compensation should be at
risk; if shareholders did not profit, executives would not profit.

As stated in the 2001 proxy, the responsibility of the Compensation Committee “is to
establish Enron’s compensation strategy and ensure that the senior executives of Enron and its
wholly-owned subsidiaries are compensated effectively in a manner consistent with the stated
compensation strategy of Enron, internal equity considerations, competitive practice and the

requirements of appropriate regulatory bodies.”’®° In the proxies, the Compensation Committee
stated its mission as follows:

The basic philosophy behind executive compensation at Enron is to reward
executive performance that creates long-term shareholder value. This pay-for-
performance tenet is embedded in each aspect of an executive’s total
compensation value. Additionally, the philosophy is designed to promote
teamwork by tying a significant portion of compensation to business unit and
Enron performance. Base salaries, annual incentive awards and long-term
incentive awards are reviewed periodically to ensure consistency with Enron’s
total compensation philosophy. '°!

Compensation Committee charter

The Board of Directors established the Compensation Committee with authority,
responsibility, and specific duties as described in the Compensation Committee charter.'°? The
charter provided that the Committee is to consist of directors who are independent of
management and free from any relationship that, in the opinion of the Board of Directors, as
evidenced by its election of the Committee members, would interfere with the exercise of
independent judgment as a Committee member. Under the charter, the Compensation
Committee’s basic responsibility is “to assure that the senior executives of Enron and its wholly-
owned affiliates are compensated effectively in a manner consistent with the stated compensation
strategy of Enron, internal equity considerations, competitive practice, and the requirements of
the appropriate regulatory bodies. The charter provided that the Committee is to communicate to
shareholders Enron’s policies and the reasoning behind such policies as required by the
Securities and Exchange Commission.”

The charter dated 1998 provides that the Committee was also responsible, in connection
with the Chief Executive Officer, for management development and succession planning for key

1650 9001 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

1651 9000 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement; 2001 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

1652 On February 9, 1998, the charter was approved to the Board by the Compensation
Committee. In response to Joint Committee staff requests for the most recent Compensation
Committee charter, Enron provided a copy of the Compensation Committee charter from

October 4, 1994. The 1994 and 1998 charters are almost identical.

1653 Enron Corp. Compensation Committee Charter. EC 002634700 - EC 002634702.

552

=== PAGE 581 ===
top level management positions. The charter lists other responsibilities of the Compensation
Committee, including reviewing Enron’s stated compensation strategy, reviewing and
determining Chief Executive Officer and senior management compensation, and assuring that
Enron’s executive incentive compensation program is administered consistent with Enron’s
compensation strategy. Under the charter, the Compensation Committee was also responsible
for approving all new equity-related incentive plans for senior management, approving annual
retainer, meeting fees and stock compensation for the Board of Directors, approving executive
salary range structures, reviewing Enron’s employee benefit programs and approving all
changes, hiring executive compensation experts to assist the Committee with its reviews, and
such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned to the Committee from time to time.

The charter provided that the Committee would meet as often as necessary to carry out its
responsibilities. Meetings could be called by the Chairman of the Committee and/or
management of Enron. All meetings of the Committee were required to be held pursuant to the
bylaws of Enron with regard to notice and waiver, and written minutes of each meeting were
required to be filed with Enron records. According to the charter, reports of the meetings of the
Compensation Committee were required to be made to the Board of Directors at its next
regularly scheduled meeting following the Committee meeting accompanied by any
recommendation to the Board of Directors approved by the Committee.

Activities of the Compensation Committee

The Compensation Committee made decisions on a wide variety of compensation issues.
While the Compensation Committee was principally invelved with executive compensation, the
duties of the Compensation Committee were not limited to executive compensation. The
Compensation Committee approved all qualified retirement plan documents and amendments.
They also approved medical and dental plans, severance pay plans, and flexible compensation
plans. The Compensation Committee also approved all stock plans, bonus plans, and deferral
plans and approved grants of stock options and other equity compensation. The Compensation
Committee was also responsible for authorizing bonus pools and often approved accelerated
vesting of options and other equity-based compensation. Selected employment agreements were
approved by the Compensation Committee.

While the Compensation Committee had responsibility for a wide range of issues, they
were not deeply involved in most issues. Members of the Compensation Committee interviewed
by Joint Committee staff were not fully aware of all of the issues for which they were
responsible and often made decisions. For example, even though changes to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plans were approved by the Compensation Committee, one former
member of the Compensation Committee interviewed by Joint Committee staff did not know
whether Enron offered nonqualified deferred compensation. Even though reflected in the
minutes, one former member of the Compensation Committee interviewed by Joint Committee
staff could not recall whether the Committee approved qualified retirement plans issues, while
another Committee member did not know what a qualified retirement plan was. The
Compensation Committee did not scrutinize proposed arrangements, but basically approved
whatever compensation arrangements were presented to them by management.

553

=== PAGE 582 ===
According to interviews with former Compensation Committee members, the
Compensation Committee reviewed the compensation of the 30 to 45 senior positions annually.
There was special concentration on the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Operating Officer and
any other position in the Office of the Chairman. Most meetings of the Compensation
Committee included an executive session in which the salaries of the top executives were
discussed. Generally, the executive sessions were not recorded in the meeting minutes. The
attachments to the minutes show that during the executive sessions, the Committee periodically
reviewed executive committee compensation summary charts.'* These charts summarized the
compensation of the top executives and included information on employment end date, years of
service, age, base salary, cash bonus, stock owned, long-term value realized, vested and unvested
options, restricted stock, performance units, outstanding long-term value, and five-year
projection of outstanding long-term values.

In each annual proxy, the Compensation Committee issued a report regarding executive
compensation. The report outlined the responsibility of the Committee and its basic philosophy.
The report did not change much, if at all, from one year to the next.

In recent years, the Compensation Committee was composed of a Chairman and three or
four members of the Board. According to the Chairman of the Committee during the period
reviewed by the Joint Committee staff, the members of the Committee were selected by a
nominating committee as the members who were most independent; and then members would be
elected by the full Board.'©°> The Compensation Committee met at least once before each Board
meeting and also held telephone meetings when issues arose. The Committee formally met ten
times in 2000. Until the restructuring following the bankruptcy filing, the members of the
Committee were Charles A. LeMaistre, Norman Blake, Jr., John H. Duncan, Robert K. Jaedicke
and Frank Savage.'°° The Board members have been replaced in connection with
reorganization of Enron.

Role of outside consultants

The Compensation Committee relied on outside consultants in making a variety of
decisions. The annual proxy statements described the Compensation Committee’s reliance on
outside consultants. According to the 2001 proxy, all decisions regarding executive
compensation were made based upon performance, measured against preestablished objectives
and competitive practice, as determined by utilizing multiple public and private compensation
surveys. The proxy stated that Enron utilized the services of Towers Perrin to conduct an

1654 Th older years, the charts were labeled “Executive Compensation Value.”
1655 : : :
Interview with Dr. LeMaistre.

1656 Messrs. Blake and Jaedicke were appointed to the Compensation Committee in
1996, replacing Robert A. Belfer and Joe E. Foy. See Enron Corp. 1996 and 1997 Proxy
Statements. Mr. Savage is first listed as being on the Compensation Committee in the 2000
proxy statement.

554

=== PAGE 583 ===
executive compensation study covering executives in the top corporate and business unit
positions.'© 7 Additional studies performed by Towers Perrin are discussed below.

The 2001 proxy states that competitive compensation rates are developed using published
and private compensation survey sources for companies of comparable size and, as appropriate,
in comparable industries. According to the proxy, data from the sources represent similar
positions in general industry and industry specific companies as appropriate.

Towers Perrin advised the Compensation Committee that “under most circumstances,
Compensation Committee actions are governed by the Business Judgment Rule. Under this rule,
Compensation Committee (and full Board) decisions are not to be second-guessed if good
processes have been used in making decisions, even if the impact of the decisions turn out to be
unfavorable. A helpful condition for demonstrating sound business judgment is the use of
reputable professional experts (such as compensation consultants in the case of making
compensation decisions).”1°8

The minutes of the Compensation Committee meeting on April 30, 2001, discuss the
consulting services provided to Enron and the Compensation Committee by Towers Perrin. The
services included: (1) providing analysis and recommendation with respect to base, bonus, and
long-term compensation for the Office of the Chairman and the Board of Directors; (2) providing
updates and opinions relative to trends in executive compensation; (3) reviewing, validating, and
recommending executive compensation program design alternatives; (4) providing consultation
with respect to governmental regulations and shareholder perspectives on certain issues;

(5) reviewing and validating management’s executive job pricing analysis and pay target
recommendations; (6) providing Black-Scholes stock option valuations on request; and
(7) conducting consultations and special studies as requested by management and/or the
Compensation Committee.’

Enron frequently obtained analysis from consultants, particularly Towers Perrin, to
ensure that the executive compensation program was within its stated philosophy and goals.
Towers Perrin periodically issued opinion letters to Enron regarding their compensation
programs in general and on specific compensation issues. For example, in December 2001, the
Compensation Committee received an opinion letter from Towers Perrin regarding the

‘657 The compensation studies were said to evaluate total direct compensation, defined as
base salary plus most recent actual annual incentive earned plus the estimated annualized present
value of long-term incentive grants.

1658 | etter from Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles LeMaistre dated November 14, 2001.
EC2 000028647. This letter is included in Appendix D. Towers Perrin also advised that once a
company is in a merger or other similar situation, a higher standard of decision-making could
apply.

1659 Minutes of the meeting of the Compensation Committee, at 4 (April 30, 2001). EC
000102176.

555

=== PAGE 584 ===
competitiveness of the executive compensation programs at Enron.'®° Additionally, Towers
Perrin issued a letter to Enron dated November 14, 2001, addressing potential strategies Enron
might want to consider in dealing with 2001 bonus allocations and possible ways to retain key
employees during the period before the anticipated merger with Dynegy was expected to be
completed.’ The letter outlined how Enron’s Compensation Committee was impacted by the
announced merger and provided suggested compensation decision parameters.

General compensation studies were frequently performed. For example, a comparative
analysis of Enron’s executive compensation levels was conducted in November 2000.'°°? In
January 2001, the Compensation Committee approved the performance of a study by Towers
Perrin to analyze the relationship between pay and performance. '° Towers Perrin presented to
the Compensation Committee that they concluded that the basic structure of the program was
consistent with Enron’s stated philosophy and that the program was appropriately tied to
performance. Towers Perrin recommended that Enron not make any broad-based programmatic
changes to its executive pay programs since pay-for-performance systems work when pay rises
and falls according to the gains realized by shareholders.

While Towers Perrin concluded that the basic structure of the program was consistent
with Enron’s philosophy, the findings of the study show that pay elements were higher than the
stated philosophy.'© The study looked at the specific compensation of approximately 60
executives. The results of the study showed that the base compensation, base plus bonus, long-
term incentives, and total compensation for many executives were considerably above the stated
target. The finding showed that for base salaries, Enron was 91 Petene of market median. !©
For total cash, Enron was 140 percent of market 75th percentile. 66° For long-term incentives,
Enron was 97 percent of market 75th percentile,’ and for total direct pay was 113 percent of

1660 The letter provided an overview of Enron’s executive compensation programs and is
included in Appendix D. EC2 00028641 - EC2 000028645.

1661 Y etter from Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles LeMaistre dated November 14, 2001. EC2
000028647. This letter is included in Appendix D.

1662 The results indicated Enron’s 2000 actual total direct compensation to be at the 75%
percentile of the market, which met Enron’s stated philosophy relative to pay and performance.

1663 The findings of the study, dated April 20, 2001, were presented to the Compensation
Committee on May 1, 2001. EC 002634703 - EC 002634756. The findings of the study, as
presented to the Compensation Committee, are included in Appendix D.

1664 Td, at BC 002634712.

1665 Fg

1666 74

1667 Id.

556

=== PAGE 585 ===
market 75th percentile. !°8 Still, Towers Perrin concluded that the program was consistent with
Enron’s philosophy.

Towers Perrin also provided opinions on individual compensation arrangements. At the
request of Enron, Towers Perrin prepared a letter to document the results of marketplace
compensation analysis for the top two executives at Enron (Mr. Lay and Mr. Skilling) dated
November 16, 2000.'? On January 18, 2001, Towers Perrin prepared a letter for Enron
providing alternative compensation arrangements for Mr. Lay, given his shift in responsibilities
to Executive Chairman of the Board, with Mr. Skilling becoming CEO of Enron.!™

From Joint Committee staff interviews with many former members of the Compensation
Committee, it appears that many members made decisions relying on the opinions of consultants
without fully understanding the underlying issue. For example, former Compensation
Committee members interviewed by Joint Committee staff could not explain why Enron
purchased two annuities from Mr. Lay and his wife in 2001, but knew that Towers Perrin issued
an opinion providing justification for the transaction.

Employment agreements

Several employees had employment agreements with Enron. There were no set rules for
deterinining which employees entered into employment agreements, but generally agreements
were executed for top executives and traders. Employment agreements were often used in the
commercial areas, or other areas in which skills were in high demand. In many of these cases
Enron wanted to have a contract with noncompetition clauses. Employment agreements were
generally used for members of the managernent committee, managing directors and some vice
presidents. Documents provided by Enron show that as of February 9, 1998, there were 425
employment contracts in place throughout the various business units and affiliated companies.
Enron documents show that as of April 30, 2001, 225 executives, not including traders, below
the Vice President level had employment agreements with Enron.'67!

Employment agreements were individually negotiated, but generally included certain
standard terms. Agreements generally included an appendix listing the employee’s base salary,
bonus and long-term incentive and generally included a signing bonus. Employment agreements
were often renegotiated before expiration. Terms were typically two to three years. Some
contacts included noncompete provisions. Selected employment agreements were approved by
the Compensation Committee. The Compensation Committee generally approved the
agreements for the top executives only.

1668 Id.

1669 | etter from Towers Perrin to Pam Butler dated November 16, 2000. EC 000102297 -
EC 000102306. The letter is included in Appendix D.

1670 1 etter from Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles LeMaistre dated January 18, 2001. EC
000102234 - EC 000102238. The letter is included in Appendix D.

1671 BC 000102476.

557

=== PAGE 586 ===
B. Overview of Executive Compensation Arrangements
1. In general
Overview

Enron’s stated executive compensation philosophy was to provide executives with
rewards that reflect their impact on Enron’s total shareholder returns and creation of long-term
shareholder value. ‘©? As previously discussed, each year, the Compensation Committee
established total compensation targets based on an assessment of external trends and market data.
According to Enron employee materials, the key tenets of the executive compensation program
were: (1) to tie executive compensation to the creation of shareholder value; (2) to deliver a
significant portion of total compensation in a combination of short-term and long-term incentives
so that executives have the opportunity to earn at the 75th percentile of the external marketplace
or higher, subject to the achievement of Enron financial and nonfinancial goals and individual
performance objectives; and (3) to promote teamwork and support movement of key talent to
opportunities as they arise throughout the organization.'©”

Executive compensation at Enron was generally comprised of base salary, annual
incentives, and long-term incentives. Executives had the opportunity to earn at the 75"
percentile or higher level, subject to obtaining performance at the 75" percentile or higher. !° In
addition to the three principal components of executive compensation (base salary, annual
incentive and long-term incentive), certain executives also participated in special compensation
arrangements, such as nonqualified deferred compensation programs, split-dollar insurance
arrangements, and employee loans. Individualized compensation arrangements were also used
for certain executives. For example, as discussed below, as a form of compensation, Enron
purchased two annuities from Kenneth L. Lay and his wife. Another executive, Mr. Lou Pai,
received a fractional interest in an airplane as part of his compensation.

Base salary

Base salary levels were targeted at the 50th percentile of the external marketplace. An
annual salary increase budget was set to maintain Enron’s position relative to the market. Base
pay was reviewed and adjusted at Enron’s discretion and in relation to market conditions, but
was also reflective of individual performance. Base pay was generally reviewed and adjusted on
February | of each year, if appropriate. Base salary increases were typically approximately four
percent per year.|°”

1672 Enron Compensation Program 2001 (employee brochure). EC2 000019710.
1673 Enron Compensation Program 2001 (employee brochure). EC2 000019710.
1674 Report from Compensation Committee, 2001 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

1675 The minutes of the May 3, 1999, meeting of the Compensation Committee show that
Messrs. Lay and Skilling requested that the Committee not increase their respective salaries for

558

=== PAGE 587 ===
Annual incentive awards

Annual bonuses were a major component of Enron’s executive compensation structure.
Annual bonuses were targeted at the 75" percentile level compared to the market and could often
be larger than base salary for some employees.

According to the 2001 proxy, the primary objective of the annual incentive plan was to
promote outstanding performance by Enron in absolute terms, as well as in comparison to its
peer companies. The plan was funded as a percent of recurring after-tax net income as approved
by the Compensation Committee each year.

Competitive annual incentive targets were established by the Compensation Committee
each year based on external trends and market data.'6” Payments were based upon Enron’s
performance against preestablished goals, as well as business unit and individual performance.
According to the 2001 proxy, annual bonus payments were based upon Enron’s performance
measured against Enron’s operating plan as approved by the Board of Directors. Key
performance criteria such as funds flow, return on equity, debt reduction, earnings per share
improvements, and other relevant factors could be considered at the option of the Committee.
Proxy statements from recent years state that a Performance Review Report was presented to the
Compensation Committee in January, which summarized management’s view regarding whether
and to what extent the key performance criteria were attained. The Performance Review Report
also discussed any other significant, but unforeseen factors that positively or negatively affect
Enron’s performance. The Compensation Committee verified Enron’s actual recurring after-tax
net income, reviewed management’s funding level recommendation, and approved the resulting
award fund.

The Performance Review Committee process and resulting employee ranking
significantly influenced the actual incentive awards paid. The Annual Incentive Plan was used
for bonuses for Section 16 officers. The Annual Incentive Plan for Section 16 officers was
funded as a percentage of after-tax net income, not to exceed five percent. Officers other than
Section 16 officers were paid annual bonuses, but not through the Annual Incentive Plan.

Annual incentives are discussed in detail in Part III.B.2., below.

Long-term incentives

According to the 2001 proxy, Enron’s long-term incentive program was designed to tie
executive performance directly to the creation of shareholder wealth. The long-term incentive

1999. The Committee reluctantly agreed to honor the request on the condition that the minutes
reflect the Committee’s judgment that during 1998 Messrs. Lay and Skilling had performed their
respective duties superbly, that Enron’s shareholders had benefited significantly from such
performance, and that, in the absence of the specific request they had made, each would have
received a salary increase for 1999.!°> Joint Committee staff asked several interviewees about
this and no one, including Mr. Skilling, could recall the reason for the request.

1676 9001 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

559

=== PAGE 588 ===
program provided for awards of nonqualified stock options and restricted stock. Awards were
one-half stock options and one-half restricted stock. In the past, the Compensation Committee
utilized other long-term compensation vehicles. Option grants generally vested over a five-year
term. The number of options to be awarded was determined based on the approved Black-
Scholes value as determined by the Compensation Committee. Restricted stock grants generally
vested over four years, but could be accelerated based on Enron’s performance relative to the
S&P 500 index.

Participation in the long-term incentive plan was available to employees in the vice
president job group and above.'©”” Long-term incentive target values were to be established by
the Compensation Committee each year based on assessment of external trends and market
data’? Actual grants were determined each January based on the year-end performance review
committee assessments and were subject to the approval by the Office of the Chairman. Award
agreements providing the terms and provisions of the awards were typically presented to
recipients during the first quarter of the year. Grants for section 16(b) officers required
Compensation Committee approval.

Before the changes to Enron’s compensation structure in 1999, some business units had
their own long-term incentive programs. For example, Enron Capital & Trade Resources had its
own long-term compensation program for stock options and phantom stock units, which were
granted under the Enron Capital & Trade Resources Corp. Phantom Stock Unit Plan.

Long-term incentives are discussed in detail in Part III.C.2., below.
Nonqualified deferred compensation

Certain executives were given the opportunity to participate in nonqualified deferred
compensation arrangements. Participants were eligible to defer all or a portion of salary, bonus
and long-term compensation into Enron-sponsored deferral plans. The plans provided an
opportunity to delay payment of Federal and State income taxes and earn tax-deferred return on
deferrals. Many executives took advantage of the opportunity to defer amounts that would
otherwise be included in income currently. The specific nonqualified deferred compensation
plans and programs offered by Enron are discussed below in more detail.

Miscellaneous

Enron maintained a FlexPerq program for Managing Directors and above. Under the
program, certain expenses were covered by an allowance rather than required to be submitted for
reimbursement on an expense report. These included income tax preparation, investment
counseling/estate planning, legal counseling, country club and health club membership, luncheon
club membership, airline VIP club membership, car/cell phone, in-home long-distance service,
and “premium” credit cards. In materials provided to executives, Enron explained that all
FlexPerq allowance amounts would be reported as compensation on the participant’s Form W-2.

1677 Enron Corp. Executive Compensation Program brochure. EC 002634797.

1678 Enron Corp. Executive Compensation Program brochure. EC 002634797.

560

=== PAGE 589 ===
Eligible participants would be given an annual FlexPergq allowance equal to three percent of their
salary.

Top-200 most highly compensated

Appendix D shows the compensation paid to each of the top-200 highest paid employees
for the years 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001 Ate Compensation attributable to bonus, stock options,
restricted stock, deferred payout, and other compensation is separately stated. As shown in
Appendix D, the top executives were extremely highly compensated, especially in the years
immediately preceding Enron’s bankruptcy. The range of total compensation paid to the top-
200, as provided by Enron, is shown in Table 13, below.

Table 13.-Range of Total Compensation Paid to the Top-200
Most Highly Compensated Employees for 1998-2001'*°

Year Range of Total Compensation
Paid to the Top-200
1998 $152,000 to $20,621,000
1999 $325,000 to $56,541,000
2000 $1,270,000 to $168,741,000
2001 $1,104,000 to $56,274,000

In 2000 and 2001, each one of the top-200 employees was paid over $1 million. In 2001,
the year of Enron’s bankruptcy, at least 15 executives were paid over $10 million. One
executive was paid over $56 million.!°? In 2000, three executives were paid over $100 million,

with the top-paid executive receiving $169 million. In 2000, at least 26 executives were paid
over $10 million.

Table 14, below, shows information obtained from the IRS, which is based on

information provided by Enron, on the total compensation for the top-200 employees for 1998
through 2000.

1679 This information was provided to the Joint Committee staff by Enron.

1680 A mounts are rounded.

1681 For 2001, $56.274 million is the highest compensation which is separately listed.
There are eight separate listings for Chairman and CEO, but because names are not provided it is

unclear whether compensation to some individuals is separately stated in more than one line
entry.

1682 As mentioned above, there are eight separate listings for Chairman and CEO, but

because names are not provided it is unclear whether compensation paid to the most highly
compensated individual is included in more than one line entry, which is likely the case.

561

=== PAGE 590 ===
Table 14.-Total Compensation Paid to the Top-200 Highly
Compensated Employee for 1998-2000'°

Year Total Compensation paid
to the Top-200

1998 $193,281,000

1999 $401,863,000

2000 $1,424,442,000

As in many other cases, the information provided by the Company to the IRS does not
reconcile with the information provided by Enron to the Joint Committee staff.

Executive compensation White Papers

In general

During 1986, the Compensation Committee, with the assistance of Hewitt Associates,
developed the compensation philosophy, objectives, and comprehensive executive compensation
program for senior Enron executives to be implemented January 1, 1987.16 With the merger of
HNG and InterNorth, Enron needed to reconcile the different executive compensation
philosophies and programs. With the help of Board members and management, Hewitt
Associates developed a suggested philosophy and objectives for the compensation program.
Based on these suggestions, the Management Committee developed a comprehensive executive
compensation program based upon the agreed-to philosophy and objectives. The Compensation
Committee approved the program (with modification), as did the full Board of Directors on
December 8, 1986, subject to ongoing review and change. Approximately 60 Enron executives
(less than 1 percent of the total Enron employee population) participated in the original program,
including management committee members, operating company presidents, corporate officers,
and selected key line and staff officers in the operating companies.

The Enron Executive Compensation Program “White Paper” provides a summary of
Enron’s executive compensation polices. The White Paper was periodically revised to
incorporate changes agreed to by the Compensation Committee. The White Paper was
distributed by management to the executives who were participants in the program. The original
White Paper was dated August 1987, and was revised August 1990, May 1993, January 1996,
January 1997, and January 1998. The changes between the various versions are relatively minor.
In most cases, the only changes from one version to the next are the peer companies used for
performance comparison and the number of executives participating in the program. The
following discussion summarizes the executive compensation White Paper.

1683 The information provided by the IRS includes some inconsistencies. In reproducing
the summary data, the Joint Committee staff attempted to reconcile inconsistencies and include
the data that appears to be accurate. Amounts are rounded.

1684 BC 001934641 - EC 001934656.

562

=== PAGE 591 ===
Compensation philosophy and objectives

Throughout the various versions of the White Paper, Enron’s stated compensation
philosophy for its senior management remained the same and included the following:

¢ Total compensation will consist of base pay, annual bonus, long-term incentive
pay, benefits, and perquisites.

© Individuals will have an opportunity to earn at the 75th percentile or higher level
relative to peer companies, subject to obtaining performance at the 75th percentile
or higher. Higher achievement provides higher payouts, while lesser achievement
decreases total compensation. In order to assure that individual compensation is
tied to performance, more dollars of total compensation will be placed at risk, tied
to Enron absolute performance, and performance relative to its peers.

¢ Program design will promote teamwork by tying a significant portion of
compensation to subsidiary and Enron Corp. performance.

White Paper Updated, January 1998

The most recent version of the White Paper appears to be January 1998,!°8 which is
almost identical to all other older versions, as Enron’s compensation philosophy has generally
been the same since 1986. The January 1998 White Paper is included in Appendix D. The
major components of the most recent White Paper, January 1998, are summarized below. Joint
Committee staff asked Enron whether the White Paper had been revised since the January 1998
version. In response to this request, Enron provided an undated Enron Corp. Executive
Compensation Program brochure.!©*° The brochure is summarized below and is included in
Appendix D. It is unclear whether the brochure replaced the White Paper.

According to the White Paper, the executive compensation program would be reviewed
biannually for market competitiveness and was reviewed periodically to determine if changes in
philosophy, targets or compensation vehicles were necessary. The White Paper lists the
companies that would be considered the “market” in making compensation comparisons.

Compensation Objectives.-The compensation objectives were stated as shown in Table
15 below.'*

1685 EC 001934688.
1686 BC 002634796 - EC 002634799.

1687 This table lists the compensation objectives exactly as stated in the January 1998
White Paper. EC 001934689.

563

=== PAGE 592 ===
Table 15.-Enron “White Paper” Compensation Objectives

Component Enron Target

Base Salary 50th Percentile

Target Annual Bonus for Outstanding “Gap” between Total Direct Target and Base

Performance Salary

Total Direct Compensation , Commensurate with Enron Performance -
Target of 75th Percentile

Long-Term Incentive Pay Grants at 75th Percentile - Payouts
Commensurate with Enron Performance

Benefits Same as All-Employee Benefits Target

Perquisites 50th Percentile

Participation According to the 1998 White Paper, approximately 78 Enron executives
participated in the program. These 78 executives included management committee members,
operating company presidents, corporate officers, and selected key line and staff officers in the
operating companies. These 78 executives represent approximately one percent of the total
Enron employee population. The participation is an increase from 60 in 1987, which at that time
was less than one percent of the employee population.

Base salary.The target for base salary was the 50th percentile of the market. The salary
midpoints were set at the 50th percentile for the executive positions. The annual merit increase
budget was set to maintain Enron’s market position.

Annual Incentive Plan.—The primary objective of the annual incentive plan was to
promote outstanding performance by Enron in absolute terms, as well as in comparison to its
peer companies. The plan was funded as part of a percent of after-tax net income as approved by
the Compensation Committee each year. Payouts under the program would be made in the year
following the year of performance. The payout would be based upon Enron’s performance
against preestablished goals, as well as subsidiary and individual performances.

Long-term incentives.Enron’s long-term incentive program was designed to tie
executive performance directly to the creation of stockholder wealth over a four-year period.
Payout was based upon how well Enron’s stock price performed absolutely and how well it
performed against the stock process of its peer companies.

Each participant would be assigned a “Targeted Grant Value” coincident with selection
for participation in the program and in December each year thereafter. The “Targeted Grant
Value” would be determined by the results of the Hewitt Compensation Survey.

Grants were targeted at the 75th percentile. One half of the grants would be paid in
nonqualified stock options to foster shareholder return. The remaining one half would be
granted in the form of performance units to be paid within six weeks after the close of books for

564


=== PAGE 593 ===
the fourth year. The Compensation Committee had the option to substitute any other long-term
compensation vehicles that they deemed appropriate (e.g., restricted stock).

Enron Corp. Executive Compensation Program brochure

In general.—As discussed above, the Joint Committee staff asked Enron whether the
White Paper had been revised since the January 1998 version. In response to this request, Enron
provided an undated Enron Corp. Executive Compensation Program brochure.'®* It is unclear
whether the brochure replaced the White Paper. The brochure is included in Appendix D.
According to the brochure, the “central philosophy of Enron’s executive compensation program
is to provide executives with rewards which reflect their impact on Enron’s total shareholder
returns and creation of long-term shareholder value. The Program is targeted at Enron’s senior
management team, which is approved each year by the Compensation and Management
Development Committee . . . of the Enron Board of Directors.”’ The key tenets of the
program, as stated in the brochure, are:

e To deliver market competitive total compensation targets as determined through
comprehensive market studies.

@ To deliver a significant portion of total compensation in a combination of short-
term and long-term incentives so that executives have the opportunity to earn at
the 75th percentile of the external marketplace or higher, subject to the
achievement of company financial and nonfinancial goals and individual
performance objectives.

e To tie executive compensation to the creation of shareholder value.

e To promote teamwork and support Enron’s desire for a transferable workforce.

The brochure states that the Enron Corp. Executive Compensation Program is “designed
to promote excellence in both team and individual performance and to attract and retain key
talent.” The program is revised annually for market competitiveness. It is also reviewed
periodically to determine if changes in philosophy, targets or compensation vehicles are
necessary to help attract, motivate and retain executive talent.”!°

The various components of the executive compensation program are discussed in the
brochure and include base salary, annual incentives, long-term incentives, executive deferral
plans, and benefits. The components of the program as explained in the brochure are discussed
below. These are essentially the same as described in the White Paper for prior years.

1688 BC 002634796 - EC 002634799.
1689 Enron Corp. Executive Compensation Program brochure. EC 002634796.

1690 Enron Corp. Executive Compensation Program brochure. EC 002634799.

565

=== PAGE 594 ===
Base salary.—Base salary was targeted at the 50th percentile of the external marketplace.
An annual salary increase budget was set to maintain Enron’s market position. Base pay was
reviewed and adjusted on February 1 of each year.

Annual incentives.~Competitive annual incentive targets were established by the
Committee each year based on an assessment of external trends and market data. Cash awards
were determined each January based on company and business unit performance as determined
by the Committee. Individual performance, as determined trough year-end performance review
committee process had a significant influence on actual incentive awards paid.

Long-term incentives.—Long-term incentives were composed of stock options and
restricted stock. Options grants provided time-based vesting. Restricted stock grants were made
with a future vesting date, which could be accelerated based on Enron’s performance relative to
the S&P 500. The brochure describes how restricted stock vesting could be accelerated based on
Enron’s annual cumulative shareholder return relative to the S&P 500. Participation in the long-
term incentive program was available to employees in the vice present job group and above.
Actual grants were determined each January based on the year end performance review
committee assessments and were subject to approval by the Enron Corp. Office of the Chairman.
Awards are presented to each recipient during the first quarter of the year. Grants to Section 16
officers required Compensation Committee approval.

Executive deferral plans._Long-term incentive plan participants were eligible to defer all
of a portion of salary, bonus and long-term compensation into Enron-sponsored deferral plans.

Benefits.Executives typically had the same benefit plans as other Enron employees.

2. Bonuses

In general

As discussed above, the components of executive compensation at Enron included base
salary, annual incentive awards (cash bonus) and long-term incentive. Bonuses were targeted at
the 75 percent level. There has been much media attention on the magnitude of bonuses paid to
Enron executives. In many cases, bonuses were the principal compensation component.
Appendix D shows the bonuses received by each of the top-200 highest paid employees for the
years 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001.1! Bonuses paid in 2001, the year of Enron’s bankruptcy,
were as high as $5 and $8 million dollars in some cases. In 2001, at least 48 executives received
bonuses of $1 million or greater. Table 16, below, shows bonuses for the top-200 employees
according to information obtained from the IRS.'©” Enron’s bankruptcy filing Exhibit 3b.2
shows that bonuses to 144 insiders (managing directors and above) paid during the year
preceding the bankruptcy totaled approximately $97 million.

1691 This information was provided to the Joint Committee staff by Enron.
1692 The data is based on information provided by Enron to the IRS. As in other cases,

information regarding bonuses provided by Enron to the Joint Committee staff does not reconcile
with similar information provided by Enron to the Joint Committee staff and to the IRS.

566

=== PAGE 595 ===
Table 16.-Total bonuses for the top-200 highly compensated employees!?

Year Total bonuses for the top-200
1998 $41,193,000
1999 $51,195,000
2000 $56,606,000

The Joint Committee staff asked Enron to provide the average employee bonus for
employees other than the top-paid 200, for each of the years 1999 - 2001. Enron provided
information on managers and above only.!64 For such group, the average bonus paid in 2000
(earned in 1999) was $37,396, which was an average of 43.6 percent of base salary and 19.5
percent of total compensation. The average bonus paid in 2001 (earned in 2000) was $61,543,
which was an average of 70.7 percent of base salary and 27.4 percent of total compensation.

According to materials provided to employees, the primary objectives of Enron’s annual
incentive plan were to provide cash awards aligned with Enron’s achievement of preestablished
financial and nonfinancial operating goals and to reward individual contributions to Enron’s
success.'®> In recent years, the Annual Incentive Plan was used for bonuses for certain
executives.!© Prior to 1999, the Annual Incentive Plan was also used for bonuses to non-
executives. According to Enron, generally all employees were eligible for incentive/variable pay
consideration unless excluded due to union contracts, local labor laws, etc,167 Payment of
bonus, however, was continent on company an individual performance; therefore, less than 100
percent of employees actually received bonuses. 8 Employees interviewed by Joint Committee
staff stated that all employees, other than those receiving a performance review committee
ranking of category five, received annual bonuses.

Prior to the modification of Enron’s compensation structure in 1999, some business units
maintained their own bonus plans. For example, the Enron International, Inc. Project
Participation Plan was used for international developers. The Project Participation Plan has
received a considerable amount of attention because of the large bonuses that were paid from the
plan and because of the way that bonus amounts were determined. For a discussion of the
Project Participation Plan, see Part III.B.3., below.

1693 A mounts are rounded.

1694 FC 002690459. Because Enron did not provide the specific data requested, the
averages are not true indicators of typical employee bonuses.

1695 Executive Compensation Program brochure. EC2 00019710.

1696 Enron’s bonus program is generally referred to as its “annual incentive plan,” which
includes the Enron Corp. Annual Incentive Plan, as approved in 1999.

1697 EC 002679698.

1698 EC 002679698.

567


=== PAGE 596 ===
Annual Incentive Awards

Annual Incentive Plan

The most recent version of the Enron Corp. Annual Incentive Plan (the “Annual Incentive
Plan”) was executed as of May 4, 1999, and was effective as of January 1, 1999. The Plan was
“designed to recognize, motivate, and reward exceptional accomplishment toward annual
corporation objectives; to attract and retain quality employees; and to be market competitive.”!6”

The Annual Incentive Plan was approved by the shareholders at the May 1999 Annual
Meeting. Before the approval of the plan in 1999, an older version of the Annual Incentive Plan
had been approved by the shareholders in 1994. The older version of the plan was somewhat
different from the plan approved in 1999, as eligibility under the 1994 plan included all full-time
and part-time employees, while eligibility under the more recent version is limited to Section 16
officers. With the change in class of eligible employees under the Plan, employees other than
Section 16 officers still received annual bonuses, but not through the Annual Incentive Plan.

The Annual Incentive Plan was administered by the Compensation Committee of the
Board of Directors, who had the sole discretion to interpret the plan, approve preestablished,
objective, annual performance measures, certify the level to which the performance measures
were attained prior to any payment under the Plan, approve the amount of awards made under
the Plan, and determine who is to receive payments under the Plan.!””

The Annual Incentive Plan has an annual award fund of five percent of recurring after-tax
net income of Enron. “Recurring after-tax net income” is after-tax net income subject to
downward adjustment by the Compensation Committee in its discretion for what the Committee
considered extraordinary or nonrecurring items of after-tax net income and other items or events,
including, but not limited to financial impact on Enron resulting from changes in law or
regulation pertaining to Federal corporate taxes. The maximum individual target award level
that may be established under the Plan is one percent of the recurring after-tax net income of
Enron. This is an increase from the Annual Incentive Plan in effect prior to 1999, which had a
maximum individual award level of .5 percent.

According to the Plan document, at the end of each plan year, the Compensation
Committee would verify the actual recurring after-tax net income of Enron, if any, and the
resulting award fund (taking into consideration any downward adjustments made by the
Committee). The Committee would then determine which participants would receive payments
under the Plan and the amounts of the payments. Payments made under the Plan could be made
in cash or other property having equivalent value, including shares of Enron Corp. common
stock. Cash payments under the Plan could be deferred according to the terms of Enron’s deferral
plans. Eligible recipients of an Annual Incentive Plan bonus payment could defer up to 100
percent of bonus into one or more of the Enron Corp. 1994 Deferral Plan, the Enron Corp. Bonus
Stock Option Program and/or the Enron Corp Bonus Phantom Stock Program.

1699 Enron Corp. Annual Incentive Plan.

1700 Enron Corp. Annual Incentive Plan.

568

=== PAGE 597 ===
Bonus determinations

Bonuses for individuals would be determined after the approval of bonus pools.
Preliminary bonus pools were generally approved at the close of the current year as were
preliminary funding for the following year. Exact bonus amounts would be determined and
approved in the beginning of the following year. The year-end Performance Review Committee
process significantly influenced the annual incentive paid to an employee.!”"!

According to the 2001 Proxy, annual bonus payments were based upon Enron’s
performance measured against the Enron Operating Plan as approved by the Board of Directors.
Key performance criteria such as funds flow, return on equity, debt reduction, earnings per share
improvements, and other relevant factors were considered at the option of the Compensation
Committee.” A Performance Review Report, which summarized management’s view
regarding whether and to what extent the key performance criteria were attained, would be
presented to the Compensation Committee in J anuary.'”? The report also.discussed other
significant, but unforeseen factors that positively or negatively affected Enron’s performance.
The Compensation Committee would verify Enron’s actual recurring after-tax net income,

review management’s funding level recommendation and then approve the resulting award
fund.!7™

After the Board of Directors determined the overall funding level, the Office of the
Chairman determined the allocations for each operating group based on performance. Individual
payouts were based on business unit performance (or corporate financial performance for
corporate executives) and the employee’s individual performance as determined through the
Performance Review Committee process. : The Compensation Committee would review the
individual recommendations for key executives and the Office of the Chairman would approve
the recommendations for all other participants.'”° In an interview with Joint Committee staff,
the former chairman of the Compensation Committee stated that bonuses for executives were
generally proposed by management and then recommended to Compensation Committee, who
would basically approve what management had proposed. According to interviews with current
and former Enron employees, bonuses for nonexecutive level employees were generally
determined by market data and then ultimately approved by management.

Funding

Before 2000, Enron’s bonuses were funded as a percentage of each specific business
unit’s net income. Maintaining separate bonus funding created problems for business units,

1701 Executive Compensation Program brochure. EC2 00019710.

1702 9001 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.
1703 ry
1704 1g

1705 Id.

569

=== PAGE 598 ===
especially new business units, that had little or no net income, but significant total shareholder
value. As discussed below, to help ensure continued employee fungibility, a single corporate-
wide funding pool was established.

Before the 1999 restatement of the Annual Incentive Plan, a bonus pool for all Enron
Corp. Section 16 officers and corporate staff would be determined annually. The Annual
Incentive Plan as adopted in 1994 did not have a specific bonus target, but allowed the
Compensation Committee to set a target based on after-tax net income. For 1996, the Annual
Incentive Plan fund for Enron Corp. was 11 percent of after-tax net income. For 1997 and 1998,
the Annual Incentive Plan fund for bonuses was 15 percent of after-tax net income.

At Enron’s request, Towers Perrin prepared a letter, dated July 27, 1998, providing
information about the percentage of after-tax net income allocated to management annual
incentives.!”° Towers Perrin commented that Enron’s annual bonus spending cap of 15 percent
of after-tax net income for Section 16 officers and corporate staff was relatively high.!7°7
However, Towers Perrin noted that most companies are well advised to set high bonus caps
because the limits exist only to preserve the tax deductibility of compensation paid to the top-
five highest paid officers.!”* Beginning in 1999, with the effectiveness of the restated Annual
Incentive Plan, which limited eligibility for payments under the Plan, there was a five-percent
bonus pool for Section 16 officers. Bonuses of corporate staff were not paid from the five-
percent pool.

As discussed above, until 2000, Enron funded bonus pools for each business unit and for
corporate staff based on market levels of incentive funding by business line.'”” In 2000, senior
management expressed concern that this bonus funding structure discouraged key commercial
employees from leaving profitable units to take critical positions in less profitable units (since
funding was based on a percentage of net income for each unit).!7”°

To address that concern, at the recommendation of Towers Perrin, the Compensation
Committee adopted a new bonus funding scheme under which bonuses throughout Enron would
be funded with one pool. At its December 11, 2000, meeting, the Compensation Committee
approved a change in the compensation scheme to utilize a single corporate-wide bonus funding
pool for 2000 which would be set at up to 27 percent of after-tax income. Individual employee

1706 BC 000104381.

1707 The Towers Perrin survey showed that most companies pay management annual
incentives from two percent to 10 percent of net income. EC 000104381.

1708 See the discussion of the $1 million limit on deductibility of executive compensation
in Part III.C.6, below.

1709 1 etter from Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles LeMaistre dated December 3, 2001.
EC2 000028641. This letter is included in Appendix D.

1710 Id.

570

=== PAGE 599 ===
bonus allocations from the pool would be made using discretion, but considering the value of the
individual’s position using market data and individual performance.

At the January 22, 2001, Compensation Committee meeting, the 2000 bonus pool as a
percentage of after-tax net income up to 27 percent was adopted.’” ' This pool included Enron
Corp. and all business units. The pool as a percentage of earnings before interest and taxes was
up to 15 percent. Pursuant to the Annual Incentive Plan, the pool allocated under the Plan (for
Section 16 officers) was five percent of recurring after-tax net income. Towers Perrin advised
Enron that its annual incentive plan design was consistent with market 75th percentile practices
for energy trading and marketing entities.17!?

Annual bonuses for employees other than executives

As of January 1, 1999, even though payments under the Annual Inventive Plan were
limited to Section 16 officers, other employees were paid annual bonuses under the general
bonus pool of Enron. The bonuses were determined similar to the determination of executive
bonuses and were market driven. Consulting firms, such as Towers Perrin, would be involved in
determining bonuses for both executives and nonexecutives.

Bonus deferral programs

In general

Enron had two bonus deferral programs, the Bonus Stock Option Program and the Bonus
Phantom Stock Deferral Program. The bonus deferral programs gave participants an opportunity
to receive stock options and/or phantom stock in lieu of cash bonus payments. '3 Tt appears that
these programs were open to all employees receiving a cash bonus, with the exception of certain
employees working outside of the United States. These programs were considered deferral
programs because Federal and State income taxes associated with bonus deferrals, plus
appreciation on such amounts, were not incurred until stock options were exercised or phantom
shares were released. Participants were required to enroll in the programs in the year prior to the
scheduled bonus payment. Participation in the programs did not guarantee that a participant
would receive a bonus. The minutes of meetings of the Compensation Committee show that the
Committee approved the issuance of stock options and phantom stock that Section 16 officers
elected to receive pursuant to the bonus deferral programs.'7!4

1711 The letter from Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles LeMaistre dated December 3, 2001,
states that the bonus pool approved was 24.5 percent of recurring net income. The
Compensation Committee minutes reflect approval of a bonus pool of 27 percent.

1712 7 etter from Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles LeMaistre dated December 3, 2001. EC2
000028641.

3 BC2 0000018944.

1714 See, e.g., Minutes of Compensation Committee meetings held January 24, 2000, and
January 22, 2001.

571

=== PAGE 600 ===
Bonus Stock Option Program

The Bonus Stock Option Program provided employees with an opportunity to purchase
stock at a fixed price, over a specified period of time. Under the Bonus Stock Option Program,
participants could elect to defer up to 50 percent of bonus (in 5 percent increments) to purchase
stock options.'7!° For every dollar deferred into the program, the participant would receive $1.50
in expected value (employees would receive a 50 percent premium). The size of the grant was
determined using a Black-Scholes ratio. Before 2001, a fixed dollar value was used. Bonus
stock options were fully vested immediately upon grant. Beginning with 2001 deferrals, options
had a five-year term.'7!® Before 2001, options had a seven-year term. The change was meant to
be in sync with an overall trend in moving toward shorter stock option grants.!7! Company
documents show that when the options were exercised, all taxes (Federal and state income taxes
and FICA and Medicare) were due.

Employee materials emphasized that there is risk in choosing to receive a portion of
bonus in stock options.'78 Employees were informed that if the stock price did not appreciate to
the break-even point before exercise, the participant would receive less than the amount deferred
and could lose the entire deferred bonus amount if the stock price did not increase above the
grant price. According to documents provided by Enron to the IRS, in 2000, approximately
1,121 employees participated in the Bonus Stock Option Program, deferring amounts ranging
from $75 to $300,000.

Bonus Phantom Stock Program

The Bonus Phantom Stock Program was established in 1997 to allow Enron employees
the opportunity to take a one for one exchange of cash for phantom stock for up to 50 percent of
any cash bonus received.!”!° A participant electing to defer a percentage of bonus could select a
holding period from one to five years and would receive a premium of five percent for each year
holding the shares.!”2° Phantom stock mirrored the performance of Enron Corp. common stock
and was used so that employees would not be considered to be in receipt of actual shares at the
time of grant, thereby allowing deferral of taxes until the shares were released. Dividend
equivalents accrued during the holding period.

715 Bonus Stock Option Program employee materials. EC2 000019129.

6 BC2 000018959.

'17 7 etter from Kim Bolton describing deferral programs dated October 12, 2000.
EC2 000018424.

718 C2 000018968.
19 EC 000104582.

120 Employee election form. EC2 000018971.

572

=== PAGE 601 ===
Beginning in 2001, Company documents show that FICA and Medicare taxes were due
on the bonus shares (deferred amounts) on the bonus payment date, and would be deducted from
the remaining bonus or from subsequent paychecks until fully collected.!””" It appears that prior
to 2001, FICA and Medicare taxes on the deferred bonus would be paid when the shares were
released. FICA and Medicare on premium shares would be paid when the phantom shares were
released. Federal and State income taxes were imposed when phantom shares are released.’”””
At the end of the holding period, shares would be sold to cover the tax liability and remaining
shares would be released into the employee’s brokerage account.!”3 An employee could also
choose to pay withholding taxes in cash.

Information provided by Enron states that in the initial year of the Bonus Phantom Stock
Program, 1998, there were approximately 620 participants.” Information provided by Enron
also shows that there were approximately 610 participants in 1999, 1,140 in 2000 and 681 in
2001. According to documents provided by Enron to the IRS, in 2000, approximately 1,673
employees participated in the program and deferred amounts ranging from $166 to $282,000.!775

Pre-bankruptcy bonuses

In general

In the weeks immediately preceding the bankruptcy, Enron implemented two bonus
programs for (1) approximately 60 key traders and (2) approximately 500 employees that Enron
claimed were critical for maintaining and operating Enron going forward. The combined cost of
the programs was approximately $104.9 million.'””° The minutes of the Board of Directors
meetings and Compensation Committee meetings in which such payments were approved,
discussed below, are included in Appendix D.

Bonuses for traders

At the November 16, 2001, meeting of the Compensation Committee, Lawrence Gregory
(“Greg”) Whalley reported concerns of key employees that annual bonuses either would not be

1721 bower-point presentation explaining the bonus deferral programs. EC2 000018950.
1722 Power-point presentation explaining the bonus deferral programs. EC2 000018951.
1723 Dower-point presentation explaining the bonus deferral programs. EC2 000018952.
124 Thformation provided September 4, 2002. EC 001872010.

175 As stated previously, information provided by Enron to the Joint Committee staff
and to the IRS does not reconcile in many cases.

1726 Attachment to the December 20, 2001, Compensation Committee meeting.
EC2 000028654.

573

=== PAGE 602 ===
awarded or, if awarded, might not be funded by Enron.'””” Mr. Whalley reviewed the terms of a
proposed grantor trust of Enron North America to fund the payment of 2001 performance
bonuses to certain key personnel of Enron North America as well as Enron Energy Services and
Enron Canada. The bonus trust was approved by the Compensation Committee on November
16, 2001, and was approved by the Board of Directors on November 18, 2001 178 Pursuant to
this approval, Enron established a 2001 annual bonus pool of $50 million to be paid to up to 100
key commercial employees (referred to as traders).'””” Towers Perrin advised that such funding
equaled about 2.5 percent of Enron Americas’ earnings before income taxes, which was
dramatically less than market median funding of 15 percent of earnings before income taxes for
energy trading units.!7%°

Originally, it was approved that payments to the traders would be made as long as the
employee was actively employed on the designated payment dates of January 4, 2002, and
February 5, 2002. After the payment of pre-bankruptcy bonuses to the nontrader key employee
group, discussed below, Enron decided to make payments from the trust in 2001 and impose the
same restrictions required for payments to the nontrader group.

Pre-bankruptcy payments to key employees

In connection with Dynegy’s withdrawal from the proposed merger with Enron, Enron
established a 2001 bonus pool of approximately $54 million for approximately 528 critical
noncommercial staff (i.e., persons other than traders). On November 28, 2001, the Board of
Directors aj prokee the establishment and adoption of the Enron Corp. Bonus Plan for calendar
year 2001. ! While not stated specifically in the Bonus Plan, Enron documents show that it
was Enron’s intent to pay 2001 bonus payments to key and critical employees as soon as

1727 Minutes of the Meeting of the Compensation Committee, at 1 (Nov. 16, 2001). EC2
000026922 - EC2 000026925. At the October 24, 2001, Special meeting of the Board of
Directors, the Board approved the guarantee of minimum bonuses to be paid to key commercial
personnel in January of 2002. EC2 000027260- EC2 000027262.

178 Tq Minutes of the Meeting of the Board of Directors, at 8 (Nov. 18, 2001). EC2
000028074 - EC2 000028081. The trust document is dated November 16, 2001. EC 001506928.

1729 1 etter from Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles LeMaistre dated December 3, 2001. EC2
000028641. The letter is included in Appendix D.

1730 Id.

1731 Minutes of the Special Meeting of the Board of Directors, at 5 (Nov. 28, 2001). EC2
000028296 - EC2 000028306; EC2 000028310 - EC2 000028314. The minutes of the
November 25, 2001, meeting of the Special Committee of the Board of Directors show that the
Board approved the Enron Corp. Retention Plan to retain critical and key employees through the
transitional period. EC2 000027122 - EC2 000027128. The number of employees to be
included in such plan was 1,350 and the value was capped at $115 million. It is unclear whether
this plan was implemented or whether the Enron Corp. Retention Plan was the predecessor of the
Enron Corp. Bonus Program.

574

=== PAGE 603 ===
practicable after approval of the Bonus Plan.'”** The payments would be made pursuant to the
new Enron Corp. Bonus Plan and the Enron Corp. Annual Incentive Plan. The new bonus plan
was needed to pay bonuses to key employees who were not eligible to participate in the Enron
Corp. Annual Incentive Plan.'”33 It was also contemplated that remaining eligible employees
would receive bonus payments at the end of calendar year 2001. It is unclear whether additional
payments were made.

The Enron Corp. Bonus Plan was executed as of November 28, 2001. The stated purpose
of the Enron Corp. Bonus Plan was to recognize, motivate, and reward exceptional
accomplishment of annual corporation objectives during calendar year 2001 174 Employees of
Enron and its subsidiaries and affiliated companies who were not eligible to participate in the
Enron Corp. Annual Incentive Plan, and who were designated by the Compensation Committee,
were eligible to participate in the plan. Employees eligible for payments under the Performance
Bonus Trust, the grantor trust established by Enron North America, discussed above, were not
eligible to participate in the Enron Corp. Bonus Plan.

The Enron Corp. Bonus Plan had an award fund in the amount of not more than $60
million, subject to downward adjustment by the Compensation Committee. Payments under the
plan could be made in cash or in property having equivalent value. As a condition to receive
payments under the plan, participants were required to execute an agreement requiring
repayment of any amounts received if the participant voluntarily terminated employment prior to
the expiration of 90 days following the receipt of any payment. Additionally, the agreement
under the plan required a participant who makes repayments to Enron to pay an additional 25
percent of any payment as liquidated damages for terminating employment prior to the
expiration of ninety days following receipt of payment. It appears that traders who received pre-
bankruptcy payments were also required to execute such agreement. Sample agreements are
included in Appendix D. Enron employees interviewed by Joint Committee staff maintained that
a number of employees did not want to remain with Enron for the 90-day period and did not
accept the bonus payment. The Plan was unfunded (i.e., no trust was created under the Plan).

The Bonus Plan and recommended payments were presented to the Compensation
Committee on November 29, 2001. A total of up to $60 million of payments pursuant to the
Enron Corp Bonus Plan and the Enron Corp. Annual Incentive Plan were approved.'”° Tt was
also approved that management was authorized to modify the list of employees and payment
amounts as deemed appropriate, and it was confirmed that any awards to employees subject to

1732 Attachment to the minutes of the November 28, 2001, Special Meeting of the Board
of Directors. EC2 000028310. The attachment is included in Appendix D.

1733 Payments under the Enron Corp. Annual Incentive Plan could only be made to
Section 16 executives.

1734 C2 000019658 - EC2 000019660.

‘735 Minutes of the Compensation Committee, at 1 (Nov. 29, 2001). EC2 000026930 -
EC2 000026946.

575

=== PAGE 604 ===
Section 16 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 would be presented for approval by the
Committee prior to such awards being made. At the November 29, 2001, meeting, payment to
one Section 16 officer was approved.

The Board of Directors was advised that Weil, Gotshal, and Manges commented that it
was not a legal decision to implement this type of plan, but that it was an issue of business
judgment that could be second-guessed.!”° Weil Gotshal thought, that based on Enron’s
analysis of the criticality of personnel and the need to protect key personnel, it was a
compensation design for which reasonable justification existed.!’°’ The minutes of the
November 29, 2001, Compensation Committee meeting state that Towers Perrin confirmed that
the approved payments were consistent with industry practices and with the past practices of
Enron to retain key employees.

According to Towers Perrin, awards were equal to about 90 percent of the bonus for the
prior year.!78 Many current and former employees interviewed by Joint Committee staff stated
that payments were 100 percent of the year 2000 bonus.

Recipients of these bonus payments interviewed by Joint Committee staff stated that the
bonus payments to the nontraders were made in cashier’s checks (net of payroll taxes) and were
paid on the Friday preceding Enron’s bankruptcy filing. The comments of one individual
interviewed by the Joint Committee staff indicated that there was an air of secrecy involving the
payments. Other individuals who received bonuses said that it became known that the payments
were forthcoming and individuals waited in the office for the payments. The Joint Committee
staff asked Enron why the payments were made in cashier’s checks. According to Enron, the
bonuses were paid in cashier’s checks “to effect the retention strategy approved by the
Compensation Committee as soon as possible.”!”°

Enron’s response for requests for information

The Joint Committee staff asked Enron several questions about the pre-bankruptcy
payments, including how it was determined who would be entitled to the payments and the
amount of the payments. Enron responded that various management team(s) of each business
unit reviewed the critical efforts that would need to be maintained to increase value for creditors
going forward.!™° Enron stated that the “90 Day Payments” to certain key management and
employees were based on the following criteria: the extent to which the employees’ skills were

1736 Attachment to the minutes of the November 28, 2001, Special Meeting of the Board
of Directors. EC2 000028310. The attachment is included in Appendix D.

1737 Id.

1738 | etter from Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles LeMaistre dated December 3, 2001.
EC2 000028641. The letter is included in Appendix D.

1739 BC 002679699.

174 &cn000077383. Company response received January 13, 2003.

576

=== PAGE 605 ===
critical to business, marketable skills, trust factor with Enron, specialized skills,
replaceability/cost of outside procurement (by consultants, etc.), multiskilled, and institutional
knowledge.'*! Enron provided a list of employees who received payments. !” See Appendix D
for the list. The list included approximately 584 employees for payments totaling approximately
$104.6 million. Additional information provided by Enron states that 490 employees received
key employee bonuses totaling $50.404 million, which were paid from general company
assets.'"? Trader/Dynegy bonuses were paid to 67 employees totaling $46.074 million, which
were made from the trust discussed above.’ In addition, 27 Canadian employees received
bonuses totaling $8 million, which were paid by Enron Canada Corp.’ The payments ranged
from $2,500 to $8 million. It appears that three employees terminated employment with Enron
before the end of the 90-day retention period.!“° In each of the three cases, Enron indicated that
repayment of the bonus has been demanded, but the employee disputes the obligation and has not
repaid.

Post-bankruptcy bonuses

Bonuses have been awarded after Enron’s bankruptcy filing.'”“” With the approval of the
Bankruptcy Court, Enron implemented the Key Employee Retention Program (“KERP”) to
provide an employment incentive for certain existing and newly hired employees deemed
essential to the successful liquidation of Enron assets, divestiture of certain non-core businesses,
restructuring of profitable core businesses, and management of litigation and governinent
investigations.'”* As approved by the court, the KERP provides for the following: retention

741 1000077383. Company response received January 13, 2003.

1742 000077384 - Ecu000077395. Company response received January 13, 2003.
743 BC 002679698.

1744 EC 002679698.

1745 EC 002679698.

1746 cu000077396. Company response received January 13, 2003. Information
regarding individuals who terminated employment with Enron before completing the 90-day
service requirement is included in Appendix D.

47 On December 20, 2001, the Compensation Committee ratified a retention program to
be used for bankrupt companies. Minutes to the Meeting of the Compensation Committee, at 3
(Dec. 20, 2001). EC2 000028575 - EC2 000028578; EC2 000028654. The Joint Committee staff
was not provided minutes of meetings held after December 2001; therefore, it is unclear whether
other post-bankruptcy retention plans were considered.

1748 Enron’s motion for approval of the KERP, dated March 29, 2002, and the
Bankruptcy Court’s order approving the KERP, dated May 8, 2002. The motion and order also
provided for indemnification of officers and directors for claims related to their post-bankruptcy-
petition services, to the extent not covered by insurance, and treatment of costs related thereto as
priority administrative expenses.

577

=== PAGE 606 ===
payments, liquidation incentive payments, and severance benefits.'” Employees are not
permitted to participate in the retention payment program and the liquidation incentive program
simultaneously. The KERP is effective March 1, 2002, through February 28, 2003.

Under the retention payment program, employees are entitled to payments of a
percentage of base salary for continued employment during each quarter ending May 31, 2002,
August 31, 2002, November 30, 2003, and February 28, 2003, as long as the employee neither
resigns nor is involuntarily terminated for cause during the quarter. The program was expected

to cover up to 1,285 employees. Payments up to a total of $40 million can be made under the
program.

The liquidation incentive program is intended to correlate incentive payments to
performance for employees involved in the liquidation of Enron’s trading assets and certain
non-core businesses between March 1, 2002, and February 28, 2003. The amount payable under
the program is determined as a percentage of $1 billion increments of the cash collected from the
liquidation of assets, with a threshold collection amount of $500 million. The percentage is

~ 5 percent of collections from $500 million to $3 billion, 1 percent of collections over $3 billion
up to $6 billion and 1.5 percent of collections over $6 billion up to $9 billion, for a maximum
amount of $90 million. The minimum aggregate amount payable is $7.4 million.

The severance benefit program provides severance benefits for about 850 employees not
eligible to participate in either of the other programs and about 700 employees eligible under the
retention payment program, whose severance benefits will be offset by any retention payments
received. Severance benefits consist of two weeks of base salary for each year or partial year of
the employee’s total service, with a minimum of $4,500 and a maximum of eight weeks of base
salary. The maximum amount of severance benefits for employees not eligible for the other
programs is $7 million; the maximum amount of severance benefits for employees also covered
by the retention is $500,000. The KERP was later amended to reduce the amount available for
severance benefits by $1.3 million in order to pay divestiture bonuses to certain employees in
connection with the sale of the Enron Metals and Commodity Corporation.

1749 Tn addition to approval of the KERP, the motion also requested approval to waive the
right to seek recovery from 237 potential KERP participants (150 retention participants, 37
liquidation incentive participants, and 50 severance benefit participants) of payments made
before the filing of Enron’s bankruptcy petition, which were scheduled to vest on February 28,
2002. These payments were subject to challenge as preference payments or fraudulent transfers
under bankruptcy law. Enron proposed to release any claim for disgorgement of these payments
by a participant if the participant would agree to remain employed by Enron until August 31,
2002 (or an earlier termination of employment without cause).

578

=== PAGE 607 ===
3. Special compensation arrangements

In general

While executive compensation at Enron generally included base pay, bonus and long-
term incentive, Enron had certain compensation arrangements for limited groups of people or for
specific individuals. For example, Enron had a Project Participation Plan for employees in its
international business unit. The Project Participation Plan is discussed below.

Enron also had arrangements for a small number of employees or in some cases just one
employee. For example, one executive, Mr. Lou Pai, received the use of a 1/8 fractional interest
in a jet aircraft Hawker 800 as part of his compensation.'”* ° A few employees received loans
from Enron and had split dollar life insurance policies. These arrangements are discussed in
further detail below. As discussed below in further detail, Enron purchased two annuities from
Kenneth L. Lay and his wife as a part of his compensation package for 2001. Certain executives
were allowed to exchange interests in plans for large cash payments or stock options and
restricted stock grants.

Project Participation Plan

in general

On September 23, 1993, Enron Development Corporation adopted the Enron
Development Corp. Project Participation Plan. The Project Participation Plan was used for
international developers and other employees working on international projects. The Enron
Development Corp. Project Participation Plan was amended and restated effective January 1,
1996; this restatement replaced the prior plan originally effective January 1, 1993.'7" All
projects were not subject to the restated plan. Generally, projects for which an incentive
payment was made with respect to an event occurring on or before December 31, 1995, were not
subject to the restated plan, but continued to be governed by the terms of the plan in effect prior
to the January 1, 1996, restatement. The Project Participation Plan was principally used in the
1990’s when Enron was competing for various international projects. According to the terms of
the plan, the plan terminated as of December 31, 2000; however, payments for awards granted
before 2001 could be made from the plan after such date.

One former Enron executive told the Joint Committee staff that the Project Participation
Plan was terminated because it was viewed as not in the interests of the shareholders. He
indicated that if someone had an interest in a project, and the project was not likely to be a good
project, it was hard to move people off the project, because they had a stake in it. Every time

1750 As part of the executive’s separation from Enron, he assumed and became
financially responsible for the 1/8 fractional interest in the jet aircraft Hawker 800. EC
002634790.

151 The Project Participation Plan was amended as of February 1, 1997, and as of
January 1, 1998.

579

=== PAGE 608 ===
Enron wanted to move someone off a project, compensation had to be renegotiated. He said that
the Project Participation Plan made staffing inflexible, time consuming, and difficult.

In the late 1990’s, the name of the Project Participation Plan and all references to “Enron
Development Corp.” were changed to “Enron International, Inc.,”!”>? thus changing the name of
the plan to the Enron International, Inc. Project Participation Plan. The stated purpose of the
plan was to provide a means whereby certain selected employees could develop a sense of
proprietorship and personal involvement in the development and financial success of Enron
International, Inc., to attract and retain employees of outstanding competence and ability, and to
encourage them to devote their best efforts to the business of Company, and to reward them for
outstanding performance benefiting Enron and its stockholders.!”°

Projects under the Project Participation Plan included:!74

Bitterfeld;

Centragas - Columbia Pipeline;
Dabhol India - Phase I;

Latvian Storage;

Mostransgaz - Optical Disk Imaging;
Severnaya Compressor Station;
Subic Bay Power Plant;
Yucatan (Merida);

YPFB - Joint Venture;
Volgograd Compressor;

Italy - Saras;

Poland;

Puerto Rico;

Panama;

Puerto Caldera - Costa Rica;
Sao Paulo - Brazil;

Ecuador;

CEMIG - Brazil;

YPFB - Capitalization;
CEMAT-Mato Grosso - Bolivia;
Enersul-Mato Grosso Do Sul;
LNG Commercial Development;

1752 The change was executed in August 1999, to be effective February 1, 1997. By error
or omission, the Board did not adopt the First Amendment on or about February 1, 1997, which
would have changed the name of the plan. EC2 000019327.

1753 Project Participation Plan document. EC 000767561.

1754 This is not intended to be an inclusive list. Other projects may have also been under
the Project Participation Plan.

580

=== PAGE 609 ===
Israel Marketing;

Mozambique - Integrated;
Oman;

Qatar;

Jordan Marketing;

E. Java - Indonesia;

llijan Philippines Gas;
China-Hainan;

Vietnam;

E. Kalamintan;

Thailand IPP LPG;

Song Yu;

Hainan LPG Storage Terminal;
Dong Fong Natural Gas Reserve;
Dabhol India - Phase II;

Multan - Pakistan;

Dabhol India - Phase I - Implementation;
India Marketing; and

Dominican Republic.!7°

All employees were eligible to be selected for participation in the Project Participation
Plan. Under the plan, employees would be granted participation interests in particular projects.
Participation interests would be expressed as a percentage of the value of the project. Payments
with respect to a project would be triggered upon the occurrence of a plan payment date, which
generally occurred upon (1) financial closure of the project, (2) operation of the project, or
(3) the sale or transfer of the project. The incentive payment generated upon a payment date
would be allocated among the participants who had a participation interest in the project at such
time based upon the relative size of their participation interests.

Typically, awards would be paid 50 percent upon financial closure of the project and 50
percent upon operation of the project, as defined by the Project Participation Plan. The plan also
included provisions which provided how participants would be compensated in the event that the
particular project was sold or transferred before the achievement of financial closure or
commercial operation. Under the Project Participation Plan, the total participation interests in
any given projects could not exceed 10 percent. The financial closure payment would generally
be five percent of the net project value; the commercial operation payment would generally be
10 percent of net project value reduced by any prior financial closure payment paid or payable.
Some projects were specifically excluded from the Project Participation Plan and certain projects
had special features under the plan. The plan defined how the value of the project was
determined and included provisions for cases in which the value was disputed.

Payments would be made in cash, in shares of common stock, or in a combination of cash
and shares. The amendment to the Project Participation Plan effective January 1, 1998, allowed

755 BC 000767596 - EC 000767597.

581

=== PAGE 610 ===
participants in certain projects (Italy and Poland) to elect to receive payments in cash and stock
options. Such options were granted under the 1994 Stock Plan.

The Project Participation Plan was administered by a committee which was charged with
selecting participants in the plan and determining the participation interests to be awarded each
participant. According to the plan document, the plan constituted an unfunded, unsecured
obligation of Enron to make payments of incentive compensation from its general assets in
accordance with the plan.

Awards under the Project Participation Plan could vary greatly. Attention has been given
to the plan because of the large amounts that were awarded under the plan and because the
method used to determine award amounts, a percentage of the estimated project value, could
create an incentive to overstate the value of projects. Awards for top developers could be as high
as $5 million or $7 million for single projects. WE

Former and current employees interviewed by Joint Committee staff regarding the
magnitude of the payments responded that such large payments could be attributable to years of
work on a particular project. While many executives greatly benefited from Project Participation

Plan awards, all awards under the plan were not very large; some awards were less than
$10,000.'7°”

Deferrals

The Project Participation Plan was amended effective February 1, 1997, to allow deferral
of payments under the plan from the time they would otherwise be paid. A participant could
elect to defer receipt of a portion of any plan payment that was to be made in cash:to a date that
is after the participant’s termination of employment with Enron. Up to 100 percent of payments
could be deferred. Payments deferred by a participant would be credited to the participant’s
deferral account as of the date that the participant would have received such payment under the
plan had such payment not been deferred.

Deferrals were credited with Enron’s mid-term cost of capital for the period. For 2001,
deferrals were to earn a 7.4 percent annual rate of return.!”°8 Deferral accounts would be paid to
participants in the event of retirement, disability, death, or termination of employment.
Payments could also be requested in the event of a hardship.

1756 BC 000102338 (Project Puerto Rico); EC2 000032354 (Project Puerto Rico). The
Joint Committee staff does not have a list of all payments, so it is not clear whether these were
the highest awards.

57 BC2 000032354.

1758 Participant election form for 2001 deferrals. EC2 000018648.

582

=== PAGE 611 ===
Documents provided by Enron show that there were 11 participants who deferred
amounts under the Project Participation Plan.!’°? Enron documents show that as of
December 31, 1999, there were five participants with total account balances of $450,054.17 As
of December 31, 2000, there were 10 participants with accounts balances totaling $7.9
million.!7©! As of December 31, 2001, the Project Participation Plan had 11 participants with
account balances totaling $9.4 million.!”

Project Participation Plan trade-outs

In 1997, Enron allowed certain participants in the Project Participation Plan to trade their
interests in the plan for stock options and restricted stock, thus allowing their compensation to
grow as Enron’s stock price increased. On February 10, 1997, the Compensation Committee
approved the trade-out of fixed interests owned by five Enron International executives in the
Project Participation Plan by providing $10 million in stock options and $10 million in restricted
stock. The trade-out was reported by the Board of Directors on February 11, 1997. According to
IRS information, in addition to the five executives referred to above, seven other employees
agreed to trade-out their participation interests in the Project Participation Plan for grants of
stock options and restricted stock later in August 1997.17

According to IRS documents, the value of the stock options and restricted stock conveyed
to the 12 employees totaled approximately $22 million at the date of grant.!7 Also according to
IRS information, the fair market value of the options granted to two executives totaled 74 percent
of the total value conveyed. Stock options were valued using the Black-Scholes valuation
method. Restricted stock was assigned a value equal to the closing price of the stock on the date
of the exchange.

Enron treated the stock options and restricted stock attributable to the trade-out of the
Project Participation Plan interests the same as options and restricted stock are treated generally
for Federal tax purposes. That is, no income was reported to employees at the time of the trade-
out/grant. Rather, income was reported at the time of exercise (in the case of options) and when

1759 C 000768136. This list is not all participants in the Project Participation Plan, but
only those who elected to defer payments.

1760 RC 000768234.
1761 BC 000768234.
1762 BC 000768234.

1763 The additional trade-outs do not appear to be reflected in the Compensation
Committee meeting minutes.

1764 Other IRS documents state that the fair market value of the stock options and
restricted stock conveyed to the 12 employees totaled approximately $26.8 million; $11.6 million
on the February 10, 1997, grant date, and $15.2 million on the August 11, 1997, grant date.
While these two amounts do not reconcile either amount is substantial.

583

=== PAGE 612 ===
the restrictions lapse (in the case of restricted stock). Similarly, Enron had a corresponding
income tax deduction at such times. In the case of restricted stock, the deduction is equal to the
fair market value of the stock multiplied by the number of shares with respect to which
restrictions lapsed. In the case of options, the deduction is equal to the difference between the
fair market value of the stock at the time of exercise and the exercise price.

Because the compensation expense was deducted when the options were exercised and
the restrictions lapsed, and the stock price continued to rise, Enron’s deduction was much larger
than the deduction would have been if Enron had paid the awards in cash or unrestricted stock as
originally contemplated by the arrangement. According to IRS documents, due to the increase in
Enron stock, amounts deducted by Enron, and reported as compensation to the individuals, were
about $82 million more than the value at the grant dates.! According to the IRS, two
individuals reported more than 90 percent of the spread.'7 The Joint Committee staff did not
discover any information indicating whether the potential increase in the deduction was a
motivating factor behind the trade-outs.

4. Board of Directors compensation

In general

Nonemployee director compensation at Enron was composed of annual fees and equity
grants. For the years 1999 through 2001, each nonemployee director received an annual service
fee of $50,000 for serving as a director. This was an increase from the $40,000 fee paid in 1995
through 1998. In 1994 and the beginning of 1995, the annual service fee was $22,000.
Additional fees for serving on committees were eliminated effective May 2, 1995. Prior to the
elimination of such fees, nonemployee directors were paid $4,000 for serving on committees.

Committee chairs received an additional $10,000 annually in 1999 through 2001, which
was an increase from $5,000 paid in 1995 through 1998, and $4,000 paid in prior years. Meeting
fees were $1,250 for each Board of Directors and committee meetings attended. Before 1999,
meeting fees for committee meetings were $1,000. Enron periodically hired compensation

1765 Internal IRS Memorandum regarding EDC Participation Plan Stock Trade-Out dated
February 22, 2002. An earlier IRS correspondence (dated January 25, 2002) stated that the
deduction could exceed $70 million.

1766 Th connection with the 1997 audit, IRS international examiners raised issues with
respect to the trade-outs, including whether the grant or exercise date should be used for valuing
the compensation for purposes of deductions, capitalizing costs by Enron, and determining
service fee income to be reported by Enron Development Corp. The IRS concluded that there
was authority for the taxpayer to use the grant date in determining the value of the trade-outs for
certain purposes. The IRS also raised other issues related to the Project Participation Plan trade-
outs, including whether the stock-based compensation spread was an ordinary and necessary
business expense under section 83(h). For a discussion of international issues relating to the
Project Participation Plan, see Part IV.D. of Part Three, above.

584

=== PAGE 613 ===
consultants, particularly Towers Perrin, to perform studies to determine if the level of
compensation for nonemployee directors was competitive with market practices.

Directors’ fees could be paid in cash, deferred under the Enron Corp. 1994 Deferral Plan,
or received in a combination of phantom stock and stock options in lieu of cash under the Enron
Corp. 1991 Stock Plan. As discussed below, beginning in 1997, directors were required to defer
50 percent of their annual service fee into the Phantom Stock Account of the 1994 Deferral Plan.

For 2000, total directors’ fees (whether paid in cash, deferred, or paid in the form of
phantom stock or stock options) were $1.1 million, or an average of $79,107 per nonemployee
director. The average fee for nonemployee directors was $86,829 in 1999 and $63,500 in 1998.
These averages do not include the value of stock options and phantom stock units annually
granted to directors. Table 17 below shows totals fees paid in cash, deferred, or received in a
combination of phantom stock units and stock options in lieu of cash for the years 1993 through
2000 for all nonemployee directors.!7°”

Table 17.-Total Directors Fees for All Nonemployee Directors 1993 - 2000

(Thousands of Dollars)
1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
$551 $481 $601 $701 $813 $889 $1,172 $1,107

Deferrals

Beginning January 1, 1997, nonemployee directors were required to defer 50 percent of
their annual service fee into the Phantom Stock Account of the 1994 Deferral Plan. Directors
could elect to receive remaining fees (i.e., annual service fee has less mandatory deferrals) in
cash, defer receipt of the fees to a later specified date under the 1994 Deferral Plan, or receive
the fees in a combination of phantom stock units and stock options in lieu of cash under the 1991
Stock Plan.!”°8 Before the mandatory deferral requirement was adopted in 1997, directors could
elect to receive fees in cash, defer receipt of the fees to a later specified date under Enron’s 1994
Deferral Plan, or receive the fees in a combination of phantom stock units and stock options in
lieu of cash under Enron’s 1991 Stock Plan. Prior to 1997, restricted stock was used instead of
phantom stock units.

In some countries, deferrals into the 1994 Deferral Plan could create adverse tax
consequences for the director. In August 1999, the Compensation Committee approved a change
that upon notification by Enron management of the applicable international tax laws, a director
could receive an award of phantom stock units under the 1991 Stock Plan in lieu of mandatory

1767 1994 through 2001 Enron Corp. Proxy Statements.

1768 December 11, 2000, letter to members of the Board of Directors regarding deferral
program opportunities. EC2 000018652.

585


=== PAGE 614 ===
deferrals into the Phantom Stock Accounts of the 1994 Deferral Plan. After such change, Lord
Wakeham was allowed to receive phantom stock units in lieu of deferrals into the Phantom Stock
Account.

Directors were required to annually complete election forms to make their deferral plan
choices.!”” Directors could elect to defer compensation annually in December prior to the year
in which the compensation was earned and payable. Voluntary deferrals could be placed into the
Flexible Deferral Account and/or the Phantom Stock Account at the director’s discretion.”
Earnings on amounts invested in the Flexible Deferral Account or the Phantom Stock Account
would be determined in the same way as all other 1994 Deferral Plan participants. Earnings on
deferrals into the Flexible Deferral Account would be credited with cumulative appreciation
and/or depreciation based on the market price of the chosen investments. Investments in the
Phantom Stock Account were treated as if the participant purchased shares of Enron Corp.
common stock at the closing price on the date of deferral. Deferral accounts would be paid as
specified in the participant’s election form during the first quarter of the year following the
termination event (retirement, death, disability or termination).!77! The 1994 Deferral Plan also
provided an opportunity for in-service distributions.

Under the 2001 annual election form, in electing stock in lieu of fees, a director could
choose a vesting period for phantom stock units between six and 60 months. Stock options (in
lieu of the annual retainer fee) would be 100 percent vested on the grant date and have a ten-year
term. Regular and special purpose deferrals could be elected.

Nonemployee directors were also eligible to participate in the deferral of stock options
gains and deferral of restricted stock programs. The deferral of stock option gains program
allowed deferrals to the 1994 Deferral Plan in lieu of receiving financial gains upon the exercise
of stock options granted under an Enron Corp. stock plan. The deferral of restricted stock
program allowed deferrals under the 1994 Enron Corp. Deferral Plan in lieu of the release of
shares of restricted stock granted under an Enron Corp. stock plan. The programs are discussed
in more detail in the nonqualified deferred compensation section of this Report.!7”?

During 2000, eight of the 13 eligible directors elected to defer fees under the 1994
Deferral Plan. In 2000, four directors elected to receive stock in lieu of fees in a combination of
phantom stock units and stock options under the 1991 Stock Plan. In 1999, nine directors elected
to defer fees under the 1994 Deferral Plan, while one director elected to receive stock in lieu of

fees in a combination of phantom stock units and stock options according to the terms of the
1991 Stock Plan.

1769 Id.
1770 Id.
1771 Id.

1772 See Part III.C.1, below.

586

=== PAGE 615 ===
In prior years, Enron maintained “Directors Deferral Plans.’

Enron show that the Director Deferral Plans included HNG, InterNorth, and Enron.
Documents provided by Enron show that there were approximately 29 participants in such plans.
In prior years, directors also deferred into the HNG Deferral Plan and the 1985 Deferral Plan.

Directors’ account balances

? Documents provided by

On December 11, 2001, Enron sent letters to the Board members advising them of the
status of their nonqualified deferred compensation.!””* Distributions to deferral plan participants
who were in pay status ceased as of November 30, 2001. Enron stated that after the first phase

of the bankruptcy, it would begin to explore options with its creditors to seek approval to

reinstate deferral plan payments, or to somehow otherwise restore the value lost to deferral plan
participants. In general, claims under the deferral plans have the same status as Enron’s other

unsecured general creditors, which are paid after the claims of secured creditors. Board

members were informed that claims for deferral plan benefits should be made against Enron’s

bankruptcy estate.

Nonemployee director balances in nonqualified deferred compensation plans as of
November 30, 2001, are provided in Table 18, below.

1775

Table 18.-Nonemployee Director Balances in Nonqualified
Deferred Compensation Plans (November 30, 2001)

(Thousands of Dollars)
Enron Corp. | Enron Corp. Enron HNG
1988 1994 Directors Deferred
Deferral Deferral Deferral Income

Plan Plan Plan Plan Total
Robert Belfer 3,894 485 1,708 6,087
Norman Blake, Jr. 250 39 288
Ronnie Chan Dia De
John Duncan * *
Wendy Gramm 686 686
Robert Jaedicke 220 1,068 175 1,463
Charles LeMaistre 92 92
John Mendelsohn Bia i
Paulo Pereira 4* 4*

73 BC 000758146.

1774 tt is unclear whether such letters were sent to all nonqualified deferred compensation

participants or just to Board members.

1775 The information in the table was obtained from letters sent to directors by Enron

informing them of their bankruptcy rights and the status of their deferred compensation.

EC 000171608 - EC 000171674.

587


=== PAGE 616 ===
Enron Corp. | Enron Corp. Enron HNG
1988 1994 Directors Deferred
Deferral Deferral Deferral Income

Plan Plan Plan Plan Total
William Powers 18 18
Frank Savage 3* 3*
Lord John Wakeham a :
Herbert Winokur a -
Joe Foy 176 484 46 706
Jerome Meyer 58 57

Total 9,411

* Denotes that balance is relatively minimal because 100% invested in the Phantom Stock Account (value of Enron
common stock at $.26 per share).

Equity grants

In addition to the fees discussed above, nonemployee directors were annually granted
stock options and phantom stock units. Under the Enron Corp. 1991 Stock Plan, nonemployee
directors were granted shares of phantom stock units and nonqualified options to purchase stock
effective the Monday following the annual meetings of the shareholders. The number of shares
of phantom stock units was equal to 50 percent of the prior year’s average retainer fee divided by
the stock price on the date of grant rounded to the next highest increment of ten. The number of
stock eptions was equal to four times the number of shares of phantom stock units. In some
years, additional stock options were granted.!7”° For 2001, each nonemployee director was
granted 460 phantom stock units and 11,175 stock options.!””” The awards were based on an
average 2000 retainer fee of $52,871 and a May 7, 2001, closing stock price of $58.04. During
2000, each nonemployee director received 360 phantom stock units and options to purchase
10,775 shares according to the terms of the 1991 and 1994 Stock Plans. Phantom stock units and
options granted in 2000 and 2001 vest over a five-year period. The Senate Permanent
Subcommittee on Investigations computed that for 2000, total stock/option value when granted
was $250,626 per director.!7”® Table 19, below, shows the number of restricted stock shares,
phantom stock units, and stock options received by directors in the years 1993 through 2001.

1776 Tn most recent years (2000 and 2001), nonemployee directors were granted stock
options equal to four times the number of phantom stock units plus 9,335 options.

1777 1 etter from Mary K. Joyce to Charles A. LeMaistre dated May 11, 2001, regarding
May 2001 director awards. EC 000257935.

1778 Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental

Affairs, United States Senate, The Role of the Board of Directors in Enron’s Collapse, May 7,
2002, Exhibit #35a.

588


=== PAGE 617 ===
Table 19.—Directors’ Restricted Stock, Phantom Stock, and Stock Options
(1993-2001)

1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

Restricted

stock shares oe Re oe

Phantom 480 510 400 560 360 460
stock units

Stock options 1,920 1,960 1,800 1,920 2,040 1,600 8,240 10,775 11,175

The 1991 Stock Plan permitted nonemployee directors whose ownership of Enron Corp.
common stock would result in a materials conflict of interest for business, employee, or
professional purposes, to submit an opinion of counsel of such fact to the Compensation
Committee with a request that such nonemployee director not be eligible to receive further grants
under the 1991 Stock Plan and to forfeit all outstanding grants made to such nonemployee
director until such time as the Committee is satisfied that such conflicts have been removed or no
longer apply. In December 1998, Dr. Gramm provided to the Compensation Committee a
written opinion of counsel indicating that her continued participation in the 1991 Stock Plan
could be considered a conflict of interest. Dr. Gramm chose not to receive further grants under
the 1991 Stock Plan, and therefore, did not receive stock options or phantom stock units in 1999
or 2000. Instead, on behalf of Dr. Gramm, Enron contributed the value of phantom stock units
and stock options into her Flexible Deferral Account under the 1994 Deferral Plan.

Table 20, below, represents the value of directors compensation as of August 21, 2002,
and July 31, 2001, from documents provided by Enron.'”” The top number shows the value as
of August 21, 2000 (when the stock value was $86), while the bottom number shows the value as
of July 31, 2001 (when the stock value was $45).

1779 BC 000257928 - EC 000258305. The values as of August 21, 2000, were published
by the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, The Role of the Board of
Directors in Enron’s Collapse, May 7, 2002, Exhibit #35b.

589


=== PAGE 618 ===
Table 20.-Value of Directors Compensation as of August 21, 2000 and July 31, 2001

(Thousands of Dollars)
Stock Option Restricted/ Total Equity Deferral Plan
as of 8/21/00 | Phantom Stock Value Account
as of 7/31/01 as of 8/21/00 as of 8/21/00 Balance’
as of 7/31/01 as of 7/31/01 as of 6/30/00
as of 6/30/01

Charles LeMaistre $3,111 $162 $3,273 $263
860 72 932 242

Robert Jaedicke 3,111 162 3,273 1,670
860 72 932 1,809
Wendy Gramm N/A N/A N/A 699
John Duncan 3,111 162 3,273 170
860 72 932 149
Ronnie Chan 1,295 213 1,508 357
N/A N/A N/A N/A

Norman Blake 2,809 266 3,074 449
330 142 472 409

Robert Belfer 2,479 162 2,641 5,900
860 72 932 6,414
John Mendelsohn 516 69 586 113
61 49 110 141
Jerome Meyer 852 178 1,030 247
N/A (resigned) N/A N/A N/A
John Urquhart 2,479 162 2,641 962
N/A N/A N/A N/A
Lord Wakeham 1,472 208 1,680 149
413 119 532 115
Herbert Winokur, Jr. 2,479 162 2,641 170
860 72 932 149
Paulo V. Ferraz Pereira 140 53 193 39
0 45 45 74
Frank Savage 140 31 170 46
0 49 49 65

Miscellaneous

Liability insurance was provided to directors with a maximum indemnification of $300
million for sums that they become legally obligated to pay for claims made because of a
wrongful act for which Enron does not provide reimbursement. Directors were also provided

1780 The deferral account balances are reflected as of June 30, 2000, and June 30, 2001.
The top number is the value as of June 30, 2000; the bottom number is the value as of June 30,
2001. The account balance reflects combined balances under the 1994 Deferral Plan, 1985

Deferral Plan and Director’s Deferral Plans.

590


=== PAGE 619 ===
coverage in the case of an accident resulting in death on a company aircraft and could participate
in Enron’s matching gift program under which Enron would match charitable contributions by

employees.

591

=== PAGE 620 ===
C. Discussion of Specific Issues
1. Nonqualified deferred compensation plans
Present law

In general

Deferred compensation occurs when the payment of compensation is deferred for more
than a short period after the compensation is earned (i.e., the time when the services giving rise
to the compensation are performed). Payment is generally deferred until some specified event,
such as the individual’s retirement, death, disability, or other termination of service, or until a
specified time in the future. Nonqualified deferred compensation plans do not receive the
favored tax treatment afforded to qualified retirements plans under the Code.!7*"

ERISA contains exemptions from its requirements for certain nonqualified deferred
compensation arrangements. Most nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements are
designed to fall within these ERISA exemptions.

A “top-hat plan” is the term generally used for certain nonqualified deferred
compensation plans that are exempt from most ERISA requirements. The ERISA exemption
applies to a plan that is unfunded and is maintained by an employer primarily for the purpose of
providing deferred compensation for a select group of management or highly compensated
employees. ERISA does not provide statutory definitions of “select group,” “management,” or
“highly compensated employees,” and the Department of Labor has not issued regulations
defining these terms.!”°? Employees sometimes claim ERISA protection (such as vesting or
funding) for benefits under a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. However, most
nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements are intended to fall under the top-hat
exemption.

A top-hat plan is exempt from the ERISA requirements relating to participation and
vesting, funding, and fiduciary responsibility.” A top-hat plan is not exempt from the
reporting and disclosure requirements or the administration and enforcement provisions under
ERISA. However, under Department of Labor regulations, the reporting and disclosure
requirements are satisfied by (1) a one-time filing with the Secretary of Labor of a statement that
includes the name and address of the employer, the employer’s tax identification number, a
declaration that the employer maintains a plan or plans primarily for the purpose of providing

1781 This favorable treatment includes: (1) a current deduction for the employer’s
contributions; (2) assets of the plan set aside in a trust for the exclusive benefit of the employees;
(3) tax-exempt status of the trust; and (4) no income inclusion by employees until distributions
are received (i.e., constructive receipt does not apply).

1782 The Code definition of “highly compensated employee” (sec. 414(q)) has not been
applied for this purpose.

1783 ERISA secs. 201(2), 301(a)(3), and 401 (a)(1).

592

=== PAGE 621 ===
deferred compensation for a select group of management or highly compensated employees, and
a statement of the number of such plans and the number of employees in each, and (2) providing
plan documents, if any, to the Secretary of Labor upon request.!7*

Types of nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements

Nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements are contractual arrangements between
the employer and the employee, or employees, covered by the arrangement. Such arrangements
are structured in whatever form achieves the goals of the parties; as a result, they vary greatly in
design. Considerations that may affect the structure of the arrangement are the current and future
income needs of the employee, the desired tax treatment of deferred amounts, and the desire for
assurance that deferred amounts will in fact be paid.

In the simplest form, a nonqualified deferred compensation arrangement is merely an
unsecured, unfunded promise to pay a stated dollar amount at some point in the future.

’ However, in most cases, such a simple arrangement does not meet the needs of the parties to the
arrangement; thus, the typical nonqualified defined compensation arrangement is more
complicated and may involve a funding vehicle or other mechanism to provide security to the
employee.

Some nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements are structured as formal plans
with formal governing documents. In such cases, the plan generally specifies the employees
covered by the plan. In other cases, nonqualified deferred compensation may be provided for

under the terms of an individual’s employment contract and apply only to that particular
individual.

A nonqualified deferred compensation arrangement may provide for the deferral of base
compensation (i.e., salary), incentive compensation (e.g., commissions or bonuses), or
supplemental compensation. The arrangement may permit the employee to elect, such as on an
annual basis, whether to defer compensation or to receive it currently, similar to a salary
reduction or cash-or-deferred arrangement under a qualified employer plan. Alternatively, the
arrangement may provide for mandatory deferral of compensation. !”*°

A nonqualified deferred compensation arrangement may be structured as an account for
the employee (similar to a defined contribution or individual account plan) or may provide for
specified benefits to be paid to the employee (similar to a defined benefit pension plan). Under
an account structure, depending on whether the arrangement is unfunded or funded, a
hypothetical or actual account is maintained for the employee, to which specified contributions
and earnings are credited. The benefits to which the employee is entitled are based on the
amount in the account. Under a defined benefit structure, the terms of the nonqualified
arrangement specify the amount of benefits (or formula for determining benefits) to be paid to
the employee.

1784 99 CFR 2520.104-23.

1785 Such plans are discussed in Part IL.A., above.

593

=== PAGE 622 ===
Timing of income inclusion for the individual -- in general

The determination of when amounts deferred under a nonqualified deferred compensation
arrangement are includible in the gross income of the individual earning the compensation
depends on the facts and circumstances of the arrangement. A variety of tax principles and Code
provisions may be relevant in making this determination, including the doctrine of constructive
receipt, the economic benefit doctrine,'” the provisions of section 83 relating generally to
transfers of property in connection with the performance of services, and provisions relating
specifically to nonexempt employee trusts and nonqualified annuities.'7°”

The following general rules regarding the taxation of nonqualified deferred compensation
result from these provisions. In general, the time for income inclusion of nonqualified deferred
compensation depends on whether the arrangement is unfunded or funded. If the arrangement is
unfunded, then the compensation is generally includible in income when it is actually or
constructively received (i.e., when it is paid or otherwise made available). If the arrangement is
funded, then income is includible for the year in which the individual’s rights are transferable or
not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture.

Timing of income inclusion under an unfunded arrangement
In general

As mentioned above, in the case of an unfunded nonqualified deferred compensation
arrangement, amounts are includible in gross income when the amount is actually or
constructively received.

An amount is constructively received if it is credited to an individual’s account, set apart,
or otherwise made available to the individual so that he or she can draw on it at any time, even if
the individual has not actually received the income.!7** Income is not constructively received if
there is a substantial limitation or restriction on the individual’s ability to withdraw it. A
requirement that the individual provide advance notice in order to withdraw (or receive) the
income is not considered a substantial limitation on the ability to withdraw it. However, a
requirement that the individual relinquish a valuable right in order to withdraw the income is a
substantial limitation.

1786 See, e.g., Sproull v. Commissioner, 16 T.C. 244 (1951), aff'd per curiam, 194 F.2d
541 (6th Cir. 1952); Rev. Rul. 60-31, 1960-1 C.B. 174.

187 Secs. 402(b) and 403(c). For a detailed discussion of the background of the taxation
of nonqualified deferred compensation, see Joint Committee on Taxation, Present Law and

Background Relating to Executive Compensation (JCX-29-02), April 7, 2002.

1788 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.451-2(a).

594

=== PAGE 623 ===
For years before 1982, the constructive receipt doctrine applied to amounts payable under
a qualified retirement plan.'”®° Various IRS revenue rulings held that amounts held within a
qualified retirement plan were not constructively received if, in order to receive a distribution,
the participant was required to discontinue participation in the plan (either permanently or for a
period of at least six months), forfeit a portion of his or her benefits, or lose past service credits
or job retention rights in the case of reemployment.

A variety of methods are used under nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements to
provide some flexibility to individuals covered by the arrangement in obtaining distributions
while attempting to avoid constructive receipt. For example, nonqualified deferred
compensation arrangements frequently provide that distributions can be made in the event of
financial hardship. Another technique sometimes used is to provide that the employer, plan
administrative committee, or similar body can make distributions in its sole discretion. Another
mechanism is to provide that withdrawals can be made at any time, but that a portion of the
amount withdrawn, such as 10 percent, is forfeited to the employer if the distribution is made
before some stated time or event. Other ways to try to avoid constructive receipt may also be
used.

Subsequent elections

While it is generally accepted that, to avoid constructive receipt, the election to defer
compensation must be made before the performance of services giving rise to the compensation,
the required timing of subsequent elections to avoid constructive receipt is unclear. Revenue
Procedure 71-19 sets guidelines for obtaining an advance ruling from the IRS regarding the
application of the doctrine of constructive receipt to unfunded nonqualified deferred
compensation arrangements.'””° Under the revenue procedure, a ruling letter will be issued only
if the plan meets certain requirements. If the plan provides for an election to defer payment of .
compensation, such election must be made before the beginning of the period of service for
which the compensation is payable, regardless of the existence in the plan of forfeiture
provisions. In addition, if any elections, other than the initial election may be made by an
employee subsequent to the beginning of the service period (i.e., a “subsequent election”), the
plan must set forth substantial forfeiture provisions that must remain in effect throughout the
entire period of deferral.'””’ Revenue Procedure 92-65 amplified Revenue Procedure 71-19 and
clarified that the period of service is generally the employee’s taxable year for cash basis,
calendar year taxpayers, with exceptions for new plans and new participants in existing plans.”

1789 Before 1982, amounts were includible in income when distributed or made available.
Since 1982, qualified retirement plan benefits are includible in income when distributed.

1790 1971-1 C.B. 698, amplified by Rev. Proc. 92-65, 1992-2 C.B. 428.

171 Revenue Procedure 71-19 provides that a substantial forfeiture provision will not be
considered to exist unless its condition imposes upon the employee a significant limitation or
duty which will require a meaningful effort on the part of the employee to fulfill and there is a
definite possibility that the event which will cause the forfeiture could occur.

1792 Rey, Proc. 92-65, 1992-2 C.B. 428.

595

=== PAGE 624 ===
Revenue Procedure 92-65 further provides that, for an advance ruling, the plan must define the
time and method for payment of deferred compensation for each payment event and also states
that a plan may provide for the payment of benefits in the case of an unforeseeable
emergency.!””° Courts have sometimes taken a more lenient approach than the IRS ruling
position in allowing subsequent elections.

Various courts that have dealt with the issue of subsequent elections have held that a
subsequent election to change the timing or manner of payment of deferred compensation does
not result in constructive receipt. Because each decision is fact specific, there is no case which
can be cited for the rule that, unequivocally, constructive receipt does not result from the making
of a subsequent election. While the holding of each case legally applies only to its specific facts,
there are several cases that are principally cited for support of permitting subsequent elections
without triggering constructive receipt.

In Veit v. Commissioner (known as “Veit I’), a subsequent election made after the
performance of services was complete did not result in constructive receipt.!7"4 At the time of
the subsequent election, however, the amount due was not ascertainable. Additionally, the
election was bilateral and was mutually beneficial to both the employer and the employee. In
Commissioner v. Oates, constructive receipt did not apply when the taxpayer was given the right
to elect to receive payments as provided in an original contract or to have them paid in monthly
installments over a period not to exceed 15 years.'”° While all services necessary to earn the
payments had been performed, the final amount to be paid was not determinative. Veit J and
Oates are relied upon by taxpayers for the position that constructive receipt does not result when
a subsequent election is made before payment is due and the amount of compensation to be paid
is ascertainable.'”°

Taxpayers also rely on other decisions for the position that subsequent elections do not
result in constructive receipt. In Martin v. Commissioner, a change in the payment schedule did
not result in constructive receipt.!7°” In Martin, however, the election to receive either a lump-
sum distribution or installment payments could only be made before the amounts became due
and fully ascertainable. In Veit v. Commissioner (known as “Veit IT’), a subsequent election

1793 The other requirements for an advance ruling are that the plan must provide that
participants have the status of general unsecured creditors of the employer and that the plan
consitiutes a mere promise by the employer to make benefit payments in the future. If the plan
refers to a trust, it must conform to the terms of Revenue Procedure 92-64, 1992-2 C.B. 422,
modified in part by Notice 2000-56, 2000-2 C.B. 393.

1794 Veit vy. Commissioner, 8 T.C. 809 (1947).
1795 Commissioner v. Oates, 207 F.2d 700 (7" Cir. 1953).
1796 The IRS acquiesced in both Veit J and Oates.

1791 artin v. Commissioner, 96 T.C. 814 (1991).

596

=== PAGE 625 ===
made after the amount of pavaneas was determinable, but before payment was due, did not result
in constructive receipt.!” In Veit IT, the subsequent election was bilaterally negotiated.

Even though the IRS has attempted to enforce its position on constructive receipt, it
appears that courts generally have been hesitant to apply the doctrine of constructive receipt.
Many practitioners rely on case law for the position that subsequent elections to change the
timing and manner of payment do not result in constructive receipt. It is not uncommon for
plans to allow participants to make some type of subsequent election to change the time or
manner of payment.

Income inclusion under a funded arrangement

As stated above, if a nonqualified deferred compensation arrangement is funded, then
income is includible for the year in which the individual’s rights are transferable or not subject to
a substantial risk of forfeiture. An arrangement is considered funded if there has been a transfer
of property under section 83. Under that section, a transfer of property occurs when a person
acquires a beneficial ownership interest in such property.'””

Under section 83, the excess of the fair market value of property received in connection
with the performance of services over the amount, if any, paid for the property is includible in
the income of the person performing the services. Income is generally includible for the year in
which the service provider’s right to the property is either transferable or is not subject to a
substantial risk of forfeiture. The amount includible in income is based on the fair market value
of the property at that time. 18°

Section 83 applies to a transfer of property to any service provider; its application is not
limited to employees or even to individuals. A transfer of property occurs for purposes of
section 83 when a person acquires a beneficial ownership interest in such property.

The term “property” is defined very broadly for purposes of section 83.'8°! Property
includes real and personal property other than money or an unfunded and unsecured promise to

1798 Veit vy. Commissioner, 8 T.C.M. 919 (1949).

1799 The application of section 83 to a funded nonqualified deferred compensation
arrangement is based in part on the broad scope of section 83 (i.e., section 83 applies to any
transfer of property in connection with the performance of services) and the broad definition of
property under section 83. Depending on the design of a particular nonqualified deferred
compensation arrangement (e.g., if it covers only employees), either the economic benefit
doctrine or Code provisions dealing with nonexempt employee trusts and nonqualified annuities
may be relevant as legal authority for this tax treatment in addition to section 83.

1800 Under a special rule, if property is either nontransferable or is subject to a substantial
risk of forfeiture when transferred, the service provider may elect within 30 days to apply
section 83 as of the time of the transfer.

1801 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.83-3(e). This definition in part reflects previous IRS rulings on
nonqualified deferred compensation.

597

=== PAGE 626 ===
pay money in the future. Property also includes a beneficial interest in assets (including money)
that are transferred or set aside from claims of the creditors of the transferor, for example, in a
trust or escrow account. Accordingly, if, in connection with the performance of services, vested
contributions are made to a trust on an individual’s behalf and the trust assets may be used solely
to provide future payments to the individual, the payment of the contributions to the trust
constitutes a transfer of property to the individual that is taxable under section 83,180

Property is subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture if the individual’s right to the
property is conditioned on the future performance of substantial services (such as full-time
services for two years or more) or on the nonperformance of services (such as a noncompete
requirement). In addition, a substantial risk of forfeiture exists if the right to the property is
subject to a condition other than the performance of services and there is a substantial possibility
that the property will be forfeited if the condition does not occur.'8 Under a special rule,
property is considered to be subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture if sale of the property at a
profit could subject the person to suit under section 16(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
(relating to short-swing profits).

Risks that do not fall within this legal definition, such as the risk that the property will
decline in value, do not result in a substantial risk of forfeiture. Whether a substantial risk of
forfeiture exists depends on the facts and circumstances, including whether the service
requirement or other condition will in fact be enforced. Property that is subject to a substantial
risk of forfeiture is referred to as nonvested property; property that is not (or is no longer) subject
to a substantial risk of forfeiture is referred to as vested property.

Property is considered transferable if a person can transfer his or her interest in the
property to anyone other than the transferor from whom the property was received. Property is
not considered transferable if the transferee’s rights in the property are subject to a substantial
risk of forfeiture. A temporary restriction on the transferability of property (called a “lapse”
restriction) is disregarded in determining the value of the property for purposes of section 83. A
permanent restriction on the transferability of property (a “nonlapse” restriction) is taken into
account in determining the value of the property.

1802 Yn the case of a transfer of a life insurance contract, retirement income contract,
endowment contract, or other contract providing life insurance protection, only the cash
surrender value is considered to be property. Where rights in a contract providing life insurance
protection are substantially nonvested, the cost of the current life insurance protection thereunder
(i.e., the reasonable net premium cost as determined by the Commissioner) is includible in
income.

1803 For example, if contributions are made to a trust exclusively for the purpose of
reimbursing employees for education expenses, but reimbursement is available only if an
employee takes a course and earns a passing grade, the employee’s interest in the trust is subject
to a substantial risk of forfeiture until he or she takes and passes a course.

598

=== PAGE 627 ===
Section 132 of the Revenue Act of 1978

Section 132 of the Revenue Act of 1978'8™ was enacted in response to proposed
Treasury regulations published in the Federal Register for February 3, 1978.'8° These
regulations provided that, if a payment of an amount of a taxpayer’s compensation is, at the
taxpayer’s option, deferred to a taxable year later than that in which such amount would have
been payable but for the taxpayer’s exercise of such option, the amount is treated as received by
the taxpayer in such earlier taxable year.'® Section 132 of the Revenue Act of 1978 provides
that the taxable year of inclusion in gross income of any amount covered by a private deferred
compensation plan is determined in accordance with the principles set forth in regulations,

rulings, and judicial decisions relating to deferred compensation which were in effect on
February 1, 1978.

The term, “private deferred compensation plan” means a plan, agreement, or arrangement
under which the person for whom service is performed is not a State or a tax-exempt
organization and under which the payment or otherwise making available of compensation is
deferred. However, the provision does not apply to certain employer-provided retirement
arrangements (e.g., a qualified retirement plan), a transfer of property under section 83, or an
arrangement that includes a nonexempt employees trust under section 402(b). Section 132 of the
Revenue Act of 1978 was not intended to restrict judicial interpretation of the law relating to the
proper tax treatment of deferred compensation or interfere with judicial determinations of what
principles of law apply in determining the timing of income inclusion.

Attempts to provide security for nonqualified deferred compensation
In general

Because amounts deferred that are funded are includible in gross income in the year the
amount is transferable or is no longer subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture, funded
arrangements can result in the imposition of tax even when no amount is actually received. For
example, suppose a nonqualified deferred compensation plan provides that an employer will pay
an employee (or the employee’s beneficiary) $500,000 when the employee attains age 55 or dies.
Further suppose that the plan is funded and provides that the employee’s right to the $500,000
vests after five years of employment. Because the arrangement is funded, the employee must
include the present value of $500,000 in income after he or she completes five years of
employment, even if that is many years before the employee attains age 55. Given this type of
result, individuals covered under nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements typically
prefer for such arrangements not to be funded for tax purposes.

Nevertheless, such individuals are often interested in providing some security with
respect to payment of the deferred compensation. Unfunded status presents the risk that the

1804 Dub. L. No. 95-600 (1978).

1805 Drop. Treas. Reg. 1.61-16, 43 Fed. Reg. 4638 (1978).

1806 Id.

599

=== PAGE 628 ===
employee will not receive his or her deferred compensation payments when due.'®” Thus, a goal
of many plans is to maximize the security that can be provided for the individual without
incurring current income tax consequences, 1.€., without having the arrangement being
considered funded for tax purposes. Various arrangements have been developed in an effort to
provide employees with security for nonqualified deferred compensation, while still allowing
deferral of income inclusion.

Rabbi trusts

A “rabbi trust” is a trust or other fund established by the employer to hold assets from
which nonqualified deferred compensation payments will be made.'®® The trust or fund is
generally irrevocable!®? and. does not permit the employer to use the assets for purposes other
than to provide nonqualified deferred compensation. However, the terms of the trust or fund
provide that the assets are subject to the claims of the employer’s creditors in the case of
bankruptcy or insolvency.

As discussed above, for purposes of section 83, property includes a beneficial interest in
assets set aside from the claims of creditors, such as in a trust or fund, but does not include an
unfunded and unsecured promise to pay money in the future. In the case of a rabbi trust, terms
providing that the assets are subject to the claims of creditors of the employer in the case of
bankruptcy or insolvency have been the basis for the conclusion that the creation of a rabbi trust
does not cause the related nonqualified deferred compensation arrangement to be funded for
income tax purposes.'*!° As a result, no amount is currently included in the income of a
beneficiary of a rabbi trust by reason of the rabbi trust; income inclusion occurs as the deferred
compensation is paid or made available.

The IRS has issued guidance setting forth model rabbi trust provisions.’*!! Revenue
Procedure 92-64 provides a safe harbor for taxpayers who adopt and maintain grantor trusts in
connection with unfunded deferred compensation arrangements. The model trust language
requires that the trust provide that all assets of the trust are subject to the claims of the general
creditors of the company in the event of the company’s insolvency or bankruptcy.

1807 This risk is not a substantial risk of forfeiture as defined under section 83.

1808 | rabbi trust is generally a grantor trust of the employer for tax purposes, so trust
earnings are treated as income to the employer.

1809 Some trusts provide that the trust is funded or irrevocable only upon the occurrence
of acertain events, such as a change in control of the employer.

1810 This conclusion was first provided in a 1980 private ruling issued by the IRS with
respect to an arrangement covering a rabbi; hence the popular name “rabbi trust.” Priv. Ltr. Rul.
8113107 (Dec. 31, 1980).

1811 Rey, Proc. 92-64, 1992-2 C.B. 422, modified in part by Notice 2000-56, 2000-2
CB. 393.

600

=== PAGE 629 ===
Since the concept of a rabbi trust was developed, other techniques have been developed
that attempt to protect the assets from creditors despite the terms of the trust. For example, the
trust or fund may be located in a foreign jurisdiction, making it difficult or impossible for
creditors to reach the assets. In such a case, the existence of the assets may be unknown or the
assets may be protected from creditors under the laws of the jurisdiction where the trust is
located.

Secular trusts

In contrast to a rabbi trust, a “secular” trust is a trust established by an employer
exclusively for the purpose of providing nonqualified deferred compensation; assets are not
subject to claims of creditors. A secular trust constitutes a funding of a nonqualified deferred
compensation arrangement, so that vested amounts are includible in income by the employees
(i.e., such amounts are not tax-deferred).'*!” A secular trust provides security for the employees,
but also causes current taxation. In some cases, under the terms of the nonqualified deferred
compensation arrangement, the employer pays the taxes attributable to the deferred
compensation by grossing up the employees’ current compensation by a corresponding amount.

Other forms of security

Other methods are sometimes used in an attempt to provide employees with security that
deferred compensation payments will be made when due, such as third party guarantees, letters
of credit, and surety bonds. There is little specific guidance as to how these arrangements should
be treated for tax purposes. In addition, the tax treatment depends on the facts of the particular
arrangement.

Timing of employer income tax deduction

Special statutory provisions govern the timing of the deduction for nonqualified deferred
compensation, regardless of whether the arrangement covers employees or nonemployees and
regardless of whether the arrangement is funded or unfunded.'*!’ Under these provisions, the
amount of nonqualified deferred compensation that is includible in the income of the individual
performing services is deductible by the service recipient for the taxable year in which the
amount is includible in the individual’s income.

Payroll taxes and wage reporting
In general

In the case of an employee, nonqualified deferred compensation is generally considered
wages both for purposes of income tax withholding and for purposes of taxes under the Federal
Insurance Contributions Act (“FICA”), consisting of social security tax and Medicare tax.

1812 A secular trust is generally structured as a separate entity for tax purposes, and
earnings are includible in the income of the trust.

1813 Secs. 404(a)(5), (b) and (d) and sec. 83(h).

601

=== PAGE 630 ===
However, the income tax withholding rules and social security and Medicare tax rules that apply
to nonqualified deferred compensation are not the same.

Income tax withholding

Nonqualified deferred compensation is generally subject to income tax withholding at the
time it is includible in the employee’s income as discussed above. In addition, such amounts
must be reported as wages on a Form W-2. Income tax withholding and Form W-2 reporting are
required even if the employee has already terminated employment. For example, if nonqualified
deferred compensation is includible in income only as payments are made after retirement,
income taxes must be withheld from the payments and the payments must be reported on a
Form W-2.

Income tax withholding and Form W-2 reporting are required when amounts are
includible in income even if no actual payments are made to the employee. For example, if
nonqualified deferred compensation is provided by means of vested contributions to a funded
arrangement, the amount of the contributions is includible in the employee’s income and is
subject to income tax withholding!®"* and Form W-2 reporting. Additional income tax
withholding and reporting may be required when payments are made from the funded
arrangement to the extent a portion of the payments are includible in income (i.e., amounts in
excess of the employee’s basis). Such amounts are subject to the income tax withholding rules
that apply to pensions and are reported on a Form 1099R.

Generally, the employer is responsible for income tax withholding and Form W-2
reporting (or Form 1099R, if applicable) with respect to nonqualified deferred compensation.
However, if nonqualified deferred compensation payments are made by a third party, such as the
trustee of a trust, and are not under the control of the employer, the payor is responsibie for
income tax withholding and reporting.

Social security and Medicare taxes

The Code provides special rules for applying social security and Medicare taxes to
nonqualified deferred compensation. In general, nonqualified deferred compensation is subject
to social security and Medicare tax when it is earned (i.e., when services are performed), unless
the nonqualified deferred compensation is subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. If
nonqualified deferred compensation is subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture, it is subject to
social security and Medicare tax when the risk of forfeiture is removed (i.e., when the right to the
nonqualified deferred compensation vests). This treatment is not affected by whether the
arrangement is funded or unfunded, which, as described above, is relevant in determining when
amounts are includible in income (and subject to income tax withholding). Because nonqualified
deferred compensation arrangements generally cover only highly paid employees, the other
compensation paid to the employee during the year generally exceeds the social security wage

1814 The required income tax withholding is accomplished by withholding income taxes
from other wages paid to the employee in the same year.

602

=== PAGE 631 ===
base. In that case, nonqualified deferred compensation amounts are subject only to Medicare
tax.

Factual Background
Executive deferral programs in general

In recent years, Enron had two principal active deferral plans: the Enron Corp. 1994
Deferral Plan (the “1994 Deferral Plan”) and the 1998 Enron Expat Services, Inc. Deferral Plan
(the “Expat Deferral Plan”). The 1994 Deferral Plan was the principal deferral plan used by
Enron. The 1994 Deferral Plan and the Expat Deferral Plan had almost identical terms and
features, with the principal difference that the Expat Deferral Plan was used for employees of
Enron Expat Services Inc., while the 1994 Deferral Plan was used for all other employees.
Enron also had several older deferral plans, which did not allow current deferrals, but pursuant to
which participants had made deferrals in previous years. In addition, Enron had a Project
Participation Plan for international developers, which was put in place in the early 1990’s. The
Project Participation Plan was terminated December 31, 2000, except that payments could be
made after that date with respect to awards made before such date. The Project Participation
Plan allowed participants to defer receipt of payments that would otherwise be made.'*!°

Nonqualified deferred compensation was a major component of executive compensation
for Enron. Documents provided by Enron show the approximate amounts deferred under all
deferred compensation plans for the top-paid 200 employees for the years 1998-2001.'8!
Amounts deferred in these years are shown in the following table.

Table 21.-Amounts Deferred by Top-Paid 200 Employees 1998-2001

Amounts Deferred Under All Deferred |
Compensation Plans for the Top-200
Year (millions of dollars)
1998 $13.3
1999 19.7
2000 67.0817
2001 54.4

1994 Enron Corp. Deferral Plan
In general/background

Enron adopted the Enron Corp. 1994 Deferral Plan effective January 1, 1994. The stated
purpose of the Plan is to allow key employees and outside directors of Enron Corp. to reduce
current compensation and thereby reduce their current taxable income, earn an attractive, tax-free
rate of growth on monies deferred, and accumulate funds on a tax-favored basis which can be

1815 The Project Participation Plan is discussed in Part III.B.3., above.

1816 BC 000599639 - EC 000599654(1998); EC 000599620 - EC 000599638 (1999);
EC 001872078 - EC 001872081 (2000); and EC 000599599 - EC 000599619 (2001).

603

=== PAGE 632 ===
used for retirement planning or other future financial objectives. The summary of the 1994
Deferral Plan for participants states that the “Plan provides you with an opportunity to delay
payment of federal and state income taxes, and earn tax-deferred returns on your deferrals. You
have the flexibility of choosing an investment strategy and payment schedule to meet your
financial needs.”'*!®

Participation in the 1994 Deferral Plan was originally offered to approximately 300
executives and key employees.'*!? Approximately 100 individuals'®”° elected to defer 1994
compensation, including salary, bonus, and long-term incentive for total deferrals of $3 million
in 1994.'*?! Enron anticipated offering the same deferral opportunity for seven consecutive
years, subject to further renewal after that time, according to the value of the 1994 Deferral
Plan.!®” To provide a level of security to executives and an asset to cover Enron’s future
payment liabilities, a rabbi trust was approved for the 1994 Deferral Plan.'®* The rabbi trust is
discussed below in further detail.

Many executives participated in Enron’s deferral programs. Information provided by
Enron shows that for the years 1999-2001, there were approximately 340 participants in the 1994
Deferral Plan.'®* As of December 2000, there were approximately 295 participants in the 1994
Deferral Plan, with account balances totaling $153.4 million. As of December 2001, there were
approximately 304 participants in the 1994 Deferral Plan, with account balances totaling
approximately $51.6 million. The decrease in account balances was principally due to the
decline in the value of Enron Stock and the accelerated distributions, discussed below, that were
made immediately preceding Enron’s bankruptcy filing.

The 1994 Deferral Plan was amended and restated several times. The original plan, after
being amended seven times, was restated as of August 11, 1997. The 1994 Deferral Plan,

1817 According to the documents provided by Enron, in 2000, Mr. Lay deferred $32
million under the 1994 Deferral Plan in 2000. EC 001872080.

1818 Added Value for your Future (a participant brochure). EC 000768171.

1819 Dian Funding Conclusions and Recommendations prepared by Clark/Bardes, Inc.
EC 000768252.

1820 When the 1994 Deferral Plan filed notification of its effectiveness with the
Department of Labor, the plan covered 104 highly compensated employees.

1821 Bian Funding Conclusions and Recommendations prepared by Clark/Bardes, Inc.
EC 000768252. .

1822 Id.
1823 Id.

1824 EC 000768148.

604

=== PAGE 633 ===
restated as of August 11, 1997, was amended three times and was restated again as of October 6,
2000.!825 The 1994 Deferral Plan was amended August 14, 2001.'*°

In connection with Enron’s financial situation, the 1994 Deferral Plan was amended
November 28, 2001, to suspend deferrals under the Plan, effective at the end of business on
November 29, 2001, until such time that the Board of Directors removed such suspension.

Eligibility

Under the 1994 Deferral Plan, key management and highly compensated employees of
Enron, as determined by the Deferral Plan Committee,!®”’ and outside directors of Enron Corp.
and participating subsidiaries were eligible to be designated participants under the 1994 Deferral
Plan. The 1994 Deferral Plan allowed Enron to determine which executives would be eligible
for participation. Over time, Enron changed participation eligibility requirements.

For 2001, the following employees were eligible to participate in either the 1994 Deferral
Plan or the Expat Deferral Plan, whichever was applicable: (1) vice president level and above
employees of Enron Corp. or a participating subsidiary who were eligible for stock awards under
the Executive Long-Term Incentive program, on the executive pay structure (job level structure),
and on local payroll; and (2) lower than vice president level employees who were making current
(year 2000 for 2001 eligibility) deferrals under one of the plans.'® Enron believed that linking
deferral plan eligibility to job level and participation in another Enron-sponsored program was a

1825 This is the most recent version of the plan. In the October 6, 2000, restatement of
the 1994 Deferral Plan, certain amendments were made. On October 6, 2000, the Compensation
Committee approved a restatement of the 1994 Deferral Plan which included amendments to:

(1) clarify provisions relative to deferral of gains realized upon the exercise of options utilizing a
stock swap and the deferral of restricted stock that would otherwise be released; (2) provide
consistency with respect to Enron’s definition of retirement; (3) clarify current administrative
processes; and (4) eliminate a reference that the plan may be adopted by other employing
companies due to multiemployer trust issues.

1826 The 1994 Deferral Plan as restated October 6, 2000, was first amended August 14,
2001, to: (1) allow daily investment changes instead of only once a month; (2) allow participants
to make an election covering all future aggregate deferrals and to have the ability to change past
and future elections by submission of a revised payout election; and (3) allow participants the
ability to submit a beneficiary designation via an electronic process.

1827 The “Deferral Plan Committee” refers to the committee established under the 1994
Deferral Plan to administer the plan. The duties and authority of the Deferral Plan Committee
are discussed below.

1828 Ynteroffice memorandum from Executive Compensation Department to unspecified
distribution list regarding deferrals, dated October 12, 2000. EC2 000018424.

605

=== PAGE 634 ===
very straight-forward and thoughtful approach to determining the eligible group for executive
deferrals.'®

In the few years preceding the bankruptcy, the group of eligible participants had changed.
For 1999, employees with a September 15, 1998, salary of $130,000 or above, who were
employees of Enron Corp. or a participating subsidiary, were eligible to participate in the 1994
Deferral Plan.'®*° For 2000, there was a change in eligibility for the 1994 Deferral Plan. Each
business unit had the ability to select the executive and management employees who would be
eligible to participate. The number of eligible participants was determined based on the numbers
in each group that had been eligible to participate in the past at the advice of legal counsel. For
2000, all managing directors, executive vice presidents, business unit heads, and employees
participating in the Plan during 1999 were automatically eligible to participate. Up to 43
additional employees in a group could be selected to participate based on specified criteria. In
order to participate, an employee had to earn a minimum base salary of $120,000.

Regular deferrals

Under the 1994 Deferral Plan, a participant could defer up to 35 percent of base salary,
up to 100 percent of annual bonus payments and up to 100 percent of select long term incentive
payments. Prior to the Third Amendment to the 1994 Deferral Plan (as amended and restated
effective as of August 11, 1997) dated August 8, 2000, participants could defer only up to 25
percent of base salary. The minimum deferral for each category of compensation was $2,000 for
any deferral year.

Deferral elections were to be made in writing. Elections to defer compensation were
irrevocable and were required to be made prior to the first day of the calendar year in which the
compensation to be deferred was earned and payable.'% ' As discussed below, the 1994 Deferral
Plan also allowed for stock option deferral and restricted stock deferral for certain employees.
Enron could also make company deferral contributions on a participant’s behalf.

Under the 1994 Deferral Plan, Enron would establish a deferral account in the name of
each participant on its books and records. The account would carry the amount of the deferrals
made, plus any earnings thereon, as a liability of Enron to the participant. Participant materials
state that the account would be utilized solely as a device for the measurement and determination
of the amount to be paid to the participant pursuant to the Plan.

Participants could choose to have their deferrals treated as having been invested in two
types of investment accounts -- the Phantom Stock Account and the Flexible Deferral Account.
A percentage of deferred compensation could be allocated to either account or the entire deferral
could be allocated to only one account.

1829 Id.

1830 Tnteroffice memorandum from Corporate Compensation Department regarding 2000
deferrals, dated October 21, 1999. EC2 000018664.

1831 A special rule applied for deferral elections of new employees.

606

=== PAGE 635 ===
Deferrals invested in the Phantom Stock Account were treated as if the participant
purchased shares of Enron Corp. common stock at the closing price on the date of deferral.
Under the Plan, credits for dividends declared for Enron Corp. common stock would be made
quarterly to the Participant’s Phantom Stock Account Deferral Account, and would be
administered as though reinvested in Enron Corp. common stock.

During 1994 and 1995, deferrals into a participant’s Flexible Deferral Account earned a
fixed annual return of nine percent. Beginning in 1996 and thereafter, participants were allowed
to select investment funds for the crediting of earnings to their account balances, and returns on
Flexible Deferral Accounts were based on the performance of the participant’s investment
choices, less an administrative fee. Investment options were to include different levels of risk
and return such as growth, balanced asset and bond funds, and fixed interest accounts. In 1999,
in connection with a change to the Enron Savings Plan’s recordkeeper, the investment options
under the Flexible Deferral Account were changed to mirror those of the Enron Savings Plan.
For 2001, participants could allocate among 17 investment choices that mirrored funds available
in the Enron Savings Plan.'8? The account would be credited with cumulative appreciation
and/or depreciation based on the market price of chosen investments.

It appears that participants’ deferrals were not actually invested to match participants’
investment elections, but that participants’ investment elections may have been followed
generally in investing the assets of the rabbi trust associated with the 1994 Deferral Plan.
According to Enron, only initially did Enron direct investments to generally correspond with
participant elections.'®32 The investment of the trust’s assets is discussed in further detail below.
According to Enron’s summary of the 1994 Deferral Plan,'*** because of constructive receipt
rules, Enron could credit a participant deferral account with earnings that tracked a chosen mix
of investment funds, but the actual investments were required to be made by Enron Corp. or by
the Trustee appointed by Enron Corp. at the direction of Enron Corp.

A participant could not transfer balances between the Phantom Stock Account and the
Flexible Deferral Account, but could change investment choices within the Flexible Deferral
Account once each calendar month. The First Amendment to the 1994 Deferral Plan dated
August 14, 2001, allowed for daily changes in election choices instead of monthly changes.

1832 For 2001, the Flexible Deferral Account investment choices were: Stable Asset
Fund, Fidelity Balanced Fund, Fidelity Equity-Income Fund, Fidelity Growth & Income
Portfolio, Fidelity Magellan Fund, Fidelity Growth Company Fund, Fidelity OTC Portfolio,
Fidelity Overseas Fund, MSDW Institutional International Equity Fund, MSDW Institutional
Equity Fund Growth Portfolio, PIMCO Total Return Fund II, T. Rowe Price Small Cap Stock
Fund, Vanguard Index Trust 500, Vanguard Windsor II, Vanguard Conservative Growth
Portfolio, Vanguard Moderate Growth Portfolio, and Vanguard Growth Portfolio.

1833 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated December 20, 2002.

1834 BC? 000018443.

607

=== PAGE 636 ===
Under the 1994 Deferral Plan, within 120 days after the close of each plan year, each
participant was to be provided a statement setting forth the participant’s balance in the deferral
accounts.

Distributions

Distributions from the 1994 Deferral Plan could be made upon the participant’s
retirement, disability, death or termination of employment. The 1994 Deferral Plan provides
how retirement benefits, disability benefits, death benefits and termination benefits would be
triggered and paid.

The 1994 Deferral Plan originally provided that elections with respect to payment options
had to be made annually at the time the election to defer was made. Participants could elect to
receive payments in a lump sum or up to 15 annual installments. Payments from an account
could be received beginning the first quarter of the year following retirement, death, disability or
termination. Payment elections could be revised at any time, but would not be effective until one
full calendar year after receipt of the revised payment election form. Only one installment
payment option could apply at any given time, e.g., an employee could not elect to have certain
deferrals payable over 10 years and other deferrals payable over 15 years. If a participant was
terminated for cause, the participant would receive deferrals only, with no earnings, in a lump
sum during the first quarter of the year following termination.

The First Amendment to the 1994 Deferral Plan (as amended and restated October 6,
2000) dated August 14, 2001, changed the Plan to allow participants to make an election
covering all future aggregate deferrals, rather than requiring payment option elections to be made
annually, and to have the ability to change past and future elections by submission of a revised
payout schedule. The 1994 Deferral Plan provided specific rules for beneficiary designations
and the First Amendment allowed beneficiary designations by electronic processes.

In addition to distributions on account of retirement, death, disability or termination, the
1994 Deferral Plan allowed for hardship withdrawals. Participants were required to petition the
Deferral Plan Committee, described below, in writing for such distributions, which could be
granted, in the sole discretion of the Deferral Plan Committee, on account of unforeseeable
circumstances causing urgent and severe financial hardship for the participant. According to the
1994 Deferral Plan, the types of circumstances that usually met the criteria were accidents and
illness, large theft and fire loses, severe financial reversals, and large personal judgments. The
distribution amount was limited to a reasonable, necessary amount to eliminate the hardship.
The 1994 Deferral Plan was amended in 1996 to prohibit hardship distributions from the
Phantom Stock Account for participants subject to section 16(b) of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934.

For circumstances other than financial hardship, an accelerated withdrawal of all or a
portion of the account balance was also available, subject to the consent of the Deferral Plan
Committee. The accelerated distribution provision was added to the plan in the First
Amendment to the 1994 Deferral Plan (as restated effective August 11, 1997) dated October 13,
1997. Ifa participant elected an accelerated withdrawal, 10 percent of the elected distribution
amount was required to be forfeited and 90 percent of the elected distribution would be paid to

608

=== PAGE 637 ===
the participant. Upon such distribution, a participant would not be eligible to participate in the
1994 Deferral Plan for at least 36 months following the distribution. The account balance
distributed would be determined as of the last day of the month preceding the date on which the
Deferral Plan Committee received the written request of the participant.

Deferrals into the Phantom Stock Account would be paid out in shares of Enron Corp.
common stock, with the exception of pre-1998 deferrals, which would be paid out in cash unless
the participant signed a waiver to receive stock. The plan provides that the value of the shares,
and resulting payment amount, would be based on the closing price of Enron Corp. common
stock on the January 1 before the date of payment. Dividends would be credited to a
participant’s Phantom Stock Account and would be administered as if reinvested in Enron Corp.
common stock.

Payments from the Flexible Deferral Account would be made in cash over the payment
period selected. Earnings/losses would be applied to the Flexible Deferral Account during the
payout period, based upon the investment choices made. Earnings on the declining account
balance would be paid annually. Losses, if any, would be subtracted from the remaining account
balance, which could shorten the payment period. Payments would begin during the first quarter
of the year following the termination event.

Special purpose deferrals

The Second Amendment to the Enron 1994 Deferral Plan (as restated effected August 11,
1997) dated October 12, 1998, changed the Plan to allow participants to elect to make special
purpose deferrals beginning in 1999. Participants could receive special purpose deferral
payments while remaining actively employed. Special purpose deferral payments could be
received as soon as three years following the deferral in a lump sum or up to five annual
installments. Special purpose deferrals were intended to assist with anticipated expenses, such as
a child’s college expenses.

Taxes

Participant information states that Federal and State income taxes associated with
deferrals were not incurred until the receipt of payments. FICA and Medicare taxes on amounts
deferred were due at the time of deferral. Such amounts were said to be subtracted from
compensation that was not deferred.

Information supplied to the IRS by Enron states that, for all deferrals of compensation
made to the various plans, FICA tax was withheld at the time the deferral was made and
deposited along with other payroll taxes for the pay period in which the deferral was made.

Enron deferral contributions

The Second Amendment to the 1994 Deferral Plan (as restated effective August 11,
1997) dated October 12, 1998, allows for deferral contributions by Enron. Under the
amendment, Enron could make contributions on a participant’s behalf in any amount as Enron
determined in its sole discretion and to any investment account under the 1994 Deferral Plan.
Such contributions could be made on behalf of some participants to the exclusion of others, and

609

=== PAGE 638 ===
could vary among individual participants in amount and/or with respect to the investment
account in which they may be credited. Such Enron deferral contributions were said to be cash
bookkeeping credits made to the records of the 1994 Deferral Plan.

Documents obtained from the IRS show that, as part of one executive’s employment
agreement, Enron agreed to make contributions to the 1994 Deferral Plan in the amount of
$500,000 to be deposited each February 15th of calendar years 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003. It is
unclear to what extent Enron made deferral contributions on behalf of other employees.

Deferral of stock option gains and deferral of restricted stock

The 1994 Deferral Plan allowed for deferral of income attributable to stock options and
restricted stock. The Stock Option Deferral Account was established by the Fifth Amendment to
the 1994 Deferral Plan, dated December 10, 1996. The Restricted Stock Deferral Account was
established by the Sixth Amendment to the 1994 Deferral Plan, dated May 5, 1997.

Under the deferral of stock option gains program, participants designated by the Deferral
Plan Committee could make an advance written election to defer the receipt of shares of Enron
Corp. common stock from the exercise of a stock option granted under a stock plan sponsored by
Enron, when such exercise was made by means of a stock swap using shares owned by the
participant.'** The deferral election applied to the number of shares that the employee was due
to receive in addition to the shares exchanged in the stock for stock exercise.

In 2001, nonemployee directors and members of the Enron Executive and Policy
Committees were eligible to participate in the deferral of stock option gains program. An
election to defer stock was required to be made prior to the end of the tax year preceding the year
in which the option was exercised and at least six months prior to the exercise. The election was
irrevocable, remained in effect for all tax years subsequent to the year the election was made, and
remained in effect until to the Phantom Stock Account was to be paid out.

If an executive made a deferral election, Enron would credit share units to the Stock
Option Deferral Account under the 1994 Deferral Plan, to be payable in stock upon death,
disability, retirement or termination as elected by the executive (over a period of one to fifteen
years) instead of delivering shares to the executive upon exercise of the option. Credits for
dividends would be accrued in a separate account and paid in cash pursuant to the distribution
provisions under the 1994 Deferral Plan. Phantom stock units derived through deferral counted
for purposes of meeting Enron stock ownership requirements for executives. The tax issues
associated with this program are discussed below.

Under the deferral of restricted stock program, participants designated by the Committee
could make an advance written election to defer the receipt of shares of Enron Corp. common
stock to be released according to a grant of restricted shares under a stock plan sponsored by
Enron Corp. In 2001, nonemployee directors and executives who were current deferral plan
participants or who met criteria for deferral in accordance with ERISA regulations for top-hat

1835. Issues relating to stock-for-stock exercises are discussed in detail in Part ITI.C.2,
below.

610

=== PAGE 639 ===
plans, as determined by the Deferral Plan Committee, were eligible to participate in the deferral
of restricted stock program under the 1994 Deferral Plan. Eligible holders of shares of restricted
stock could make an advance election, in the nature of a deferred compensation election, prior to
the end of the tax year preceding the release date, and at least six months prior to release date, to
defer receipt of shares which would otherwise vest and be released. Instead of delivering shares
of restricted stock upon vesting, Enron would credit the value of such shares of restricted stock
to the participant’s Phantom Stock Account under the 1994 Deferral Plan, to be payable in shares
of Enron Corp. common stock upon death, disability retirement or termination, as selected by the
participant, over a period from one to fifteen years. Credits for dividends would be accrued in a
separate account and paid in cash pursuant to the distribution provisions under the 1994 Deferral
Plan.

Administration

According to the plan document, the 1994 Deferral Plan was to be administered by a
committee of not more than three people appointed by the Chief Executive Officer of Enron
(“Deferral Plan Committee”). The Deferral Plan Committee had the authority to make, amend,
interpret and enforce all appropriate rules and regulations for the administration of the 1994
Deferral Plan and decide or resolve any and all questions, including interpretations of the 1994
Deferral Plan. In addition to other enumerated powers, the Deferral Plan Committee had the
right, power, authority and duty to determine the amount, manner and time of payment of any
benefits under the 1994 Deferral Plan and to prescribe procedures to be followed in obtaining
benefits.

Effective October 26, 2001, Kenneth L. Lay appointed Lawrence Gregory (“Greg”)
Whalley to serve as the sole member of the Deferral Plan Committee. Mr. Whalley accepted the
appointment October 29, 2001. Even though eligible, Mr. Whalley was not a participant in the
1994 Deferral Plan. There is no record of a Deferral Plan Committee before October 2001.
Enron employees interviewed by Joint Committee staff said that an informal administrative
committee would be formed when an issue arose, which was infrequently. Informal committees
may have been composed of the head of Human Resources, compensation staff members, and
legal counsel.

Claims procedures

Under the 1994 Deferral Plan, any claim for benefits was required to be submitted to the
Deferral Plan Committee. The Deferral Plan Committee was responsible for deciding whether
such claim was within the scope provided by the 1994 Deferral Plan. Notice of a decision by the
Deferral Plan Committee with respect to a claim was required to be furnished to the claimant
within 90 days following the receipt of the claim. If a claim was wholly or partially denied,
notice was required to be in writing and worded in a manner to be understood by the claimant.

Rights of participants

The 1994 Deferral Plan provides that compensation deferred is part of the general assets
of Enron. Enron was not required to segregate, set aside or escrow compensation deferred, nor
earnings credited thereon. With respect to benefits payable under the 1994 Deferral Plan,

611

=== PAGE 640 ===
participants have the status of general creditors of Enron. Participants could look only to Enron
and its general assets for payment of their account balances.

Establishment of rabbi trust

Under the 1994 Deferral Plan, Enron, in its sole discretion, could acquire insurance
policies or other financial vehicles for the purpose of providing future Enron assets to meet its
anticipated liabilities under the 1994 Deferral Plan. Such policies or other investments would at
all times remain unrestricted general property and assets of Enron. Participants in the 1994
Deferral Plan would have no rights, other than as general creditors, with respect to such policies
or other acquired assets. As discussed below, Enron did acquire insurance policies on the lives
of certain participants in the 1994 Deferral Plan.

The 1994 Deferral Plan provides that, notwithstanding any other provision or
interpretation of the plan, Enron shall establish a trust in which to hold cash, insurance policies
or other assets to be used to make or reimburse Enron for payments to participants of the benefits
under the plan, provided that the trust assets shall at all times remain subject to the claims of
general creditors of Enron in the event of Enron’s insolvency. The 1994 Deferral Plan further
provides that Enron, and not the trust, shall be liable for paying the benefits under the 1994
Deferral Plan. On April 5, 1994, Enron Corp. established an irrevocable rabbi trust for the
executive nonqualified deferred compensation program. 86 The provisions of the trust document
were incorporated in the 1994 Deferral Plan.

The use of variable life insurance products was approved for investment of trust assets,
because such products provided tax-free buildup of earnings.'**” Upon the establishment of the
trust, 100 trust-owned life insurance (“TOLI’) policies were purchased through Cigna on the
lives of 100 participants in the Plan. It was also approved that the assets for the 1992 Deferral
Plan, which credited deferrals with Enron’s mid-term cost of capital, be included in the rabbi
trust and used to purchase life insurance. '*%8
Documents obtained from Enron!*” show that a new grantor trust agreement was entered
into with Wachovia Bank, N.A. as trustee dated January 1, 1999.'**° Even though approved by

1836 Ty response to questions asked by the Joint Committee staff, Enron responded that
the trust was established April 5, 1995. This appears to have been an error; because several
documents provided by Enron state that the trust was established in 1994.

1837 Plan Funding Conclusions and Recommendations prepared by Clark/Bardes, Inc.
EC 000768252.

1838 py

1839 Trust under the Enron Corp. 1994 Deferral Plan. EC2 000030938.

1840 The Trust Agreement dated January 1, 1999, was actually executed in August 2000.
The minutes of the August 7, 2000, Compensation Committee meeting show that executive

compensation staff, in-house and outside legal advisors, and trust experts from Wachovia
conducted a thorough review of the trust document dated April 5, 1994, to make sure that it

612

=== PAGE 641 ===
the Compensation Committee, members of the Compensation Committee interviewed by the
Joint Committee staff did not know whether Enron had such a trust.

The January 1, 1999, trust replaced the prior trust dated April 5, 1994, and the assets from
the prior trust were transferred to the 1999 trust. 1841 The 1999 trust was established with $1,000,
plus the transfer of the assets from the 1994 trust.'*? Enron could make additional deposits of
assets, but according to Enron, other than the contribution in 1994 of the trust-owned life
insurance policies, no additional funding other than a pay-as-you go mechanism was established
(i.e., current deferrals funded current benefit obligations).'* According to Enron, the assets of

incorporated sufficient protection to plan participants in the event of a change in control. Several
changes were recommended and were incorporated into a replacement trust document. The new
trust included several changes relating to the following areas: (1) the establishment and funding
of a new trust (under the new trust, all income received by the trust could be returned to Enron
upon request at any time prior to.a change in control); (2) the trustee’s responsibility regarding
payments (the new trust provides a process for confirming the insolvency or alleged insolvency
of Enron, and for tax or payment claims handling); (3) provisions regarding payments if a short
fall of the trust assets occurs (the new trust described how payments would be handled in the
event of a short fall of trust assets that could result if Enron were to become insolvent); (4)
insurance contracts to provide an irrevocable trust (the new trust confirmed the trustee as owner
of life insurance policies, and beneficiary of death proceeds); and (5) provisions regarding the
resignation and removal of the trustee (the new trust allowed for removal or termination of the
trustee with majority consent of participants following a change in control). EC 000101470.

1841 The Third Amendment to the 1994 Deferral Plan (as amended and restated effective
as of August 11, 1997) dated August 8, 2000, amended the plan to incorporate provisions of the
new trust document in order to link the replacement trust to the 1994 Deferral Plan.

1842 Minutes from the February 12, 1996, Compensation Committee meeting report that
the deconsolidation of Enron Oil & Gas (“EOG”) in December 1995, resulted in EOG
establishing a 1996 Oil & Gas Deferral Plan which included the assumption of deferral plan
liabilities for active participants. It was anticipated that EOG would assume the deferred
compensation obligations attributable to EOG and that there would be a separation of the trust
under the 1994 Deferral Plan into an Enron trust and an EOG trust. The minutes note that as of
December 31, 1995, the assets to be placed in the EOG trust equaled $2.085 million, with all
trust assets totaling $11.480 million. Evidently, the transfer did not take place when originally
contemplated, as the minutes of the May 3, 1999, meeting of Compensation Committee state that
they approved, for recommendation to the Board, a proposed amendment to the 1994 Deferral
Plan to allow the transfer of assets to the EOG trust. It is unclear whether such transfer
eventually took place.

1843 7 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated December 20, 2002.

613

=== PAGE 642 ===
the trust were not intended to be sufficient to entirely pay for the nonqualified deferred
compensation obligations under the 1994 Deferral Plan.'*“*

Under the trust document, a change in control would trigger funding of the trust so that
the trust would contain assets necessary to meet the liability for benefits credited under the plan.

Under the trust document, in the event that a participant or beneficiary was determined to
be subject to Federal income tax on any amount credited under the 1994 Deferral Plan prior to
the time of payment, whether or not due to the establishment of or conditions to the trust, a
portion of the taxable amount equal to the Federal, state and local taxes owed would be, at the
direction of Enron, distributed by the trustee as soon thereafter as practicable to such participant
or beneficiary. Enron would reimburse the trust for such distributions. Enron would also bear
the expenses to defend any tax claims (related to deferred amounts) asserted by the IRS against
any participant or beneficiary.

Under the trust document, the trustee was to cease any payment of benefits if Enron were
insolvent. The trust provides that, all times during the continuance of the trust, all principal and
income of the trust is subject to the claims of all of the general creditors of Enron.’ The trust
was to be used as a source of funds to assist Enron in satisfying its obligations under the 1994
Deferral Plan. No assets held by any trust established were to constitute security for the
performances of obligations under the 1994 Deferral Plan.

The trust document provides that the trustee has the power to invest and reinvest the
assets of the trust in its sole discretion. It also provides, however, that prior to a change in
control, Enron shall have the right to direct the trustee with respect to the investment of all or any
portion of the assets of the trust. One former Enron employee interviewed by the Joint
Committee staff stated that the trust assets were invested in a manner to correspond to
participant investment selections. In response to questions asked by the Joint Committee staff,
Enron responded that only initially were investments of trust assets directed so as to correspond
generally to participant elections. 846

1844 One former employee interviewed by Joint Committee staff said that the assets of the
trust were intended to be sufficient to satisfy obligations under the 1994 Deferral Plan.

1845 At the February 12, 1996, Compensation Committee meeting, it was reported that
Vinson & Elkins informed Enron that if one of Enron’s subsidiaries were to file bankruptcy, the
creditors of that company would not be able to obtain access to amounts in the trust because the
trust was held at the corporate level. To prevent current taxation of deferred amounts, Enron
management recommended, and the Compensation Committee approved, that all employees
deferring compensation into the 1994 Deferral Plan be transferred into Enron Corp., with their
payroll costs charged back to the original subsidiaries.

1846] etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated December 20, 2002.

614

=== PAGE 643 ===
Employees were notified of the existence of the trust and were notified that they did not
have any interest or ownership in the trust assets. Employee information!®“’ regarding security
of deferrals stated that the 1994 Deferral Plan was secured by a rabbi trust to hold assets that
would be used to make payments directly to participants in the event that Enron Corp. defaults
on its obligation to make payments, but that benefits were contractually payable by Enron.
Participant information explained that the trust would secure deferrals in the event of a change in
control, or for any other circumstances, except bankruptcy. Participants were informed that in
the event of bankruptcy, trust assets would be subject to the claims of creditors in bankruptcy
proceedings.

Distributions to participants were not made from the trust, but were made from the
general assets of Enron. The 1994 Deferral Plan trust is still in existence. According to Enron,
the cash surrender value of the 78 policies with CIGNA was $25 million as of October 28, 2002
(the latest valuation report received from the insurance company).'*8 According to Enron, the
general ledger of Enron Corp. reflected a trust value of $31.1 million as of December 2001.84?
According to Enron, earning from the trust were included in income when information was

received from a third party recordkeeper.'*°

1998 Enron Expat Service, Inc. Deferral Plan

The 1998 Enron Expat Services Inc. Deferral Plan (“Expat Deferral Plan”) is very similar
to the 1994 Deferral Plan and was established to allow key employees of Enron Expat Services
Inc. to reduce current compensation and thereby reduce current taxable income, earn an
attractive, tax-free rate of growth on monies deferred, and accumulate funds on a tax-favored
basis which could be used for retirement planning or other financial objectives.'® ' The Expat
Deferral Plan was established for expatriates who were ineligible to participate in the 1994
Deferral Plan because they were employed by Enron Expat Services Inc.'®? A participant was
eligible for either the 1994 Deferral Plan or the Expat Deferral Plan. Following repatriation,

1847 9900 Deferral Plan Choices. EC2 000018665.

1848 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated December 20, 2002. In a subsequent response, Enron stated that Wachovia is
the owner of the TOLI policies and Enron is the beneficiary. EC 002680494 - EC 002680495.

1849 BC 002680493. Enron Corp.’s general ledger reflected a balance of $33.5 million as
of November 2000; $32 million as of December 1999; $24.7 million as of November 1998;
$18.4 million as of December 1997; $12.8 million as of December 1996; and $8.5 million as of
December 1995.

1850 EC 002680496.

1851 Attachment to May 4, 1998, Compensation Committee meeting minutes.
EC 000104257.

1852s tachment to May 4, 1998, Compensation Committee meeting minutes.
EC 000104257.

615

=== PAGE 644 ===
compensation of participants in the Expat Deferral Plan would be deferred under the 1994
Deferral Plan.

The most recent version of the Expat Deferral Plan was restated as of September 1,
2001,'3 and has most of the same features as the 1994 Deferral Plan. The Expat Deferral Plan
mirrored the 1994 Deferral Plan in that it provided executives the benefit of having their deferral
balances track a chosen mix of investment funds. Under the Expat Deferral Plan, participants
could defer up to 35 percent of base salary, up to 100 percent of annual incentive plan bonus
payments, and up to 100 percent of select long-term incentive payments into the Expat Deferral
Plan. Deferrals could be allocated into the Phantom Stock Account or the Flexible Deferral
Account. The 17 investment options in the Flexible Deferral Account were the same as those for
the 1994 Deferral Plan. The Expat Deferral Plan also included the deferral of stock option gains
and deferral of restricted stock programs.

Unlike the 1994 Deferral Plan, a trust or other funding mechanism was not established in
connection with the Expat Deferral Plan. The Plan provides that Enron could acquire insurance
policies or other financial vehicles for the purpose of providing future assets to meet its
anticipated liabilities under the Expat Deferral Plan. However, documents provided by Enron
show that because there were only a few eligible participants (approximately 25 in 1998), the
Expat Deferral Plan was established on an unfunded basis.'®* Enron Corp. periodically agreed
to serve as guarantor of benefit payments from the Expat Deferral Plan.'®°°

Information provided by Enron shows that there were approximately 55 total participants
in the Expat Deferral Plan.!®° As of December 2000, there were approximately 45 participants
in the Expat Deferral Plan, with account balances totaling $14 million.!®”. As of December
2001, there were approximately 48 participants in the Expat Deferral Plan, with account balances
totaling $5.4 million.'**

In connection with Enron’s financial situation, the Expat Deferral Plan was amended
November 28, 2001, to suspend deferrals, effective at the end of business November 29, 2001,
until such time that the Board of Directors removed such suspension.

1853 There was a 1997 Expat Services Inc. Deferral Plan, which appears to have been
merged into the 1998 Expat Deferral Plan.

1854 attachments to the May 4, 1998, Compensation Committee meeting minutes.
EC 000104257.

1855 Yn 1997, the Compensation Committee approved Enron Corp. as the guarantor of
payments made from the 1997 Enron Expat Services Inc. Deferral Plan. Attachments to the May
4, 1998, Compensation Committee meeting minutes. EC 000104257.

85° EC 000768135.

857 EC 000768209.

1858 EC 000768210.

616

=== PAGE 645 ===
The Expat Deferral Plan was also administered by acommittee. As with the 1994
Deferral Plan, it appears that no formal committee was ever established.

One Enron employee told the Joint Committee staff that the Executive Vice President,
Human Resources and Community Relations had been appointed to the Expat Deferral Plan
committee. The Joint Committee staff interviewed this individual, and she said she had no
recollection of such an appointment. Enron employees interviewed by Joint Committee staff
stated that, as with the 1994 Deferral Plan, an informal committee would be formed when an
issue arose, which was infrequently. It was suggested that the committee could be composed of
the head of human resources, compensation department staff members, or legal counsel. An
accelerated distribution from the Expat Deferral Plan in April 2001 was approved by three
compensation staff members.!*°? When asked whether these individuals were the committee for
the Expat Deferral Plan, Enron responded that although there is no documentation which reflects
the appointment of a formal committee, plan administrators responsible for securing approvals of
Expat Deferral Plan amendments and Expat Deferral Plan administration collectively approved
the accelerated distribution in accordance with plan provisions. '*

Change in recordkeeper

In connection with the change in recordkeeper for the Enron Savings Plan, the
recordkeeper for the 1994 Deferral Plan and the Expat Deferral Plan was changed from Northern
Trust Retirement Consulting to Hewitt Associates. The change in recordkeeper occurred at the
same time for the 1994 Deferral Plan, Expat Deferral Plan, and the Enron Savings Plan.!®! The
change was completed on November 13, 2001, which was an accelerated date. The originally
scheduled date for completion of the change was November 20, 2001. In interviews with the
Joint Committee staff, Enron employees who worked on the change in recordkeeper stated that
there had been problems with the old recordkeeper for some time, but that because the deferral
plans were relatively small plans, vendors generally were interested in recordkeeping only in
conjunction with other, larger Enron plans. Thus, they had to wait until a change in recordkeeper
was made for the Enron Savings Plan. Enron Compensation Department staff stated that they
had minimal involvement in selecting the new recordkeeper. They stated that the Benefits
Department staff, who were handling the change in recordkeeper under the Enron Savings Plan,
took the principal role in selecting the criteria and making the final decision regarding the new
recordkeeper.

1859 The document provided by Enron lists three Enron Human Resources employees as
the committee approving the accelerated distribution from the Expat Plan as of April 2001.
EC2 00032287.

1860 | etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated December 20, 2002.

1861 The change in recordkeeper under the Enron Saving Plan is discussed in Part IL.C.4.,
above.

617

=== PAGE 646 ===
Because the investment accounts in the deferral plans mirrored those in the Enron
Savings Plan, Enron employees interviewed by Joint Committee staff stated that Enron believed
that there was an advantage to having the same recordkeeper for both the Enron Savings Plan
and the 1994 Deferral Plans and Expat Deferral Plan. In 1999, when investment options for the
1994 Deferral Plan and the Expat Deferral Plan were changed to match those of the Enron
Savings Plan, the recordkeeping services for the 1994 Deferral Plan and the Expat Deferral Plan
were transitioned from Clark/Bardes to Northern Trust Retirement Consulting, who was the
recordkeeper for the Enron Savings Plan at that time. For the future, Enron intended to keep the
same recordkeepers for the Enron Savings Plan and the 1994 Deferral Plans and Expat Deferral
Plan, as having one recordkeeper would be easier and more efficient for participants.

In connection with the change in recordkeeper of the 1994 Deferral Plan and Expat
Deferral Plan, there was a blackout period from November 1, 2001, through November 13, 2001.
During this period, reallocation of balances and changes to investment choices were restricted.
According to Enron, participants were notified of the change in recordkeeper and blackout period
through a notification, which was mailed with the notification sent regarding the Enron Savings
Plan blackout.'® Information provided by Enron states that participants were mailed a brochure
providing the first notice of the change in recordkeeper on October 4, 2001, and were mailed a
transition date update postcard on November 8, 2001.'8 Information provided by Enron shows
that the notifications were mailed to 303 participants in the 1994 Deferral Plan and 48
participants in the Expat Deferral Plan.'8* The notification informed participants that
October 31, 2001, would be the last day to access account information.

Even though there was a blackout period for the 1994 Deferral Plan and the Expat
Deferral Plan, the blackout did not result in a major interruption of activities for participants.
Under the 1994 Deferral Plan and Expat Deferral Plan, participants were not allowed to change
investments from the Phantom Stock Account. Other changes in investment could be made daily
in the Flexible Deferral Account.!®® Unlike participants in the Enron Savings Plan, participants
in the 1994 Deferral Plan and Expat Deferral Plan received distributions during the blackout.
The 1994 Deferral Plan and Expat Deferral Plan provide that a participant’s account balance is
determined as of the last day of the month preceding the date on which the Deferral Plan
Committee received the written request of the participant. Therefore, the participants’ account
balances as of October 31, 2001 (which was the last day on which account information could be
accessed), could be used for distribution requests submitted during the blackout.

1862 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated December 20, 2002.

1863 Id.
1864 Id.

1865 As noted above, participant investment elections had the result of directing the
source of investment returns, rather than directing actual investments.

618

=== PAGE 647 ===
Other deferred compensation plans

In general

Enron also had other deferral plans that were the predecessor programs to the active
plans. These included the: InterNorth, Inc. Director’s Unfunded Deferred Income Plan;
InterNorth Deferral Plan; Houston Natural Gas Corporation Deferred Income Program for
Directors; HNG Deferred Income Plan; HNG/InterNorth Deferral Plan; Enron Corp. Deferral
Plan; Enron Corp. 1988 Deferral Plan; Enron Corp. 1992 Deferral Plan; Enron Corp. Director’s
Deferral Plan; Enron Deferral Repatriation Plan; Portland General Holdings, Inc. Management
Deferred Compensation Plan; and Portland General Holding, Inc. Outside Directors’ Deferred
Compensation Plan.!8%

Information provided by Enron shows that there were approximately 200 participants in
the InterNorth, HNG/InterNorth, and 1988 Deferral Plans.'**’ As of December 31, 2000, there
were approximately 87 participants in the HNG Deferral Plan, with account balances totaling
$7.5 million.'8* The account balances totaled $7 million as of December 31, 2001 ie
According to Enron, no trusts or other funding arrangements were used in connection with any
deferral plans other than the 1994 Deferral Plan.!8”°

1992 Deferral Plan

The 1992 Deferral Plan preceded the 1994 Deferral Plan. Enron filed the 1992 Deferral
Plan with the Department of Labor on January 20, 1992, and stated that there were 76 employees
participating in the Plan.!8?! Rather than allowing participants to select investments, account
earnings under the 1992 Deferral Plan were based on Enron’s midterm cost of capital. The 1992
Deferral Plan allowed distributions in the event of hardship, but did not permit the accelerated
distributions (i.e., distributions with a 10 percent forfeiture) like the 1994 Deferral Plan and the
Expat Deferral Plan. The 1992 Deferral Plan was amended in 1995 to allow Enron to establish a
trust which would fund obligations of plans of deferred compensation of Enron provided that

1866 Enron also had a deferred compensation agreement, which appears to have been a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan for one individual.

1867 EC 000768139 - EC 000768145.
1868 C2 000031598 - EC2 000031600.
1869 &C2 000031601 - EC2 000031603.

1870 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated December 20, 2002.

1871 Enron letter to the Department of Labor dated January 20, 1992. Documents

provided by Enron show that there were 18 participants in the 1992 Deferral Plan. EC
000768147.

619

=== PAGE 648 ===
trust assets at all times remain subject to the claims of general creditors of Enron. According to
Enron, no trust was established.

Directors’ deferral opportunities

As discussed in the section of this report describing of Board of Directors
compensation, !°” beginning January 1, 1997, it was mandatory that 50 percent of the annual
retainer fee of directors be deferred into the Phantom Stock Account under the 1994 Deferral
Plan, which, as discussed above, tracked the performance of Enron Corp. common stock.
Directors could elect to receive their remaining fees (less mandatory deferrals) in cash, elect to
defer remaining fees into the 1994 Deferral Plan, and/or elect to receive Enron Corp. phantom
stock units or stock options in lieu of remaining fees.'®”

Before the use of the 1994 Deferral Plan, there were separate plans maintained for
director deferrals. These included the InterNorth, Inc. Director’s Unfunded Deferred Income
Plan, the Houston Natural Gas Corporation Deferred Income Program for Directors, and the
Enron Corp. Director’s Deferral Plan. Information provided by Enron shows that there were
approximately 29 participants in the Director Deferral Plans (HNG, InterNorth, and Enron).!8*
In prior years, directors also deferred into the 1985 Enron Corp. Deferral Plan and the HNG
Deferral Plan.

As discussed above,!®”> Enron sent letters to directors on December 11, 2001, informing
them of the status of their nonqualified deferred compensation in connection with the bankruptcy
and provided them with a statement of their account balances.!®”° Documents provided by Enron
show that nonemployee director account balances in the deferral plans as of November 30, 2001,
totaled $9.4 million.'°””

The Enron Deferred Repatriation Incentive Plan

The Enron Deferred Repatriation Incentive Plan (“EDRIP”) was a plan designed for U.S.
employees on long-term assignment to the United Kingdom.'* The stated purpose of the

1872 cee Part III.B.4., above.

1873 1 etter to the Enron Board of Directors regarding deferrals, dated December 11,
2002. EC2 000018654.

1874 EC 000768146.
1875. See Part IIL.B.4.
1876 1 is unclear whether all deferral plan participants received such notification.

1877 The account balance of one individual, Robert Belfer, totaled $6.086 million. See
Part IIL.B.4.,above, for a table of individual director balances.

1878 Added Value for your Future (a participant brochure). EC2 000018643.

620

=== PAGE 649 ===
EDRIP was to promote the success of Enron by providing a means of securing and retaining the
continued success of key personnel on foreign assignments through their initial period of
repatriation to the United States.'8”? Enron would nominate selected key personnel for
participation in the EDRIP while on overseas assignments. Only those selected could choose to
participate. Under the EDRIP, Enron made discretionary payments into a U.S.-based escrow
account, which would pay out the total accrued balance, including interest, approximately six
months after repatriation to the United States. In connection with the EDRIP, Enron would make
discretionary bonus payments that were less than they would otherwise be. The employee could
express a preference between an EDRIP payment and a bonus, but such preference would not be
binding on Enron.

Documents provided by Enron show that the advantages of the EDRIP depended on four
assumptions: (1) the U.K. Inland Revenue would not tax a payment that relates to future
services; (2) the IRS would allow an election under section 83(b) to recognize earnings currently
that may not be paid until some point in the future; (3) in using this election, the earnings were
effectively treated as having been earned while on foreign assignment and became eligible for
offset by foreign tax credits; and (4) traditionally the level of U.K. taxes has been higher than
U.S. taxes and consequently there is often a surplus of foreign tax credit that could be used. 188°

According to documents provided by Enron, the EDRIP was advantageous to employees
because Enron would not withhold U.S. hypothetical taxes at their marginal rate (possibly 39.6
percent) on payments into the EDRIP. Instead Enron would take a flat (15 percent) special
hypothetical tax on any deferrals. According to documents provided by Enron, an employee
would benefit to the extent of the difference between his or her marginal U.S. tax rate and 15
percent.'®! The EDRIP balance, including the accrued interest, from the escrow amount would
therefore be paid to the employee, contingent on certain factors, free of any further U.S. or U.K.
tax liability, except on the accrued interest income. Any earnings deferred into the EDRIP were
subject to forfeiture in the event that the individual was not still in the employment of Enron
approximately six months after returning to the United States.

Early distributions from deferral plans

Accelerated distributions'**”

In general.—In the months preceding Enron’s bankruptcy, early distributions from the
1994 Deferral Plan and the Expat Deferral Plan were made to certain participants. As discussed

'879 BC 002634805.

1880 Added Value for your Future (a participant brochure). EC2 000018643.

188! EC2 000018842.

1882 The amounts discussed herein as accelerated distribution are approximate amounts.
Documents provided by Enron regarding early distributions do not exactly reconcile. The

information summarized is from the document most recently provided by Enron, which is
included in Exhibit D. EC 002634761 - EC 002634769.

621

=== PAGE 650 ===
above, the 1994 Deferral Plan and the Expat Deferral Plan had a special feature which allowed
participants to request early withdrawals of their account balances subject to a 10-percent
forfeiture. The request was subject to approval at the discretion of each plan’s committee. Upon
an early withdrawal, participants were also prohibited from participating in the plan for a period
of three years. The plan was presumably designed this way to attempt to avoid constructive
receipt.

In the fall of 2001, participants began to make requests for early distributions from their
accounts in the 1994 Deferral Plan and Expat Deferral Plan. Documents provided by Enron
show that, in the last quarter of 2001, there were a total of approximately 211 requests for
accelerated distributions from the 1994 Deferral Plan and the Expat Deferral Plan.'*®? There
have been reports in the media that certain employees were notified that they should make
distribution requests; however, the participants interviewed by the Joint Committee staff stated
that they were not notified that they should make an early distribution request. Several current
and former employees mentioned that there were general rumors regarding the financial status of
Enron circulating at the time the requests for early distribution were made.

The Joint Committee staff interviewed several current and former Enron employees
regarding the early distribution requests. The Joint Committee staff also interviewed the sole
member of the 1994 Deferral Plan Committee,'*** who was responsible for making the

determination of whether distribution requests from the 1994 Deferral Plan should be approved.

1994 Deferral Plan.—Documents provided by Enron show that there were approximately
181 requests for early distributions from the 1994 Deferral Plan.'8®° According to interviews with
current and former Enron employees, accelerated distributions had not been made in the past
from the 1994 Deferral Plan. Information provided by Enron shows that there were no
accelerated distributions made in 1998, 1999, or 2000. In interviews with Joint Committee staff,
Enron employees stated that in the fall of 2001, Enron had to create a form and process for
handling early distribution requests, because such requests had not been made in the past. After
the creation of a form to be used, requests for early distributions were accepted by the Enron
Compensation Department, forwarded to the Deferral Plan Committee for consideration, and
then, if payment was approved, were processed for payment by the Compensation Department.

Some current and former employees interviewed by Joint Committee staff, including one
employee who was involved with administering the early distribution requests, stated that they
believed the only early distribution requests approved were those made by active employees.

1883 EC (002634761 - EC 002634769. At that time, there were approximately 350
participants in the plans.

1884 5 discussed above, Mr. Whalley was appointed as the Deferral Plan Committee as
of October 26, 2001.

1885 BC 002634761 - EC 002634769.

622

=== PAGE 651 ===
Documents provided by Enron show that while many requests made by inactive employees were
not approved, some early distribution requests made by inactive employees were approved. 88

In an interview with Joint Committee staff, the sole member of the 1994 Deferral Plan
Committee explained the procedure that was used in making the determination of whether
requests for early distributions should be approved. This process was arrived at after discussions
with several people, including legal advisors. According to the Deferral Plan Committee,
participants with account balances were treated as unsecured creditors of Enron. Three possible
primary operating conditions of Enron were identified and decisions were made as to whether
distribution requests would be granted or not, depending on the operating condition.

(1) The first condition was when Enron was considered a going concern. Under such
condition, all bills would be paid when due. Thus, if Enron was operating as a
going concern, all requests for early distributions would be approved.

(2) The second condition was when Enron was operating as a going concern, but
there were cash flow issues. Under the second condition, Enron would pay
distribution requests made by active employees only, because active employees
were needed to keep Enron operating, while inactive participants were providing
no current service to Enron. The Deferral Plan Committee stated that Enron made
similar assessments in handling other unsecured creditors.

(3) The third condition was when Enron was in bankruptcy or insolvent, in which
case no early distribution requests would be paid.

According to the Deferral Plan Committee, in late October and early November, Enron
was operating under the second condition (going concern with cash flow issues); therefore, the
Deferral Plan Committee approved payments to all of the active employees who had made
requests. On November 9, 2001, Enron closed the Dynegy deal and on November 12, 2001,
received a large cash payment. At that time, Enron was operating under the first condition
(going concern); therefore, all requests were approved. This included requests by inactive
participants that had not been approved originally. '®°’ This operating condition lasted
approximately one week. According to the Committee, during the week of November 19, 2001,
there were questions as to whether the Dynegy deal would go through and Enron was eventually
downgraded below investment grade. The Committee did not believe that the inactive
participants were paid after November 19, 2001. 188

1886 Tq. According to Enron and Mr. Whalley, no requests were formally denied, but
amounts subject to a request were either paid or not paid. For simplicity, “approved” is used
here for those distributions that were made, and “not approved” refers to distributions that were
not made.

1887 Documents provided by Enron show that requests by inactive participants made in
October and early November 2001, were approved on November 14, 2001. EC 002634763.

1888 Minutes from the November 28, 2001, meeting of the Board of Directors show that
the Board had authorized management to pay bills selectively to maximize the value of Enron.

623

=== PAGE 652 ===
Documents provided by Enron detailing the timing of the approval of payments of early
distributions requests are not inconsistent with the approval system discussed above as described
by the Deferral Plan Committee. While most employees interviewed by the Joint Committee
staff believed that all requests made by active employees were approved, and that requests by
inactives were not, documents provided by Enron show that accelerated distribution requests
made by active employees on November 30, 2001, were not approved. '** Documents provided
by Enron show that while some requests made by inactive participants were approved, no such
requests were approved after November 14, 2001, which was the last approval date before
November 19, 2001.'®° No requests made after the bankruptcy filing were approved.

Of the approximately 181 participants who requested early distributions from the 1994
Deferral Plan, approximately 109 participants received distributions from the Flexible Deferral
Accounts totaling $46.2 million.!®! Payments were made from the general funds of Enron and
not from the 1994 Deferral Plan rabbi trust. In addition to the cash distributions from the
Flexible Deferral Accounts, stock distributions from the Phantom Stock Account equal to
$502,452 were made to participants.'*”” In the case of a distribution from the Phantom Stock
Account, shares were withheld to cover taxes owed.'®3

Expat Deferral Plan.—As discussed above, like the 1994 Deferral Plan, subject to the
discretion of the Expat Deferral Plan Committee, the Expat Deferral Plan also allowed an
accelerated withdrawal of all or a portion of a participant’s account balance, with 10 percent of
the elected distribution amount forfeited. An accelerated distribution had been approved from
the Expat Deferral Plan in April 2001. In the fall of 2001, approximately 30 participants in the
Expat Deferral Plan made requests for early distributions. The committee for the Expat Deferral
Plan was responsible for determining whether early distribution requests should be granted. '®4

1889 BC 000768237.
1890 EC 002634761 - EC 002634769.

1891 EC 002634761. Approval of one request for distribution of an account balance of
$4.8 million is listed as “pending.” Distributions to 11 participants in the aggregate amount of
$2.1 million were approved, but were not wired. Two distribution requests were withdrawn.
One request was approved, but the check bounced. EC 002634761 - EC 002634769.

1892 BC 002634761 - EC 002634769. Payments from the Phantom Stock Account were
paid in shares of Enron Corp. common stock, with the exception of pre-1998 deferrals, which
would be paid out in cash unless the participant signed a waiver to receive stock. Documents
provided by Enron show varying amounts in participants’ Phantom Stock Accounts. The amount
cited above is from the document most recently provided by Enron, which is included in
Appendix D.

1893 According to Enron, Exhibit 3b.2 to the bankruptcy filing incorrectly considered the
net value of the share distribution in the calculation of deferral payments.

1894 As discussed above, there does not appear to have been a formal committee under
the Expat Deferral Plan.

624

=== PAGE 653 ===
Distributions from the Flexible Deferral Account were made to approximately 18 participants in
the amount of $6.9 million.!® In addition, distributions of stock equal to $52,342 were made
from Phantom Stock Accounts. !®

Hardship requests

Three participants in the 1994 Deferral Plan and one participant in the Expat Deferral
Plan made requests for hardship distributions in the weeks immediately preceding the
bankruptcy. !® 7 There were no hardship requests granted in 2001. Participants submitted
distribution requests for both hardship distributions and early distributions. In at least one case,
after an accelerated distribution was made, the participant requested the 10 percent forfeited as a
hardship. The request was denied.

From Joint Committee staff interviews with Enron employees, it appears that the process
for evaluating hardship withdrawal requests was more complicated and time consuming than the
process for accelerated distribution requests. In the case of a hardship request, the participant
had to prove hardship and necessary documentation was required. In an interview with Joint
Committee staff, one Enron employee stated that Enron filed for bankruptcy before there was
sufficient time to process the hardship withdrawal requests. Another former employee stated that
none of the requests qualified for hardship under the terms of the plans. Many of the reasons for

the requested hardship distributions claimed by participants were tied to the financial situation of
Enron.

The older deferred compensation plans did not allow accelerated distributions, but did
allow for hardship distributions. Documents provided by Enron show that hardship withdrawal
requests were made in November 2001 from participants in the 1988 Deferral Plan, the 1992
Deferral Plan, the Project Participation Plan, the 1994 Deferral Plan and the Expat Deferral Plans
totaling $5.9 million.'®°* There were 11 requests from the 1998 Deferral Plan, one request from
the 1992 Deferral Plan, and three requests from the Project Participation Plan.'8? As mentioned
above, no hardship requests were granted. Although infrequent, hardship withdrawals had been
made in the past. Documents provided by Enron show that one hardship request was granted
from the 1992 Deferral Plan in 1998.

1895 RC 002634761. Three distributions in the aggregate amount of $283,027 were
approved for payment, but were not wired.

1896 BC 002634763 - EC 002634769. Documents provided by Enron show varying
amounts in participants’ Phantom Stock Accounts. The amount cited above is from the
document most recently provided by Enron.

87 EC2 000018410 - EC2 000018411.

188 BC2 000018404.

1899 BC2 000018404 - EC2 000018411.

625

=== PAGE 654 ===
Discussion of Issues

In general

Nonqualified deferred compensation is a common form of executive compensation.
From the executive’s perspective, the desire to save taxes is generally the key motivating factor
behind deferred compensation. Individuals may want to defer compensation to a future date
because they believe that their tax burden will be lower in the future than it is currently, thus
resulting in payment of lower taxes than if the compensation had been received currently.
Individuals may defer compensation in order to provide a future income stream in retirement.
Employers may structure deferred compensation arrangements to induce or reward certain
behavior. In many cases, the desire to accommodate the compensation wishes of an individual
that a company wants to attract or retain as an employee may be a sufficient motivating factor to
provide a deferred compensation arrangement. In some cases, a company may require the
deferral of certain amounts of compensation, e.g., salary in excess of $1 million, in order to
comply with the limitation on the deductibility of compensation in excess of $1 million’?
ERISA’s exemptions for nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements allow great
flexibility in designing plans and individual arrangements.

Nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements are often compared and contrasted to
qualified retirement plans. Qualified retirement plans are subject to rules that do not apply to
nonqualified arrangements, including nondiscrimination rules designed to ensure that the plans
cover a broad group of employees. The benefits of qualified plans include tax advantages for the
employer and the employee,'””! security for the employee,'”” and flexibility regarding
payment.

Some argue that nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements are necessary because
of the limits on qualified plans.'°™ The structure of some nonqualified deferred compensation
arrangements is similar to qualified plans without the restrictions imposed by the Code. In many

1909 Sec, 162(m). This limitation is discussed in Part III.C.6., below.

1901 Th the case of a qualified plan, the employer receives a current deduction, while in
the case of a nonqualified plan, the deduction is postponed until the time at which the employee
includes the amount in income.

1902 Assets of a qualified plan cannot be reached by creditors of the employer, and are set
aside for the sole purpose of paying plan benefits. In addition, as described above, within limits,
the PBGC guarantees benefits under defined benefit plans.

1903 Constructive receipt rules do not apply to qualified retirement plans. In some cases,
however, the Code may restrict the earliest point at which benefits may be paid.

1904 The maximum benefit that can be payable out of a qualified defined benefit plan is
$160,000 a year (sec. 415(b)). This is far less than the annual salary of many Enron executives.
In addition, the annual limit on contributions to qualified defined contributions plans, $40,000
for 2003, (sec. 415(c)) is far less than the monthly salary of many Enron executives.

626

=== PAGE 655 ===
cases, nonqualified deferred compensation offers even greater advantages for executives than
qualified plans. For example, while qualified plan distributions are subject to a 10-percent
additional tax on early withdrawals,!°°> Enron executives could defer amounts under the 1994
Deferral Plan and structure the arrangement so that payment would be made in as little as three
years from the time of deferral (i.e., special purpose deferrals). To the extent that nonqualified
deferred compensation arrangements have features more like qualified plans, there may be less
incentive for employers to adopt broad-based qualified retirement plans.

As discussed above, neither the Code nor ERISA limit the amount of nonqualified
deferred compensation. Because the employer is denied a deduction for deferred compensation
until the employee includes the compensation in income, there is often said to be a tension

between the interests of the employer and the employee that will result in an appropriate limit on
deferred compensation.

In Enron’s case, the deferral of its tax deduction was not a paramount concern, and the
supposed “tension” between the interests of the employer and the employee from a tax
perspective did little, if anything, to limit the amount of deferred compensation. Many Enron
executives participated in Enron’s nonqualified deferred compensation programs. As discussed
above, from 1998 through 2001, over $154 million in compensation was deferred.

In connection with Enron’s financial problems, many executives lost a considerable
amount of compensation that had been deferred. Participants who had balances remaining in the
deferral plans as of the bankruptcy may recover some of those amounts as unsecured creditors in
the bankruptcy proceeding. This would include participants in plans that did not allow early
distributions (e.g., the 1998 Deferral Plan), participants who could have but did not request an
early withdrawal, or participants whose requests for early withdrawals were not approved. In
addition, the value of Phantom Stock Accounts is currently minimal, because the account
balances were treated as if invested in Enron stock.

On the other hand, many executives were able to access their deferred compensation,
primarily by means of the early withdrawal provisions under the 1994 Deferral Plan and the
Expat Deferral Plan. In the few months immediately preceding the bankruptcy, approximately
117 people received distributions totaling over $53 million.

As described above, there are no clear rules governing many aspects of deferred
compensation arrangements. As a result, taxpayers may design deferred compensation
arrangements based on varying interpretations of authority that may not be strictly applicable to
the situation in question. Under present law, a variety of practices have developed with respect
to deferred compensation arrangements which are intended to achieve the desired tax deferral,
while at the same time attempting to provide some sense of security to executives as well as
some degree of flexibility regarding time of payment and other plan features. In order to make
such arrangements more attractive to the employee, some taxpayers may push the limits of
present law.

1905 Sec. 72(t).

627

=== PAGE 656 ===
While deferred compensation arrangements vary greatly, many of the plan features used
by Enron are not uncommon. Even though certain aspects of the plans may be within common
practices, some issues may be raised with respect to whether they meet the requirements
necessary to obtain the desired tax deferral. In addition, even if the present-law rules are
satisfied, certain of the arrangements Enron maintained raise broader questions of whether they
fall within the spirit of the present-law rules or whether they should, as a policy matter, result in
tax deferral. Particular issues raised under the Enron deferral arrangements are addressed below.

Funding issues

It appears that Enron may have intended the rabbi trust used in connection with the 1994
Deferral Plan to comply with the safe harbor requirements of Revenue Procedure 92-64.'° It
was certainly intended that the trust not result in current income taxation; Enron employees and
counsel interviewed by Joint Committee staff stated that it was intended that current taxation not
result from the structure of the deferred compensation arrangements. Even if the trust were a
valid rabbi trust when evaluated solely on the basis of the trust document, there is an issue as to
whether other provisions under the 1994 Deferral Plan would cause the trust to be considered
funded for tax purposes.

As discussed above, in the case of a rabbi trust, trust terms providing that the assets are
subject to the claims of creditors of the employer in the case of bankruptcy or insolvency have
been the basis for the conclusion that the creation of a rabbi trust does not cause the related
nonqualified deferred compensation arrangement to be funded for income tax purposes. In the
case of Enron, even though the trust document provided that the assets of the trust were subject
to the claims of creditors, because participants had the ability to obtain early distributions, there
is an argument that the rights of such employees were effectively greater than the rights of the
creditors, making the trust funded for tax purposes. If, in fact, the arrangement was not subject
to the claims of creditors, the arrangement should be considered funded, and income inclusion
should have occurred when there was no substantial risk of forfeiture.

It may be argued that the ability to obtain the money did not give the participants rights
greater than general creditors. Under the terms of the 1994 Deferral Plan and the rabbi trust,
participants had no interest in any particular assets of Enron. In addition, Enron employees told
the Joint Committee staff that the decisions whether to approve requests for distributions were
made in the same way as Enron would treat the claims of other unsecured creditors.

However, because of the early distribution provisions in the 1994 Deferral Plan and the
Expat Deferral Plan, plan participants received over $53 million under the Plans within
approximately two months preceding the bankruptcy, precluding such amounts from being
available to the claims of creditors. They would not have been able to obtain this amount in the
absence of the withdrawal provisions. The financial condition of Enron appears to have been a

1906 Because the revenue procedure describes a “safe harbor,” a trust may be a valid rabbi
trust without satisfying the safe harbor. However, the IRS will not rule on trusts that do not
satisfy the safe harbor, except in rare and unusual circumstances.

628

=== PAGE 657 ===
motivating factor behind the requests for distribution; such requests had not previously been
received under the Plans.

Constructive receipt
In general

Income is constructively received in the taxable year during which it is credited to the
taxpayer’s account, set apart, or otherwise made available so that the taxpayer may draw on it at
any time. Income is not constructively received if the taxpayer’s control of the income is subject
to substantial limitations or restrictions. While the 1994 Deferral Plan and the Expat Deferral
Plan were designed to impose restrictions or limitations on the participant’s control of amounts
deferred, such restrictions or limitations could be seen as illusory. While under present law the
plan provisions may not result in constructive receipt, there is an issue as to whether the
existence of such features should result in the application of the constructive receipt doctrine.
When viewed collectively, the existence of the opportunities for accelerated distributions,
participant-directed investment, and change in participant elections lend credence to the
argument that the doctrine of constructive receipt should apply.

Accelerated distributions

Even if the 1994 Deferral Plan is considered unfunded, there is an issue as to whether
participants should have been considered in constructive receipt of deferred amounts. A
participant’s unfettered right to withdraw amounts deferred results in constructive receipt. As
discussed above, income is not constructively received if the taxpayer’s control of its receipt is
subject to substantial limitations or restrictions. Enron’s treatment of deferred amounts reflects
the view that even though participants could receive accelerated distributions under the 1994
Deferral Plan and Expat Deferral Plan, the 10-percent forfeiture, the inability to participate in the
Plan for three years following an accelerated distribution, and the requirement subjecting
distributions to the discretionary authority of the plan committee were substantial limitations or
restrictions on the right to receive deferred amounts.

The IRS has not explicitly authorized the use of forfeiture provisions (i.e., “haircuts”) in
nonqualified deferred compensation plans. Many nonqualified deferred compensation plans
utilize a 10-percent forfeiture limitation preventing constructive receipt, based on the 10-percent
early withdrawal tax applicable to distributions from qualified retirement plans and IRAs.'?”

Some may argue that the fact that some participants made requests for early distributions,
but such requests were not granted supports the argument that the discretionary authority of the
plan committee was a substantial limitation or restriction on the right to receive the deferred
amounts, which should prevent the application of constructive receipt.

As a practical matter, the 10-percent forfeiture provision did not appear to impose much
of a deterrent for 1994 Deferral Plan participants in requesting distributions. As noted above,
many participants requested distributions. One former Enron executive who did not request a

1907 Sec. 72(t).

629

=== PAGE 658 ===
distribution indicated that he did not make a request because he did not want to contribute to the
already bad financial position of Enron.

Participant-directed investment

An issue may also exist due to the ability of participants to direct investments of amounts
deferred. As discussed above, participants in the 1994 Deferral Plan and Expat Deferral Plan
were able to direct investments of amounts deferred into the Flexible Deferral Account. More
precisely, they were able to direct how earnings on deferred amounts should be credited.

According to Enron, only initially did Enron direct investments to track generally with
participant elections.!%°® According to Enron’s summary of the 1994 Deferral Plan,’ because
of constructive receipt rules Enron could credit an employee’s deferral account with earnings
that tracked a chosen mix of investment funds, but the actual investments were required to be
made by Enron Corp. or by the Trustee appointed by Enron Corp. at the direction of Enron Corp.

The model rabbi trust safe harbor under Revenue Procedure 92-64 only requires that the
trustee must be given some investment discretion, such as the authority to invest within broad
guidelines established by the parties. It does not provide precise guidelines on how trust assets
must be invested. The IRS has ruled, in the case of one taxpayer, that no amount would be
considered made available as a result of the fact that the participant has a right to designated
deemed investments.!”!° Some commentators have noted that allowing participant directed
investments presents no tax issues and should be allowed in plans.'?"!

Change in participant elections

Participants in the 1994 Deferral Plan were allowed to change payout elections at any
time. Elections would be effective one year after being received by Enron. As previously
discussed, under present law, courts have generally been lenient in applying the constructive
receipt doctrine with respect to subsequent elections. While no single case can be relied upon for
the position that subsequent elections will not result in constructive receipt, given the case law in
the area, the position that the ability to make a subsequent election has some support.

Nevertheless, allowing participants to change payout elections gives them control over
the amounts deferred. Changing payout elections allows participants to control the timing and

1908 ¥ etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, J oint Committee on
Taxation, dated December 20, 2002.

1909 BC2 000018443.

1910 Driv. Ltr. Rul. 200148054. (The private letter ruling involved a qualified
governmental excess benefit arrangement under section 415.)

1911 66 SMITH, ET. AL, NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION ANSWER Book (3rd
ed. 1996).

630

=== PAGE 659 ===
amount of payment, which is the basis for the general principle of constructive receipt. Thus, the
ability to make subsequent elections arguably should result in constructive receipt.

Fairness concerns relating to early distributions

Nontax issues have been raised regarding the pre-bankruptcy accelerated distributions
made from the 1994 Deferral Plan and the Expat Deferral Plan. Media reports allege that
distributions were wrongfully allowed. While it may seem unfair for some participants to
receive their account balances while other participants’ requests were not approved, the 1994
Deferral Plan and the Expat Plan documents clearly state that accelerated distributions are made
subject to the consent of the relevant plan committee. The plans provide that the committee has
60 days to approve or deny a request, but do not discuss what criteria must be used by the
committee in approving or denying requests. Furthermore, the plans provide generally that all
determinations provided for in the plan shall be made in the absolute discretion of the committee
and that determinations shall be binding on all persons.

Employees were aware that the committee had discretion regarding accelerated
distribution payments. Employee materials state that the committee was to interpret the plans,
including but not limited to decisions regarding suspension of deferrals, hardship withdrawals,
accelerated distributions, and other matters that would arise under the terms of the plans.!*!?
There appears to be no obvious violation of the terms of either plan.

While there may be some perceived inequity, modifying the rules relating to nonqualified
deferred compensation arrangements to eliminate any perceived equities in the treatment of
active and inactive employees would be counter to tax policy because such a inodification would
give participants in nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements greater control over their
deferred amount.

Deferral of stock option gains program

As discussed above, Enron amended the 1994 Deferral Plan in 1996 to provide for the
deferral of stock options gains program, which established a Phantom Stock Account to which
gains realized from stock-for-stock exercises of options could be deferred. Under the program,
executives were able to pay the exercise price of options with already-owned Enron stock,
transfer their basis in the old stock to an equal amount of new stock, and transfer the additional
stock that would otherwise be received into the Phantom Stock Account.

The deferral credited to the participant’s stock option deferral account was an amount
equal to the number of shares deferred multiplied by the current per share market price, and was
treated as if the amount of the deferral had been used to purchase shares of Enron Corp. common
stock at such per share market price. Credits for dividends would be accrued in a separate
account and paid in cash, pursuant to the normal payment terms of the 1994 Deferral Plan.

1912 Deferral plan questions and answers (brochure for participants). EC2 000018440.

631

=== PAGE 660 ===
The 1994 Deferral Plan includes an example of how the stock option gain deferral works:

e Executive optionee holds an option for 20,000 shares at $50 per share (an
aggregate exercise price of $1 million).

e Optionee makes an advance election to defer receipt of the additional shares
received in a stock-for-stock exercise until a fixed time in the future (from one to
15 years beginning at death, disability, retirement or termination).

e Optionee owns 12,500 previously acquired mature shares (held at least six
months) with a current market price of $80 per share (an aggregate market value
of $1 million).

e Optionee exercises the 20,000-share option in a stock-for-stock exercise (either by
actual delivery of already-owned share or by “attestation,” i.e., instead of
delivering shares to Enron, the executive simply provides an affidavit of
ownership of the shares).

e@ Enron credits 7,500 share units to a Phantom Stock Account under the-Plan
(executive retains the already-owned 12,500 shares at the original cost basis).
During the deferral period, dividend equivalents would be credited in the form of
cash.!"!3

«© Upon death, disability, retirement or termination, the share units are converted to
shares which are issued to the executive according to the payment election made
by the executive at the time of the deferral election (i.e., if at termination there are
1,000 share units in the account and the executive chose 10 annual payments, 100
shares would be distributed each year, in addition to credits attributable to
dividends on such shares which will be paid out in cash).

While this type of program may be commonly used, there are questions whether it should
result in effective income deferral.'?!* There is no authority clearly addressing stock option gain
deferrals.!?!> The program does not fit within the IRS ruling guidelines on the application of

1913 Absent the deferral, the executive would include in income the fair market value of
the 7,500 additional shares, i.e., $600,000 (7,500 x $80). Rev. Rul. 80-244,1980-2 C.B. 234.

1914 See Geer, “Why not just pay the tax?,” FORBES (March 10, 1997) at 156.

1915 Some taxpayers may attempt to rely on Priv. Ltr. Rul. 199901006 in taking the
position that the IRS has approved the transaction. In addition to the fact that private letter
rulings may not be used or cited as precedent, the ruling cannot be relied upon, as the facts of the
ruling are different from that those of the stock option gains program. For example, in the ruling,
the election to exchange options for deferred compensation was made before the options were
vested. Additionally, distributions of the amounts deferred would generally be made at the time
that the employee’s options would have vested. Further deferral was not allowed at the election
of the employee.

632

=== PAGE 661 ===
constructive receipt to nonqualified deferred compensation.'*"° The principles used are a
combination of the rules relating to a stock-for-stock exercise and nonqualified deferred
compensation.

As discussed above, !?!” upon a stock-for-stock exercise, the employee is taxed on the fair
market value on the additional shares received. Under the deferral of stock option gains
program, the employee would not be taxed on the shares, but would defer the gain recognition to
some time in the future. Enron took the position that the Phantom Stock Account would amount
to an unfunded promise to pay, thereby avoiding inclusion of the gain amount.!?!8 Upon
exercise, the employee would be treated as receiving the number of already-owned shares that he
or she used for payment (in a tax-free exchange) and the employer’s promise to deliver
additional shares in the future. It appears that the timing of income inclusion is deferred by
having the employer and employee alter the terms of the original option agreement so that the
employee’s right to receive the additional shares is delayed until a specific time in the future.

To avoid possible constructive receipt, Enron required that the exercise occur six months
or more after the deferral election was made. Deferrals were required to be made prior to the end
of the preceding tax year and at least six months prior to exercise. The timing of the election is
different from the timing that is typically required for an election to effectively defer
compensation. In order to obtain a ruling concerning the application of constructive receipt to
unfunded deferred compensation arrangements, generally elections must be made before the
beginning of the period of service for which the compensation is payable.!7! In the case of
option gain deferral in Enron’s plan, the election could be made after the options are vested and
after services have been performed with respect to such compensation, as long as it is made at
least six months prior to exercise.

The tax position taken with respect to the deferral of stock options gains is similar to that
of the exercise of an option for stock which is restricted. If an individual were to engage in a
stock-for-stock exercise receiving stock subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture, the stock would
not be included in income until the substantial risk of forfeiture expires. In the deferral of stock
option gains, taxation is not postponed by imposing restrictions on the stock, but by having the
employee’s right to receive the shares delayed until a specified time in the future. Because the
employee only has an unfunded promise to pay, which is not property under section 83, income
inclusion is postponed.

1916 Rey, Proc. 71-19, 1971-1 C.B. 698; Rev. Proc. 92-65, 1992-33 LR.B. 16.
1917 ee Part IIL.C.2., above.

1918 The company’s deduction is postponed until the amounts are distributed and
included in the employee’s income.

1919 Rey. Proc. 71-19, 1971-1 C.B. 698; Rev. Proc. 92-65, 1992-33 LR.B. 16.

633

=== PAGE 662 ===
Documents provided by Enron show that Mr. Lay participated in the deferral of stock
option gains program.'°”° It is unclear to what extent other employees participated in the
program. Enron-provided documents show that spread at exercise was subject to FICA/FUTA
and Medicare taxes. Documents provided by Enron show that upon a stock-for-stock exercise
where shares were deferred, shares were withheld for Medicare taxes. 172!

Recommendations

In general

The experience with Enron demonstrates that the theoretical tension between the
employer’s interest in a current tax deduction and the employee's interest in deferring tax from a
tax perspective has little, if any, effect on the amount of compensation deferred by executives.
In Enron’s case, because of net operating loss carryovers, denial of the deduction did not have a
significant impact on its tax liability. Despite any possible effect on its tax deduction, Enron’s
deferred compensation arrangements allowed executives to defer millions of dollars in
compensation that would otherwise be currently includible in income.

Enron’s nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements contained a variety of features
which serve to blur the distinction between nonqualified deferred compensation and qualified
plans. Enron’s nonqualified deferred compensation plans included features that to some extent
provided the advantages of a qualified plan, such as security for and access to benefits without
current income inclusion, despite not meeting the qualified plan requirements. Because
nonqualified arrangements have features like qualified plans, there may be less incentive from
employers to adopt broad-based qualified retirement plans. If executives are able to fulfill their
retirement needs through the use of nonqualified plans, for some employers there would be no
incentive to offer qualified plans to rank and file employees.

While there are a number of reasons why nonqualified deferred compensation
arrangements are adopted, a primary factor is the desire by the executive to defer payment of
income tax. For example, a stated purpose of the 1994 Deferral Plan and Expat Deferral Plan
was to allow executives to reduce current compensation and thereby reduce their current taxable
income and earn returns on a tax-favored basis. Without the tax benefit of deferral, it is unlikely
that nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements would exist, and certainly would not exist
to the extent they do under present law.

Some argue that nonqualified deferred compensation is merely an avoidance of current
income taxation, and that rules should be adopted to prevent inappropriate deferral. For

1920 C (00769187 - EC 000769197. The election to defer was made August 4, 1999.
Shares were credited to the Phantom Stock Account in the 1994 Deferral Plan in February 2000.
The stock-for-stock exercises were done through attestation. Shares were withheld to pay
Medicare taxes.

1921 Mir, Lay’s compensation generally would have been over the maximum amount

subject to FICA and FUTA taxes (i.e., the taxable wage base); therefore, only Medicare (HI)
taxes would apply to these amounts.

634

=== PAGE 663 ===
example, some have suggested rules that compensation should be includible in income when
earned or, if later, when there is no substantial risk of forfeiture of the rights to such
compensation. °” In the case of Enron executives, this would have resulted in earlier income
inclusion, as amounts deferred would have been included in income when earned and vested.
The Joint Committee staff believes that this approach would result in a better measure of income
than under present-law rules in which an unfunded promise to pay, even if vested, is not
currently taxable. However, this approach would represent a significant change in policy.

The Joint Committee staff believes that some changes to the present-law rules regarding
the taxation of deferred compensation are appropriate. Following are some specific options
relating to deferred compensation which would preserve the ability to obtain tax deferral, but
would reduce the use of practices which give executives control over amounts deferred. This is
not intended as an exhaustive list of possible alternatives. Other options should also be
considered. The options mentioned here would affect current practices, but would have less
impact on current practices than would a broad change in policy.

In evaluating changes to the rules relating to deferred compensation, one factor to keep in
mind is that taxpayers are likely to change their behavior to adapt to any given set of rules. For
example, if the law were changed to restrict the use of one particular practice, it is likely that,
over time, taxpayers would develop other ways to achieve the intended result.

Section 132 of the Revenue Act of 1978

As discussed above, section 132 of the Revenue Act of 1978 was enacted in response to
proposed Treasury regulation 1.61-16, and provides that the taxable year of inclusion in gross
income of any amount covered by a private deferred compensation plan is determined in
accordance with the principles set forth in regulations, rulings, and judicial decisions relating to
deferred compensation which were in effect on February 1, 1978. The restriction imposed by
section 132 of the Revenue Act of 1978 may have prevented Treasury from issuing more
guidance on nonqualified deferred compensation and may have contributed to aggressive
interpretations of present law.

Section 132 of the Revenue Act of 1978 should be repealed. Repealing section 132
would allow Treasury to provide more guidance to taxpayers and may also help to stem abusive
practices. Especially given the lack of statutory rules in this area, the lack of administrative
guidance in this area allows taxpayers latitude to create and promote arrangements which push
the limit of what is allowed under the law. Because of the lack of rules and guidance in this area,
the current state of practice has, to a great extent, evolved from variations of private letters ruling
issued by the IRS to various taxpayers. Because there are no clear rules or guidance, taxpayers
continue to create new variations of arrangements that, in their basic form, are generally
perceived as allowed by the IRS.

1922 This would be similar to the rule under Code section 457(f) relating to deferred
compensation of employees of tax-exempt organizations and governments. Another alternative
would be to impose a tax on the investment income. See Daniel I. Halperin, Interest in Disguise:
Taxing the “Time Value of Money”, 95 YALE L.J. 506 (1986).

635

=== PAGE 664 ===
Accelerated distributions

Under present law, a requirement of surrender or forfeiture of a valuable right is a
sufficient restriction to preclude constructive receipt of income. The Joint Committee staff
recommends that under nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements, plan provisions
allowing accelerated distributions at the request of the participant, should trigger constructive
receipt rather than resulting in deferral. Distributions made to executives in the period
immediately preceding the bankruptcy drained Enron’s cash by over $53 million that would have
been available to the creditors and raises questions regarding whether, in fact, a substantial
limitation existed.

As part of any specific proposal, consideration should be given to the circumstances
under which withdrawals should be permitted without triggering constructive receipt.
Distribution options under current arrangements include: financial hardship, death, disability,
retirement, the passage of a period of time specified by the employee (e.g., three years), and
change in control. :

Rabbi trusts

Enron had a rabbi trust to provide some security with respect to deferred amounts. Rabbi
trusts are common arrangements. Arrangements have developed which appear to fit within the
technical guidelines for a valid rabbi trust, but which provide security to executives. For
example, as discussed above, even though the trust document stated that participants’ rights were
not greater than those of general creditors, the fact that millions of dollars in distributions were
made immediately before the bankruptcy supports the conclusion that the rights of participants
were greater than those of general creditors. Consideration should be given as to whether rabbi
trusts are appropriate for deferred compensation, or whether additional requirements should be
imposed with respect to such trusts.

Participant-directed investment

Allowing participants to direct investment of amounts deferred gives participants control
over the earnings on the amounts deferred. The Joint Committee staff recommends that the

ability of participants to direct investments of amounts deferred should result in current inclusion
of income.

Subsequent elections

While the rules regarding subsequent elections are not clear under present law, many
taxpayers take the position that subsequent elections allowing participants to change the payout
term of their deferred compensation do not result in constructive receipt.

The Joint Committee staff recommends that plan provisions allowing participants to
make subsequent elections should trigger constructive receipt. Subsequent elections allow
taxpayers to control the timing and amount of their distributions. Allowing participants to
accelerate or postpone the payment of their accounts should result in constructive receipt.

636

=== PAGE 665 ===
Alternatively, limited opportunities to change elections could be provided for in the law.
If limited opportunities to make subsequent elections are allowed, the time that such elections are
allowed to be made should be specified.

Deferral of stock option gains and restricted stock

As described above, Enron provided opportunities for executives to defer gains that
would otherwise have been taxable due to the exercise of stock options and the vesting of
restricted stock. The deferral of stock option gains program can be viewed as a manipulation of
the rules for deferred compensation and stock-for-stock exercise, which were not intended to be
combined, thus resulting in an unintended and inappropriate result for taxpayers. The Joint
Committee staff believes that it is inappropriate to allow deferral of stock option gains and
restricted stock.

Reporting

Other than an initial plan filing with the Department of Labor, until amounts are
includible in income, there is no required reporting of nonqualified deferred compensation.
Requiring reporting of amounts deferred to the IRS, even if the taxpayer takes the position that
such amounts are not currently includible in income, could provide the IRS greater information
regarding such arrangements. In most cases, the IRS does not have any information regarding
amounts deferred, and therefore, no indication that a particular arrangement should be examined.

2. Stock-based compensation
Present Law

General background

Stock-based compensation is a commonly used form of compensation for employees and
may be also provided as compensation for service providers who are not employees, such as
outside directors. Commonly used forms of stock-based compensation include stock options,
restricted stock, stock appreciation rights, and phantom stock arrangements.

Similar to nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements, an employer may have a
formal plan that provides stock-based compensation to employees on a regular basis. For
example, the employer may have a plan under which stock or stock options are granted to
employees annually. Alternatively, or in addition, an individual’s employment contract may
provide for stock-based compensation for that individual. In some cases, stock-based plans are a
means of providing nonqualified deferred compensation.

Stock-based compensation is often used in connection with incentive compensation. For
example, bonuses may be paid in the form of stock; grants of stock or stock options may depend
on corporate performance; or the rate at which restrictions on stock lapse or the rate at which
stock options become exercisable may be accelerated if certain corporate earnings targets are
met.

637

=== PAGE 666 ===
Some argue that the use of stock-based compensation is an appropriate means of
compensation because it aligns the interests of the shareholders and corporate executives and
rewards performance. On the other hand, some argue that an increase in stock price or corporate
earnings alone is not an appropriate measure of performance because such an increase may not
be directly linked to an individual’s performance and may encourage executives to
inappropriately inflate earnings and focus on short-term earnings.

Compensatory stock (including restricted stock)

In general

Stock may be granted to an employee (or other service provider) without restrictions in
the sense that the stock is fully vested and transferable. In some cases, the employee is granted
“restricted” stock in the sense that the stock must be forfeited or sold back to the company in
certain circumstances. For example, an employee may receive stock that is subject to a
substantial risk of forfeiture because of a requirement that the stock be forfeited if the employee
terminates employment within some stated number of years. As another example, restricted
stock may be granted pursuant to a five-year vesting schedule, pursuant to which 20 percent of
the stock granted becomes available to the employee for each year of service. In this example, if
the employee were to leave after three years of service, 60 percent of the shares of restricted
stock would have vested and 20 percent would be forfeited.

Restricted stock (i.e., stock that is subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture} is often
referred to as nonvested stock; stock that is not (or is no longer) subject to a substantial risk of
forfeiture is often referred to as vested stock. Restrictions that no longer apply are often said to
have “lapsed.” Shares that vest are sometimes referred to a being “released.”

Tax treatment

Stock that is granted to an employee (or other service provider) is subject to the rules that
apply under section 83 to transfers of property in connection with the performance of services.
Accordingly, if vested stock is transferred to an employee, the excess of the fair market value of
the stock, over the amount, if any, the employee pays for the stock is includible in the
employee’s income for the year in which the transfer occurs.

If nonvested stock is transferred to an employee, no amount is includible in income as a
result of the transfer unless the employee elects to have income inclusion in the year of
transfer.'°? Otherwise, the excess of the fair market value of the stock at the time of vesting,
over the amount, if any, the employee pays for the stock is includible in the employee’s income
for the year in which vesting occurs.

In the case of an employee, the amount includible in income under section 83 is also
subject to income tax withholding and to social security tax (subject to the social security wage

1923 Sec. 83(b).

638

=== PAGE 667 ===
base) and Medicare tax and must be reported on a Form w-2.!°4 The amount includible in the
income of the employee (or other service provider) is generally deductible by the employer for
the taxable year of the employer in which the recipient’s taxable year of inclusion ends.

Compensatory stock options
In general

A stock option is the right to purchase stock at a specified price (or at a price determined
under a specified formula) at a specified time or during a specified period. Stock options granted
to employees or other service providers are considered to be compensation for services. There
are two general types of compensation-related stock options under the Code: nonqualified
options and statutory options.

Statutory options include incentive stock options!?”6 and options provided under an
employee stock purchase plan.!?”” Nonqualified options are any other options granted in
connection with the performance of services.

Nonqualified options

The income taxation of a nonqualified option is determined under section 83 and depends
on whether the option has a readily ascertainable fair market value when granted. A
nonqualified option has a readily ascertainable fair market value if (1) the option is actively
traded on an established market, or (2) the option is transferable, it is immediately exercisable in
full, the stock subject to the option is not subject to any restriction or condition that has a
significant effect on the value of the option, and the fair market value of the option privilege is
readily ascertainable. The option privilege is the opportunity to benefit from increases in the
value of the stock during the option period without risking capital.

If an individual receives a nonqualified option that has a readily ascertainable fair market
value at the time the option is granted, the excess of the fair market value of the option over the
amount, if any, paid for the option is includible in the recipient’s gross income as ordinary
income in the first taxable year in which the option is either transferable or is not subject to a
substantial risk of forfeiture (or, if the taxpayer elects, in the taxable year in which the option is

1924 Because there is no transfer of cash upon the vesting of the stock, the withholding
requirements may present administrative issues. Enron utilized several methods for handling
withholding in such cases, as described below.

1925 The employer must comply with applicable reporting requirements in order to claim
the deduction. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.83-6(a)(2). The amount of any deduction may also limited by
the $1 million limitation on the deduction of compensation of the top-five executives.

Sec. 162(m). This limitation is discussed in Part III.C.6., below.

1926 Sec. 422.

1927 Sec. 423.

639

=== PAGE 668 ===
granted). No amount is includible in the gross income of the option recipient due to the exercise
of the option.

If the nonqualified option does not have a readily ascertainable fair market value at the
time of grant, no amount is includible in the gross income of the recipient with respect to the
option until the recipient exercises the option. The transfer of stock on exercise of the option is
subject to the general rules of section 83. That is, if vested stock is received on exercise of the
option, the excess of the fair market value of the stock over the option price is includible in the
recipient’s gross income as ordinary income in the taxable year in which the option is exercised.
If the stock received on exercise of the option is not vested, the excess of the fair market value of
the stock at the time of vesting over the option price is includible in the recipient’s income for
the year in which vesting occurs unless the recipient elects to apply section 83 at the time of
exercise. In most cases, compensatory stock options do not have a readily ascertainable fair
market value.

In the case of an employee, the amount includible in income under section 83 with
respect to nonqualified stock options is also subject to income tax withholding and to social

security tax (subject to the social security wage base) and Medicare tax and must be reported on
a Form W-2.

The amount includible in the income of the employee (or other service provider) is
generally deductible by the employer for the taxable year of the employer in which the
recipient’s taxable year of inclusion ends,'98

Statutory options

The Federal tax rules applicable to statutory options are not discussed in detail here
because Enron did not utilize such options.'°””

1928 The employer must comply with applicable reporting requirements in order to claim
the deduction. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.83-6(a)(2). The amount of any deduction may also limited by
the $1 million limitation on the deduction of compensation of the top-five executives. Sec.
162(m). This limitation is discussed in Part III.C.6., below.

1929 The following general rules apply to statutory options. No amount is includible in
the gross income of the option recipient on the grant or exercise of a statutory option. No
compensation expense deduction is allowable to the employer with respect to the grant or
exercise of a statutory option. If an employee disposes of stock acquired upon exercise of a
statutory option, the employee generally is taxed at capital gains rates with respect to the excess
of the fair market value of the stock on the date of disposition over the option price, and no
compensation expense deduction is allowable to the employer, unless the employee fails to meet
a holding period requirement. For a detailed description of the rules relating to statutory options,
see Joint Committee on Taxation, Present Law and Background Relating to Executive
Compensation, JCX-29-02, at 41-44 (April 17, 2002).

640

=== PAGE 669 ===
Special techniques for exercising options

Cashless exercise of stock options

Stock option plans may allow employees to exercise their options through a cashless
exercise program generally operated by a company-designated broker. In a cashless exercise, on
behalf of the employee, the broker exercises the option and sells some of the stock acquired
pursuant to the option in one transaction. The amount of stock sold generally is sufficient to
generate cash in an amount needed to cover the exercise price and any taxes that the employer is
required to withhold upon exercise of the option. The remaining stock is then transferred to the
employee.

The funds required to exercise the options may be provided either by the issuer (e.g., by
advancing shares to the broker) or by the broker (by making a loan to the option holder and then
deducting the amount loaned from the proceeds of the sale). If the funds for the exercise of the
options are provided by the issuer, the broker transfers the exercise price along with tax
withholdings back to the issuer.!°!

Stock-for-stock exercise of stock options

Employers often allow optionees to pay the amount due on the exercise of an option with
already owned stock of the employer (a “stock-for-stock” exercise) rather than requiring
executives to pay cash. An IRS revenue ruling, |?” addresses the use of employer stock to
exercise stock options. Under the ruling, if stock of a corporation is exchanged for similar stock
in the same corporation, the transfer qualifies as a nontaxable transaction and the taxpayer is not
required to recognize the gain realized in the exchange.'*? Instead, the taxpayer’s basis in the
stock exchanged is transferred to an equal amount of new shares.!°** Shares received by the
employee that are in addition to the number of shares exchanged are treated as compensation for

1930 For purposes of section 83, in a cashless exercise, the employee is treated as having
received all the stock subject to the option, followed by a separate sale of stock. The amount
includible in the gross income of an employee as a result of the exercise of the option is not
affected by a cashless exercise.

1931 Some have suggested that cashless exercise programs may be affected by the
prohibition on loans to executives in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, because such programs
involve the extension of credit (or the arranging of credit) by the employer. Pub. L. No. 107-
204, sec. 402 (2002).

1932 Rev. Rul. 80-244, 1980-2 C.B. 234.

1933 Sec. 1036.

1934 Sec. 1031.

641

=== PAGE 670 ===
services under section 83(a).'°*> The employee is required to include in gross income the fair
market value of the additional shares received.

The stock-for-stock exercise effectively allows an employee to use the untaxed
appreciation in already owned shares on a tax-free basis to purchase new shares. Upon a stock-
for-stock exercise, taxes can be satisfied with already-owned shares or cash. The participant
does not incur a brokerage fee because the swap does not involve a sale on the open market. A
plan may provide that the employee does not have to physically surrender the previously owned
shares. Delivery of the shares may be accomplished through “attestation,” in which case the
executive provides an affidavit of ownership of the shares.

A stock-for-stock exercise can be illustrated by the following example:

An employee exercises an option to purchase 200 shares of stock with a fair
market value of $100 per share at an exercise price of $50 per share. To pay for
the exercise price, the employee exchanges 100 previously-owned shares, with a
fair market value of $100 per share, and a basis of $30 per share. The basis in the
previously-owned 100 shares would transfer to 100 new shares. The fair market
value of the additional 100 shares received ($10,000) is includible in income.

The use of a stock-for-stock exercise provides more favorable tax results to the executive
than would be the case if the executive first sold previously owned shares and then used the cash
to pay the purchase price. With a stock-for-stock exercise, the executive can postpone the
recognition of gain on the previously-owned shares. '**°

Gifting of stock options

Some employer plans permit the executive to transfer options to family members or
others as a gift. The IRS issued guidance on the gifting of options in 1998, which concludes that
the gratuitous transfer of a stock option is a completed gift at the later of: (1) the date of transfer,
or (2) when the right to exercise the option is no longer conditioned on the performance of
services by the transferor.'?? Upon exercise of the option by the transferee, the income tax is
generally required to be paid by the transferor.

The IRS guidance describes how an unexercised compensatory stock option is valued for
gift or estate tax purposes. 1938

135 Rey. Rul. 80-244.

1936 Th a stock-for-stock exercise, the amount includible income is the same amount that
would be includible in income if the employee paid the exercise price with cash, although the
amounts are arrived through different analyses.

1937 Rey, Rul. 98-21, 1998-18 LR.B. 7.

1938 Rey, Proc. 98-34, 1998-18 LR.B. 34.

642

=== PAGE 671 ===
Accounting for stock options

In general

The accounting rules for treatment of stock based compensation generally are governed
by Accounting Principles Board Opinion 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees,
(“APB 25”) and Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123, Accounting for Stock-
Based Compensation (“FAS 123”). FAS 123 is the preferred accounting method, but is not
mandatory. If a company accounts for options using APB 25, disclosure of the impact of
FAS 123 on the income statement is required.

APB 25 treatment of stock options

APB 25 requires compensation costs for stock-based employee compensation plans to be
recognized based on the difference, if any, between the quoted market price of the stock and the
amount an employee must pay to acquire the stock. No increase in value is ascribed to the right
to purchase the stock at a fixed price for a period of years. Correspondingly, no decrease in
value is ascribed to restrictions on the option. The comparison of the market price to the exercise
price is generally done on the grant date.!°?? The approach is effectively a snapshot of the
difference between the market price and exercise price at a specific date.

As a result of these rules, under APB 25, generally no compensation cost is recorded in
financial statements for stock options issued to employees if the exercise price is equivalent to or

greater than the market price on the grant date.

FAS 123 treatment of stock options

FAS 123, issued in 1995, defines a fair value method of accounting for employee stock
options. Under FAS 123, except in extremely rare situations, the fair value determination of an
option is made on the grant date.

The fair value of stock options is determined using an option-pricing model that takes
into account the stock price at the grant date, the exercise price, the expected life of the option,
the volatility of the underlying stock and the expected dividends on it, and the risk-free interest
rate over the expected life of the option. The fair value of an option estimated at the grant date is
not subsequently adjusted for changes, such as in the price of the underlying stock, its volatility,
or the life of the option.

The total amount of compensation cost recognized for an award of stock options is based
on the number of options that eventually vest. No compensation cost is recorded for options that
do not vest. If compensation cost has been recorded in a prior period and the employee does not
vest, such cost is reversed in the current period. Once an option vests no reversal of cost is
permitted if the option is forfeited or expires.

1939 An exception applies to certain variable plans, a type of stock option plan that is not
very common.

643

=== PAGE 672 ===
Other types of stock-based_ compensation
Stock appreciation rights

A stock appreciation right (“SAR”) is an arrangement under which the employee has the
right to receive the amount of the increase in the value of stock of the employer during a
specified period. The employee receives the increase in value by cashing out or exercising the
SAR. For example, the employee may be granted stock appreciation rights with respect to 1,000
shares of employer stock at a time when the stock is valued at $100 a share, and the SAR may be
exercisable for three years. As a result, the employee has the right at any time during the three
years to receive cash in the amount of the increase in value of 1000 shares of stock since the time
the SAR was granted. Variations in the terms of an SAR may include limitations on the
exercisability of the SAR until (or unless) certain stock value goals are met or allowing the
proceeds of the SAR to be paid in the form of stock rather than cash.

Because the employee has the right to receive on request the increase in stock value that
has already occurred (i.e., the current increase in stock value), SARs raise constructive receipt
issues. However, under IRS revenue rulings, a substantial limitation on the employee’s ability to
receive the current increase in stock value results from the fact that the employee must forego the
right to benefit from additional increases in stock value during the SAR period (i.e., the
employee must surrender a valuable right) in order to exercise the SAR. 4° Therefore, the
current increase in stock value is not considered constructively received. The amount received
on exercise of the SAR is includible in income and wages for employment tax purposes at that
time.

Phantom stock

A phantom stock unit is a contractual obligation of the company equal in value to one
share of the company which, until paid, is an unfunded bookkeeping credit on the records of the
company. Upon the vesting of phantom stock units, the holder is generally entitled to payment
in cash or in shares of common stock at the rate of one share of common stock for each phantom
stock unit, plus dividends that have accrued from the grant date until vesting. Payments made in
cash under a phantom stock plan are includible in gross income and wages when received.
Payments made in the form of stock are includible in income as provided under section 83.

Factual Background
In general

Enron utilized various types of programs to provide its employees with compensation tied
to the equity or long-term performance of the company. Included in these programs were stock-
based plans such as the 1991, 1994 and 1999 Stock Plans,'™"’ as well as one-time stock or option

1940 Rey. Rul. 80-300, 1980-2 C.B. 165.

1941 Other stock-based plans, such as the 1978, 1984 and 1988 Stock Option Plans were
no longer active during the 1990s.

644

=== PAGE 673 ===
grants such as the All-Employee Stock Option Program, the 2001 Special Stock Grant, and
“Project 50.” Long-term compensation programs that were not based on Enron stock included
the Performance Unit Plan, which was terminated in 1999.

In recent years, Enron used stock options and restricted stock as the long-term component
for executive compensation.'°” Various documents provided by Enron show that participation
in the long-term incentive program was limited to employees in the vice president job group and
above.!*? An employee involved in compensation matters interviewed by Joint Committee staff
stated that restricted stock was limited to executives. The Joint Committee staff asked Enron
whether nonexecutive level employees (i-e., employees below the vice president level) were
granted stock options and restricted stock other than through all-employee programs. Enron
responded that stock options and restricted stock/phantom stock were also granted to
nonexecutive level employees. '°“4

As part of its compensation package, Enron provided its executives with long-term
incentives designed to “encourage and reward...the enhancement of stockholder wealth.”!°*°
According to the proxy statements, the value of the long-term incentives, like base salary and
annual incentives, was targeted at the 75th percentile of Enron’s industry peer group.

Prior to 1999, long-term incentive grants were given in performance units under the
Performance Unit Plan’ and in stock options.'74” Occasionally, restricted stock was granted
for specific reasons, such as: (1) individual performance; (2) company performance; (3) to
accommodate special situations such as promotions; (4) in lieu of other benefits; or (5) to remain

1942 according to Enron, options were never repriced.
1943 See, e.g., Enron Corp. Executive Compensation program brochure. EC 002634796.

1944 7 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated December 20, 2002. Joint Committee staff asked Enron for data regarding stock
options and restricted stock granted to nonexecutives. In providing the data, Enron stated that
there is some overlap in grants to executives, so that data does not clearly indicate the amount of
options and restricted stock provided to nonexecutives. Because the data provided does not
provide the requested information, it is not included here.

1945 1992 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.
1946 See the discussion below for an explanation of this long-term incentive program.

1947 ‘according to the proxy statements, the value of an Enron stock option was based
upon the value of Enron stock at the time of the grant and other factors, including stock price
volatility, dividend rate, option term, vesting schedule, termination provisions and long-term
interest rates. In 2000, stock options were granted with a seven-year term, 25 percent vesting on
date of grant and 25 percent vesting each anniversary date thereafter. In 2001, the term of stock
options was changed to five years and the portion of the grant vesting each year was increased to
30 percent.

645

=== PAGE 674 ===
market competitive. "48 Aggregate stock holdings of the executives had no bearing on the size of
long-term incentive grants.

In 1999, citing difficulties in identifying an appropriate peer group for comparison and
the tenuous connection between peer group performance and executive management, Enron
ceased giving long-term incentive grants under the Performance Unit Plan. Consequently, for the
years 1999 to 2001, long-term grants to executives consisted of fifty percent nonqualified stock
options and fifty percent performance-based restricted stock with a performance accelerated
vesting feature.’ According to the 1999 proxy statement, the ultimate value of the
performance based restricted stock awards made to executives was to depend upon the
achievement of recurring after-tax net income targets established by the Compensation
Committee for the years 1999, 2000, and 2001 and Enron’s stock price.

During the 1990s, Enron had two principal stock plans: the 1991 Stock Plan and the 1994
Stock Plan. In 1999, Enron approved the 1999 Stock Plan as a funding mechanism for the
issuance of common stock in connection with special circumstances. The plans are described
below.

1991 Stock Plan

History

The 1991 Stock Plan was created in 1991 as an unfunded plan with the purpose of
encouraging Enron employees and other eligible persons to “develop a proprietary interest in the
growth and performance of the Company . . . generate an increased incentive to contribute to the
Company’s future success and prosperity . . . and enhance the ability of the Company to retain
key individuals.”!°° The Plan was restated and approved by the shareholders in 1994, 1997,
1999, and 2001. Various amendments that did not require shareholder approval were approved
throughout the years.

Eligibility

When the 1991 Stock Plan was created in 1991, eligible participants included all
employees of Enron Corp. and its affiliates as well as nonemployee directors of Enron Corp. or
an affiliate.!°>' Nonemployee contractors were added as eligible participants in 1994. In 1999,

1948 1998 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

1949 9000 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement. According to the proxy statement, restricted
stock was subject to four-year cliff vesting from the date of grant. However, vesting could be
accelerated based upon Enron’s annual cumulative shareholder return relative to the S&P 500.
For example, if Enron’s cumulative shareholder return exceeded the 90" percentile, 100 percent
would vest on the date of grant.

1950 1991 Stock Plan, section 1.

1951 1994 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

646

=== PAGE 675 ===
however, the entire class of eligible participants in the 1991 Stock Plan was changed to include
only employees who were residents of the United Kingdom or members of the Management
Committee of Enron, and nonemployee directors. The change in eligibility decreased the
number of individuals eligible to receive benefits under the 1991 Stock Plan from approximately
7,000'°” to 500.'9*

Grants under the 1991 Stock Plan

Initially, the 1991 Stock Plan provided for grants of (1) stock options, |? 4 including
incentive stock options meeting the requirements of section 422 of the Code,'*** and stock
options with a grant price that is discounted from the fair market value to be used only in lieu of
cash bonus payments, (2) stock appreciation rights (“SARs”), and (3) restricted stock. !9°6

In 1996, the 1991 Stock Plan was amended to provide that phantom stock units would be
given to Enron directors in lieu of restricted stock and to permit the grant of phantom stock units
interchangeably with restricted stock to eligible persons other than directors. 951 According to
documents provided by Enron, the decision to grant phantom stock units in lieu of restricted
stock was motivated by the desire to avoid constructive receipt for employees who met the 1991
Stock Plan’s definition of retirement.'°® Under the 1991 Stock Plan, vesting of restricted stock
was to be accelerated when an employee met the plan’s definition of retirement. Employees who

1952 1997 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

1953 1999 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

1954 The 1991 Stock Plan provided that exercise price of a stock option could not be less
than the fair market value of the stock on the date of grant.

1955 Although the 1991 Stock Plan provided for incentive stock options, Enron did not
grant such options.

1956 The 1991 Stock Plan provided that restrictions placed on restricted stock would
remain in place for at least three years in the case of restricted stock and, in the case of
performance-based restricted stock, for least one year. Dividends or credits associated with the
restricted stock were to be withheld during that period but credited to the participant’s account.
When shares became vested, all accumulated credits and dividends were to be distributed to the
participant. The Plan provided that non-vested restricted stock would be forfeited if the
participant terminated service for any reason other than death, disability, retirement, or
involuntary termination. On the occurrence of certain events such as such as a merger,
dissolution, sale of assets and consolidation, the Plan provided for the accelerated vesting of
restricted stock and stock options.

1957 Minutes of the meeting of the Compensation Committee (May 6, 1996).

1958 BC 000102953. While documents provided by Enron state that there was an issue of
constructive receipt, the actual issue appears to be a section 83 issue regarding a transfer of
property.

647

=== PAGE 676 ===
met the definition of retirement but who remained employed with Enron would be vested in
restricted stock and could be subject to taxation before actual receipt of the shares. To defer
taxation until the payout of the shares, the plan was amended to grant phantom stock units
instead of restricted stock, on the theory that phantom stock is considered an unfunded promise
to pay stock which would be taxable when actually or constructively received, rather than section
83 property, which would be taxed upon vesting.

In 1997, Enron eliminated the availability of discounted options under the 1991 Stock
Plan, and the plan was amended to provide that the exercise price of options would not be less
than fair market value of the stock on the date of grant. In 1999, stock appreciation rights were
eliminated from constituting an option for award under the 1991 Stock Plan,

Performance-based compensation

In 1994, in order for awards under the 1991 Stock Plan to qualify as performance-based
compensation for purposes of the $1 million limitation on the deduction of certain executive
compensation,'°? the 1991 Stock Plan was amended to provide that: (1) the issuance of awards
was contingent upon attainment of preestablished performance criteria: (2) restrictions would
lapse contingent upon attainment of preestablished performance criteria, and (3) the issuance was
in lieu of cash payments under the Annual Incentive Plan or Performance Unit Plan, based upon
attainment of the performance criteria established under the terms of those stockholder approved
plan. Likewise, limitations were placed on the number of options, stock appreciation rights and
performance-based restricted stock that could be given to any one individual during a calendar
year. The limit on options and stock appreciation rights was set at one million, while the number
of performance-based restricted stock was capped at 100,000.!7°

Shares available

When the 1991 Stock Plan was first approved in 1991, the number of shares available for
grant under the plan was 11 million.!*! The number of shares authorized for granting awards
under the 1991 Stock Plan was increased by 10 million in each of the years 1994, 1997, and
1999. In 2001, an additional 21 million shares (reflecting a two-for-one stock split that took
place in 1999) were added to the 1991 Stock Plan. No more than an aggregate of 25 percent of

the shares available under the 1991 Stock Plan could be granted as restricted stock or phantom
stock units.!°

1959 This limitation is discussed in Part III.C.6., below.

1960 As a result of the stock split, the caps were set at 2 million for both restricted stock
and stock appreciation rights and at 200,000 for performance-based restricted stock.

1961 This is equal to 2.75 million shares, adjusted for stock splits in December 1991 and
August 1993.

1962 1996 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

648

=== PAGE 677 ===
Assignability and transferability of awards

Originally, the 1991 Stock Plan contained an antialienation provision prohibiting the
assignment or transfer of awards (with the exception of transfer pursuant to a qualified domestic
relations order.) In 1996, the 1991 Stock Plan was amended to allow the transfer of stock
options to immediate family members, family trusts, and family partnerships. ° This transfer
program is discussed in more detail, below.

On October 9, 2000, the 1991 Stock Plan was amended to allow the transfer by an
eligible participant of options to a private charitable foundation described in 501(c)(3), the assets
of which are controlled by the participant and one or more members of his or her immediate
family.’ 4

Nonemployee directors

Nonemployee directors were eligible to receive awards under the 1991 Stock Plan, except
for incentive stock options. Under the 1991 Stock Plan, nonemployee directors were to receive
each year an amount equal to half of their retainer fee in restricted stock or stock options.!°®° In
1994, the 1991 Stock Plan was amended to allow non-employee directors to elect to receive a
portion or all of their retainer fees in restricted stock and stock options.

Pursuant to the terms of the 1991 Stock Plan, nonemployee directors were required to
defer fifty percent of their annual retainer fee into the 1994 Deferral Plan. On August 11, 1999,
the 1991 Stock Plan was amended to allow nonresident, nonemployee directors whose deferral
was regarded as the receipt of taxable income in their country of residence, to elect to waive the
portion of the retainer fee required to be deferred and receive an award of phantom stock units
under the 1991 Stock Plan.'”°°

On August 14, 2001, the 1991 Stock Plan was amended to provide that if a nonemployee
director resigned with the approval of the board, the Compensation Committee could fully vest

1963 1997 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement. This change followed the 1996 amendments to
the short-swing profit liability rules under section 16(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,
which eliminated the requirement that stock options be nontransferable.

1964 Sixth amendment to the 1991 Stock Plan (as amended and restated May 4, 1999).
According to documents provided by Enron, the change would allow employees to claim
charitable contribution deductions on the transfers to private charities.

1965 Only 20 percent of the options granted could be exercised on the date of grant, with
an additional 20 percent becoming exercisable in each of the following four years. On May 2,
2000, the 1991 Stock Plan was amended to provide that the 20 percent portions of the options
granted were to become exercisable only upon the completion of a full term of service by the
nonemployee director. Fourth Amendment to the 1991 Stock Plan, as amended and restated
May 4, 1999.

1966 First Amendment to the 1991 Stock Plan (as amended and restated May 4, 1999).

649

=== PAGE 678 ===
grants of restricted stock made to the director and extend the time in which he or she could
exercise options after resignation. °°”

Other provisions

The 1991 Stock Plan was amended to allow for broker cashless exercise of stock options.
As mentioned above, in a cashless exercise, the broker loans money to exercise the options, sells
the shares, deducts taxes and commissions from the sales proceeds, and sends the participant the
remaining proceeds.

Under the 1991 Stock Plan, the payment of the exercise price and applicable tax
withholding amounts was required to be made at the time of option exercise and could be made
by delivery of cashier’s checks, shares of stock, or other property, which allowed participants to
use stock-for-stock exercises. Prior to 1996, shares could not be used to satisfy tax withholding
obligations.

1994 Stock Plan

History

The 1994 Stock Plan was created in 1994 to provide long-term incentives to employees in

a similar way to the 1991 Stock Plan: The purpose of the 1994 Stock Plan was “to enable all

_ employees employed by Enron Corp. . . . and its Affiliates and other eligible persons to develop
a proprietary interest in the growth and performance of the Company, to generate an increased
incentive to contribute to the Company’s future success and prosperity, thus enhancing the value
of the Company for the benefit of its stockholders, and to enhance the ability of Enron and its
Affiliates to attract and retain employees who are essential to the progress, growth and
profitability of Enron.”!° The 1994 Stock Plan was amended several times and restated on
October 12, 1999.

Eligibility

Eligible participants in the 1994 Stock Plan included any employee of Enron or of an
affiliate, any nonemployee director of an affiliate, and any nonemployee contractor performing
services for Enron. Originally, any person who was subject to section 16(b) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 or any officer or director of Enron who was covered by the New York
Stock Exchange listing requirements was not eligible to be designated a participant. This
participation restriction was subsequently removed.!°

1967 First Amendment to 1991 Stock Plan (as amended and restated May 1, 2001).
1968 Enron Corp. 1994 Stock Plan.

1969 Tune 28, 1999.

650

=== PAGE 679 ===
Grants

When originally enacted, stock options and restricted stock could be awarded under the
1994 Stock Plan. The 1994 Stock Plan was later amended to allow the grant of phantom stock
units.!°”° Grants of incentive stock options could not be made under the 1994 Stock Plan.!?7!
The number of shares of restricted stock available for grant under the 1994 Stock Plan was

limited to not more than 25 percent of the total number of shares available under the 1994 Stock
Plan.

On February 7, 2000, the 1994 Stock Plan was amended to provide that bookkeeping
credit for phantom stock units given to individuals who were subject to the tax laws of specified
countries would be made in cash rather than Enron stock.'°””

Shares available

When the 1994 Stock Plan was created, the number of shares approved for awards was
three million. On May 3, 1994, the number of shares under the Plan was increased to 11
million.'?”? The number of shares was further increased to 18 million, 26.5 million and then to 30
million between the years 1994 and 1997. In June of 1999, additional shares were added for a
total of 45 million (updated to 90 million after the 1999 two-for-one stock split). Finally, in
February and December of 2000, the number of shares available was increased to 104 million
and 124 million, respectively.'°”*

Antialienation provisions

Under the 1994 Stock Plan as originally enacted, no rights under the 1994 Stock Plan
could be pledged, alienated, attached or encumbered, except pursuant to a domestic relations
order.

On August 8, 2000, the antialienation provision was amended to allow for the transfer of
awards under the 1994 Stock Plan by a participant to: (1) a member of his or her immediate
family; (2) a trust solely for the benefit of the participant and his or her immediate family; or (3)

197 December 12, 1997.
1971 Enron Corp. 1994 Stock Plan (as amended and restated in October, 1999).

1972 The change was made in response to the tax laws of China. Second Amendment to
the 1994 Stock Plan (as amended and restated effective October 12, 1999).

1973 First amendment to 1994 Stock Plan.

1974 Second and Fifth Amendments to the 1994 Stock Plan (as amended and restated
effective October 12, 1999).

651

=== PAGE 680 ===
a partnership or limited liability company whose only partners are the participant and his or her
immediate family.'°” This transfer program is discussed in more detail, below.

On October 9, 2000, the provisions were further amended to allow transfers of awarded
options by a participant to a section 501(c)(3) charitable foundation the assets of which are
controlled by the participant and/or one or more of his or her immediate family members.!?”6

Other provisions

The 1994 Stock Plan was amended to allow for broker cashless exercise of stock options.
As mentioned above, in a cashless exercise, the broker loans the money to exercise the options,
sells the shares, deducts taxes and commissions from the sales proceeds, and sends the
participant the remaining proceeds.

Under the 1994 Stock Plan, the payment of the exercise price and applicable tax
withholding amounts was required to be made at the time of exercise and could be by delivery of
cashier’s checks, shares of stock, or other property, which allowed participants to use stock-for-
stock exercises. Prior to 1996, shares could not be used to satisfy tax withholding obligations.

1999 Stock Plan

The 1999 Stock Plan was created to “provide a funding source for the issuance of
common stock of Enron Corp. in connection with special situations, including, but not limited to
divestitures, outsourcing, remuneration payable under compensatory programs sponsored by
Enron and its affiliates, and any other circumstance deemed, by the Compensation Committee of
the Board of Directors as such a special situation.”

Eligible participants included all employees of Enron Corp. and its affiliates,
nonemployee directors, nonemployee contractors, and any individual who had accepted an offer
of employment with Enron Corp. or an affiliate.

Under the 1999 Stock Plan, awards could be given in restricted stock, stock options, or
phantom stock units. No grants of incentive stock options could be made under the 1999 Stock
Plan. The number of shares available for grant under the 1999 Stock Plan was initially 3 million.
Awards granted were inalienable with the exception of a transfer pursuant to a qualified domestic
relations order.

Under the 1999 Stock Plan, the payment of the exercise price and applicable tax
withholding amounts were required to be made at the time of exercise by delivery of cashier’s
checks, shares of stock, or other property, thus allowing stock-for-stock exercises.

1975 Third Amendment to the 1994 Stock Plan (as amended and restated effective
October 12, 1999).

1976 Fourth Amendment to the 1994 Stock Plan (as amended and restated effective
October 12, 1999).

652

=== PAGE 681 ===
Stock option transfer program

After amending the 1991 and 1994 Stock Plans to allow for the transfer of options to
family members or family controlled entities, Enron instituted the stock option transfer program.
In 2000, the 1991 and 1994 Stock Plans were amended to allow transfers to private charitable
foundations controlled by participants or their immediate family members. Originally, eligibility
for participation in the program was limited to nonemployee directors and Management
Committee members. In August 2000, eligibility was expanded to include all employees who
received grants from the 1991 or 1994 Stock Plans.

Pursuant to the stock option transfer program, employees could irrevocably gift stock
options granted under the 1991 and 1994 Stock Plans to family members or certain family-
controlled entities.!"”’ Transfers could be made to immediate family members, to a trust for the
exclusive benefit of immediate family members, or to a partnership in which immediate family
members are the only partners. As mentioned above, the plans were later amended to allow
transfers to private charitable foundations controlled by a participant or his or her immediate
family.'°”8 The employee would pay gift tax on the present value of the options, subject to the
annual gift-tax exclusion or the lifetime unified tax credit. Enron advised employees against
gifting unvested stock options given the IRS’ position’? that the transfer of unvested options
would not be considered a completed gift, the result being that gift tax would be assessed on the
value of the options on the date of vesting rather than the date of the gift.

When the transferee exercised the options, the employee would be responsible for income
tax payments on the gains realized.!°®° No additional payment of gift tax or estate tax would be
required on the death of the employee since the options were already removed from the
employee’s estate by the transfer.

As stated in materials given to employees explaining the program “[t]he gifting technique
allows you, with little or no additional tax, to pass on stock option gains that would have been in
the estate and subject to estate rates of up to 55 percent.”!°8! In addition, for transfers to family
charitable foundations, the employee could be eligible for a charitable deduction.

1977 Tp February 2001, the Compensation Committee approved administrative procedures
to be followed under the stock option transfer program.

1978 Even though allowed by the plans, program information given to participants does
not include transfers to private charitable foundations as a permissible under the program.

1979 Rey, Rul. 98-21, 1998-18 LR.B. 7.
1989 Documents provided to participants state that upon exercise of an option by the
transferee, Federal income tax withholding was required to be paid to the Company by the

executive for the amount of withholding tax imputed to the executive.

1981 Memorandum to Executive Committee Members regarding the stock option transfer
program. EC2 000019353.

653

=== PAGE 682 ===
Enron used the Black-Scholes option pricing method to value options transferred. !°%
Employees were advised that more recent grants would have the lowest estimated value and
would create the lowest gift tax liability and the greatest benefit.

As stated in employee materials provided by Enron, benefits to the transferor included:
(1) the ability to pass on stock options that would have otherwise been in the estate and subject to
estate taxes; (2) the ability to gift vested stock options immediately after vesting at a discounted
theoretical value which reduces the gift tax when the gifting occurs; (3) the ability to provide a
benefit that appreciates over time and is tax free to heirs upon exercise; and (4) the ability to
maximize the benefits to heirs by utilizing the $10,000 per recipient annual gift tax exclusion
and/or the $675,000 lifetime unified tax credit. '*°

The Compensation Committee was required to be notified of the terms and conditions of
any transfer and was required to determine that the transfer complied with the requirements of
the applicable plan. Documents provided by Enron indicate that transfers by at least five
persons, including Ken Lay and two members of the Board of Directors, were approved by the
Compensation Committee. 1984

Stock option tax shelter

The materials provided in response to the Joint Committee staff’s general request for
information regarding Enron compensation arrangements included documents describing a
technique purporting to defer inclusion of income upon the exercise of an employee’s stock
options. 1985 The documents indicate that Enron apparently considered whether to have a role in
facilitating the technique and in letting Arthur Andersen show the technique to employees. The

1982 Documents provided by Enron show that in some years, multiple valuations were
considered. For an assumed transfer date of November 15, 2000, one set of valuations that
conforms strictly to Revenue Procedure 98-34 and qualified for safe harbor treatment was
considered, as was another set of valuations which Enron believed conformed to Revenue
Procedure 98-34, but took a more aggressive approach.

1983 Enron informed participants that the possible drawbacks are: the inability to control
the timing of the exercise, which must be relinquished to the transferee; the income tax that the
executive must pay; income tax consequences to the transferee if the executive dies before the
options are exercised; and if the executive pays gift tax upon the transfer and the stock does not
appreciate, tax would be paid on income never realized.

1984 The documents indicate that the Compensation Committee approved transfers during
1997-1998 to family members, family partnerships, and trusts of executives. EC 000104417; EC
000102332; EC2 000019444 - EC2 000019470; EC 002634789.

1985 Sale of Executive Options Techniques, EC 000770979 — EC 000770981, and Sale of
Executive Options Technique — Advantages and Disadvantages, EC 000770978. Enron also
received a draft opinion letter for employees from Arthur Andersen (1999) (EC2 000038589 —
EC2 000038616), but it is not known whether Enron ever supplied the letter to any employees.
These materials are included in Appendix D of this Report.

654

=== PAGE 683 ===
technique involves the purported sale of the option to a partnership consisting of the employee’s
family members, followed by the partnership’s exercise of the option and possible sale of the
stock. In order for the technique to be effective, it would require Enron not to report gain on the
exercise of the stock option on the employee’s W-2 statement. °°

In an interview with Joint Committee staff, Mr. Hermann indicated that he understood
that the technique was considered to be of interest to one employee. He declined to name this
individual. He also told the Joint Committee staff that the tax department had reviewed the
technique and had advised that Enron was required to withhold. Thus, the technique would not
achieve the intended result. Mr. Hermann stated that he believed that Enron had not facilitated
this type of transaction. From the materials received by the Joint Committee staff, it is not clear
whether or not any Enron executives entered into a transaction of this type.

Performance Unit Plan

The Performance Unit Plan was created to provide long-term incentive compensation tied
to increases in stockholder value to key Enron executive employees. '°8” According to the
Performance Unit Plan, eligible participants included employees of Enron Corp. and its
subsidiaries who participated in the Enron Executive Compensation Program. Dr. Charles
LeMaistre, the Chairman of the Compensation Committee, submitted written testimony to the
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations on May 7, 2002, regarding, among other things, the
Performance Unit Plan.'*** In his statement, Dr. LeMaistre stated that Enron granted
performance units to corporate and certain operating company executives who were not in an
Enron long-term incentive plan. These operating company executives were, for the most part, in
commercial support and pipeline businesses. Dr. LeMaistre stated that he believed that
performance unit awards were granted pursuant to the Performance Unit Plan between 1987 and
1998.

Prior to the beginning of each calendar year, the Compensation Committee would
designate the employees that were eligible to receive performance units during that year and the
number of performance units to be given to each individual. Each performance unit had a value
at the time of grant of $1. No single individual could be granted more than 3 million
performance units in one calendar year.

Pursuant to the Performance Unit Plan, the total shareholder return of Enron was
compared to that of a selected peer group comprised of 11 publicly held companies over a four-

1986 Sale of Executive Options Technique — Advantages and Disadvantages,
EC 000770978. This document states, “Enron will require guidance from Arthur Andersen as
the executive’s tax advisor to operationalize manually overriding the payroll system to legally
keep income off of the executive’s W-2 statement.”

1987 1994 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.
1988 Fearing on The Role of the Board of Directors in Enron’s Collapse before the

Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Government Affairs, 107th
Cong. (May 7, 2002) (testimony of Dr. Charles LeMaistre).

655

=== PAGE 684 ===
year period. The value of the performance units was then determined with reference to the
ranking of Enron’s shareholder return relative to its peer group as shown in Table 22, below.

Table 22.-Performance Unit Adjusted Values

Enron’s Total Shareholder Return Adjusted Value
| Ranking Position
1 $2.00
2 $1.50
3 $1.00
4 $0.75
5 $0.50
6 $0.25
7 through 12 $0.00

Additionally, irrespective of the ranking position of Enron’s shareholder return, if the
total return for the period did not exceed the cumulative percentage return for 90-day U.S.
treasury bills, the performance unit would have no value.

In 1995, the Plan was restated and approved by shareholders to comply with the
requirements of section 162(m) for deductions of performance-based compensation. !*°°

All-employee stock option arrangements

In general

Enron periodically made stock option grants to all employees. These grants were made
to allow all employees to become shareholders of Enron. ,

All-Employee Stock Option Program

Under the All-Employee Stock Option Program, participants were entitled to receive a
one-time up-front grant of Enron stock options. The six-year program was created in 1994 and
was offered to all full-time Enron employees and part-time employees who completed at least
1,000 hours of service. The grants were made under the 1991 Stock Plan for Section 16 officers
and under the 1994 Stock Plan for all other employees.

Initial grants under the program were made in 1994 and were equal in value to 30 percent
of the annual base salary of each employee. For those joining the All-Employee Stock Option
Program in subsequent years, the benefit was reduced by five percent for each year. For
example, so that those joining in 1999 received a grant equal to five percent of their annual
benefits. The grant was awarded on the last business day of the calendar year in which the
employee was hired. Stock options awarded under the All-Employee Stock Option Program
vested ratably over five years or over the remaining years of the program, whichever was shorter.

1989 1995 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

656

=== PAGE 685 ===
Enron documents indicate that the program was implemented in lieu of a company match
under the Enron Savings Plan because of the cost savings that could be achieved by Enron.
Documents provided by Enron show that a 401(k) match would have cost the Enron $43.9
million more than the All-Employee Stock Option Program. 1990 Documents provided by Enron
show that if options would have been held to a $75 stock price, they would have delivered $1.77
billion in option value, while a 401(k) match, if implemented, would have delivered only $359.2
million in value.!°?! The Compensation Committee decided to repeat the program in 2000
through 2005.

One Enron - “Project 50” Stock Option Program

Eligible employees on the payroll as of December 31, 1999, participated in “Project 50.”
Under the program, employees were given a one-time grant of 50 stock options on January 18,
2000, in recognition of Enron’s stock price reaching $50 after the 1999 two-for-one stock-split.
Included in the Project 50 informational materials provided by Enron to participants is a message
from Mr. Lay thanking the employees’ contributions to Enron’s success. In his words, “I look
forward to working with you as we continue to make Enron a successful global energy and
communications company. And it would not surprise me if our stock continued to $50
milestones after two-for-one splits on an even more frequent basis. In fact, anything is possible,
if we are focused, if we work together, as a team, as One Enron.”

EnronOptions

In May 2000, Enron approved a new all-employee stock option program called
“EnronOptions - Your Stock Option Program” which was to commence in 2001 and continue for
a five-year period. Pursuant to the program, all full-time and part-time employees on the payroll
of Enron as of December 29, 2000, were awarded a one-time grant of stock options equal in
value to 25 percent of their annual base salary." Employees joining after 2001 were to receive
the annual grant in the year they were hired equal in value to five percent of their annual base
salary multiplied by the number years remaining in the program. Stock options awarded under
the program were to vest ratably on June 30 of each year remaining in the program.

Pursuant to bankruptcy rules, the EnronOptions program was terminated effective with
the December 20, 2001, Compensation Committee meeting.'°"*

1999 BC 000101777.

1991 BC 000101777.

1982 BC2 000019565.

1993 9001 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

EEN Compensation Committee Meeting Minutes, December 20, 2001.

657

=== PAGE 686 ===
2001 Special Stock Grant

In the summer of 2001, when Enron’s financial problems were getting much attention,
Enron made an all-employee stock grant. The 2001 Special Stock Grant was made to most
eligible Enron employees; some Enron companies’ employees were not eligible due to legal,
accounting, tax, labor or business issues.!°° Grants were made to eligible employees who were
active, regular employees of participating companies on August 13, 2001. Such employees
received options equal to five percent of their annual base salary, as of August 13, 2001. Most
employees were granted options on August 21, 2001, with an exercise price equal to the closing
price of Enron stock ($36.88) on that date. The number of options that an eligible employee
would receive was based on five percent of an employee’s annualized base salary, as of August
13, 2001, and a theoretical stock option value of $15 (the Black-Scholes value for Enron stock on
the grant date). The grant date for some non-U.S. locations was made at a later time due to
pending legal/business issues. The grant price for grants made to eligible employees after
August 21, 2001, was determined on the date of grant.

Options granted through the 2001 Special Stock Option Grant were 100 percent vested on
the date of grant. Eligible employees who received the grant had five years to exercise the stock
options unless they terminated employment. Although examples in employee communications
assumed that the stock price would increase, Enron noted that there was no assurance that Enron
common stock would increase in value.

Enron employees interviewed Joint Committee staff stated that the grant was done for
goodwill and morale reasons on account of concerns that the stock price continued to decline. In
connection with the 2001 Special Stock Grant, Mr. Lay circulated an electronic mail message to
employees stating “one of my highest priorities is to restore investor confidence in Enron. This
should result in a significantly higher stock price . . . I ask for your continued help and support as
we work together to achieve this goal.”!°%°

Miscellaneous

As discussed in Part III.B.2., above, Enron had two bonus deferral programs. Under the
Bonus Phantom Stock Program and the Bonus Stock Option Program, participants were given
the opportunity to receive stock options and/or phantom stock in lieu of cash bonus.

In addition, Enron offered the deferral of stock options gains and deferral of restricted
stock programs in which participants could defer taxation attributable to such compensation.
The deferral of stock option gains program allowed executives to exercise options without
outlaying cash or incurring any current income tax liability. The program would be particularly
useful for options due to expire. These programs are discussed in Part III.C.1.

Before Enron revised its compensation system in 1999, many other stock/equity plans
existed throughout the various business units. These included the: Enron Capital & Trade

195 BC2 000019566.

1996 BC 000851236.

658

=== PAGE 687 ===
Resources Corp. Phantom Stock Unit Plan; Enron Energy Services, LLC Phantom Equity Plan;
Enron Power Corp. Phantom Equity Plan, Enron International Stock Plan; Enron Renewable
Energy Corp. Tandem Option Program; Northern Plains Natural Gas Company Phantom Stock
Unit Plan; and Azurix Corp. Stock Option Plan. Miscellaneous stock-related programs may have
also existed for various groups of employees or business units.!°°”

Discussion of Issues

In general

Enron used considerable amounts of stock-based compensation, and the amount of
compensation generated from such arrangements increased dramatically in the years immediately
preceding the bankruptcy, particularly in 2000.

Table 23, below, shows the Enron’s deduction attributable to stock options for 1998
through 2000.'°

Table 23.-Enron Deduction Attributable to Stock Options 1998-2000

Year Amount of Deduction
1998 $125,343,000
1999 $585,000 as filed

$367,798,000 as amended
2000 $1,549,748,000

Table 24, below, shows the amount of income attributable to stock options for the highest
paid 200 employees for 1998, 1999, and 2000. This is summary information provided by the
IRS, based on information provided by Enron to the IRS.

Table 24.-Income Attributable to Stock Options for Top-200 Most
Highly Paid Enron Employees (1998-2000)

Year Amount of Compensation
1998 $61,978,000
1999 $244,579,000
2000 $1,063,567,000

Table 25, below, shows the income generated from the release, i.e., vesting, of stock
options for the top-200 most highly paid Enron employees for 1998-2000. This information is
also summary information provided by the IRS based on information provided by Enron to the
IRS.

1997 Minutes of the Compensation Committee show that the committee approved two
other miscellaneous programs, the Key Performer Stock Option Retention Program and the
NationsBank OptionPlus Program. It is unclear whether such programs were implemented.

1998 Information from Schedule M1.

659

=== PAGE 688 ===
Table 25.-Income Attributable to the Vesting of Restricted Stock for
Top-200 Most Highly Paid Enron Employees (1998-2000)

Year Amount of Compensation
1998 $23,966,000
1999 $21,943,000
2000 $131,701,000

Enron’s stock-based compensation programs can be analyzed both from a Federal tax
perspective and from a nontax perspective. As discussed below, while Enron took advantage of
tax planning opportunities in implementing its stock-based compensation programs, with two
exceptions, the issues raised by these programs are not primarily tax-related.

Federal tax issues, in general

From a Federal tax perspective, Enron structured its stock-based compensation
arrangements with an eye toward tax planning, sometimes from the point of view of Enron,
sometimes from the point of view of the executive. For example, the use of nonqualified stock
options resulted in tax deductions for Enron that would not have been available if Enron had
used qualified stock options.!°”

Enron also made use of techniques that benefited the executives from a tax perspective.
For example, the use of stock-for-stock exercises provided a more favorable tax result for the
executive than would have resulted if the executive sold Enron stock and used the cash proceeds
to exercise options. In addition, the stock option transfer program, which allowed the gifting of
stock options to family members and certain other persons, was clearly an estate planning device
and was described to employees as such. However, both of these programs appeared to operate
in accordance with published IRS rulings. °° In these cases, Enron appeared to do little more
than take advantage of tax planning opportunities provided clear IRS authority.

There are two aspects of Enron’s stock-based compensation programs that raise Federal
tax issues. The first is the ability to defer gain on the exercise of options and restricted stock,
which is discussed in Part III.C.1., above. The second is the sale of executive stock options tax
shelter technique, which, if utilized by Enron executives, would raise signification tax issues. As
mentioned above, it is unclear whether Enron executives engaged in this transaction. Issues with
respect to this technique are discussed below.

1999 There may be other reasons Enron did not use qualified options, including the
restrictions placed on those options under applicable Code requirements.

2000 Tt also appears that Enron attempted to comply with withholding requirements for
stock-based compensation.

660

=== PAGE 689 ===
Stock option tax shelter technique

Recent news articles have drawn attention to attempts to defer inclusion of income upon
the exercise of employees’ stock options.7™ Publicity has focused on the question of whether
the sale of the option to the partnership can be an arm’s length transaction."

Enron received a copy of a draft opinion letter (not addressed to any particular individual)
from Arthur Andersen that could be provided to individuals who utilize the technique.” In the
transaction contemplated in the draft Arthur Andersen opinion letter, an employee who holds
stock options sells the options to a family partnership owned 79 percent by himself, 17 percent
by his wife, and one percent by each of his two sons. The partnership is capitalized with cash
contributed by the option holder and his family ($180,000 by the employee, and $20,000 by the
other family members). The purchase price of the options is set at $2 million as determined by
an appraisal performed by Arthur Andersen. Upon the sale of the stock options to the
partnership, the option holder takes back an unfunded and unsecured promissory obligation to
repay the purchase price after 20 years, at 8 percent interest. The terms of the purchase
agreement are described as “designed to be comparable to similar commercial transactions.” 7°

The draft opinion letter concludes it is more likely than not that: (1) the partnership will
be recognized as a valid partnership for Federal income tax purposes; (2) the sale of options to
the partnership will be respected as a valid sale between two separate taxable entities; (3) the
assignment of income doctrine will not apply to the sale; (4) a disposition of options at fair
market value under commercially reasonable terms satisfies the arm’s length standard of section
83; (5) once the options are disposed of at arm’s length under section 83, thereby triggering the
realization of ordinary income, any subsequent exercise of the options by the partnership does
not invoke the re-application of section 83; (6) the transferor’s receipt of the partnership’s
unfunded and unsecured promise to pay the appraised value of the options plus interest will not
constitute the “receipt of property” for purposes of section 83, so recognition of compensatory
ordinary income should be delayed until the transferor receives principal payments under the
promissory obligation; and (7) the timing and amount of the grantor corporation’s deduction for
compensation paid correspond to the timing and amount of compensation included in the
transferor’s gross income.

2001 Johnston, Costly Questions Arise on Legal Opinions for Tax Shelters, N.Y. Times,
Feb. 9, 2003, at A15; Glater and Labaton, Auditor Role in Working for Executives is Questioned,
N.Y. Times, Feb. 8, 2003, at B1; Johnston and Glater, Tax Shelter Is Worrying Sprint’s Chief,
N.Y. Times, Feb. 6, 2003, at C1; Blumenstein, Lublin and Young, Sprint Forced Out Top
Executives Over Questionable Tax Shelter, Wall St. J., Feb. 5, 2003, at Al.

2002 Id.

2003 Draft opinion letter to Mr. Client from Arthur Andersen, dated 1999
(EC2 000038589 — EC2 000038616). Appendix D contains this document.

2004 EC2 000038591.

661

=== PAGE 690 ===
One element of the draft opinion letter is the conclusion that, more likely than not, the
note received from the partnership does not constitute property for purposes of section 83,
because the note is unfunded and unsecured. The opinion letter relies on the regulations under
section 83 providing that an “unfunded and unsecured promise to pay” is not “property.”

The conclusion that the partnership’s obligation is “unfunded and unsecured” is arguably
not directly contrary to the conclusion that the obligation is at “arm’s length,” as discussed
below. However, whether this obligation is unfunded and unsecured could be challenged based
on the practical meaning and application of the “unsecured and unfunded” language of the
section 83 regulation in the context of a third party note as opposed to an obligation of an
employer.

The draft opinion letter concludes that it is more likely than not that sale of options to the
partnership will be respected as being at arm’s length. In discussing this issue, the draft opinion
letter relies on the assumed facts that the partnership may not make distributions other than to
meet its partners’ tax obligations, which is similar to security arrangements required by
commercial lenders; this restriction helps to assure that the partnership will be able to meet its
obligation to pay after 20 years. The draft opinion letter also relies on the fact that the
partnership’s primary activity is investing, so its exposure to liabilities or creditors’ claims is
likely to be small.

The draft opinion letter does not mention or alert the transferor to any possible economic
risk of the transfer. For example, if the payments are in fact unsecured and unfunded, then it is
possible that the value of the options (or of the optioned stock) in the hands of the partnership
could decline. To the extent this can occur and the transferor is not protected except by the value
of the options (or stock, if the options are exercised) in the partnership and by the cash
contribution largely funded by the transferor, it could be argued that he did not in fact transfer
the risk of loss of value of the options or underlying stock to the partnership, a key element of a
“sale.” Thus, it could be the conclusion that the transaction would be a contribution to capital
rather than a sale, or perhaps even a “sham” transaction that did not actually shift the benefits
and burdens of option ownership significantly to the partnership.”

2005 The draft opinion letter refers to Treas. Reg. Sec. 1.83-3(e). The draft opinion letter
recognizes that the authorities it cites interpreting that regulation involve a promissory obligation
of an employer rather than a third party, but concludes that there is no special rule limited the
provision to employers and that the theoretical support should apply equally to a third party.
EC2 000038611.

2006 “Although the draft opinion letter does make reference to concepts such as the
common law “sham transaction” and “substance over form” doctrines, it relies in large part on its
conclusion that the transfer is more likely than not an “arm’s length” sale to distinguish cases in
which such doctrines have been applied. EC 000038599.

For detailed information on the present law rules and judicial doctrines applicable to tax

avoidance transactions and related recommendations and developments, see e.g., J oint
Committee on Taxation, Background and Present Law Relating to Tax Shelters (JCX-19-02),

662

=== PAGE 691 ===
The draft opinion letter also takes the position that the sale of the options is at arm’s
length, even though the transaction is between an individual and a partnership whose partners are
the members of his immediate family. In discussing the issue, the draft opinion letter concludes
that the state of the law is merely ambiguous, and that the sale between related parties can be
considered at arm’s length. This conclusion fails to take into account the absence of any adverse
interest between the parties.

The draft opinion letter relies entirely upon the application of specific regulations under
section 83, and does not consider whether any other provisions of the tax law might apply. For
example, the letter does not mention section 453(e), generally applicable to installment sales
between parties that are related but otherwise respected as independent. Section 453(e) provides
that if a sale of property occurs between related parties and, within two years of the first sale, the
transferee makes a second disposition of the transferred property, then the original transferor is
not entitled to use the installment method of reporting income to defer recognition of income
from the sale until payments are received, but rather must include all gain in income at the time
of the second disposition. The opinion letter does not address whether this provision might have
relevance to the transaction, or whether an exercise of the option (or a sale of the optioned stock)
by the partnership might invoke this section.2°”

Noniax issues st

A noticeable aspect of Enron’s stock-based compensation programs is the emphasis
placed on stock as a form of compensation. Enron used stock-based compensation as a principle
form of compensation for executives. Management believed that executive compensation should
be tied to company performance. There was a stock ownership requirement for certain
executives, the stated purpose of which was to align the interests of executives and stockholders.
A stated focus of the Compensation Committee was ensuring that there was a strong link
between the success of the shareholder and the rewards of the executive. The Compensation
Committee believed that a great deal of executive compensation should be dependent on
company performance.

March 19, 2002; Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest
Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998 (including provisions relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (SCS-3-99), July
22, 1999; Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9017) to section 6011 (October 22, 2002);
Temporary Treasury regulations (T.D. 9018) to section 6012 (October 22, 2002); Joint
Committee on Taxation, Description of the “CARE Act of 2003,” (JCX-04-03), February 3,
2003; Symposium: Business Purpose, Economic Substance and Corporate Tax Shelters, 54
SMU L. Rev. 1 (2001).

2007 Some published discussion of similar structures has discussed section 453, both by
way of exploring possible beneficial capital gain treatment of a sale of options and also by way
of exploring whether there might be risks in the case of transfers to related parties. See, e.g.,
Hammill and Lusby, Intrafamily Installment Sales of Nonqualified Stock Options, 31 Tax
Advisor 494 (July 2000).

663

=== PAGE 692 ===
As noted elsewhere, the Enron culture also Enron stock ownership by employees. For
example, Joint Committee staff were told that there was a monitor in the lobby of the Enron
headquarters in Houston so that the performance of Enron stock could be viewed by all who
entered the building. Even up to the months immediately preceding the bankruptcy, employees
were encouraged that the company was in strong financial shape. Stock-based compensation for
was used for all employees in a variety of forms, including as an investment in the Enron
Savings Plan and Enron ESOP, in addition to the all-employee stock option programs. Stock
was used as a form of compensation for nonemployee directors.

While some argue that linking shareholder and executive success is beneficial for
shareholders, conflicts may arise. Linking compensation of executives to the performance of the
company can result in executives taking measures to increase short-term earnings instead of
focusing on longer-term interests.

The use of stock options by Enron brings renewed attention to discussions regarding the
proper treatment of stock options for accounting purposes, and the difference between the
treatment of options for tax and accounting purposes. As discussed above, under APB 25, which
Enron followed, generally no compensation cost is required to be recorded in financial
statements for stock options issued to employees if the exercise price is equivalent to or greater
than the market price on the grant date. FAS 125, the “preferred,” but optional, approach, would
require stock option costs to be taken into account when options are granted, based on a
determination of the value of the option.

Because of the differences between accounting rules and tax rules, the amount shown on
financial statements as a cost attributable to stock options, even under FAS 125, can be
substantially less than a company’s tax deduction for stock options. Accounting rules and tax
rules have somewhat different purposes, and it may be appropriate for different rules to apply in
order to achieve the differing purposes. For example, under the tax laws, one principle is the
proper matching of income and deductions; in the case of stock options, the corporation is not
allowed a deduction until an amount is includible in gross income, which is generally upon
exercise. This is an appropriate rule from a tax perspective; however, accounting rules might
reasonably take the approach that options should be recorded earlier for financial reporting
purposes.

Nevertheless, the sheer magnitude of the amount of corporate deductions and executive
income generated by the exercise of stock options in some cases, such as Enron’s, may
appropriately focus attention on whether proxy disclosure rules and accounting rules are
sufficient to properly inform shareholders.

664

=== PAGE 693 ===
3. Employee loans

Present Law

Overview

It is not uncommon for employers to make loans to some employees, particularly
executives. From a Federal income tax perspective, a question that may arise is whether the
arrangement is in fact a loan or a payment of compensation.

The tax treatment of loans is different from the tax treatment of compensation for both
the employer and the employee. Compensation is generally currently includible in the gross
income of the employee, and includible in wages for employment tax purposes. Compensation is
generally deductible by the employer as an ordinary and necessary business expense,” subject
to the $1 million limitation on the deduction of compensation for certain executives. °°?

On the other hand, a loan is not includible in the gross income of the employee (or in
wages for employment tax purposes). Similarly, no deduction is allowed the employer with
respect to the making of a loan to an employee. Interest payments may in some circumstances be
deductible by the employee;"""° accrued interest is includible in the gross income of the
employer.

Under present law, a loan that provides for the payment of interest at a rate below the
applicable Federal rate (a “below-market-rate loan”) between certain parties is recharacterized as
a transaction in which the lender made a loan to the borrower is exchange for a note requiring the
payment of interest at the applicable Federal rate. In the case of loans in the employment
context, the rule results in the parties being treated as if: (1) the borrower paid interest to the
lender at the applicable Federal rate which is includible in income by the lender; and (2) the
lender paid compensation to the employee in the amount of imputed interest.”°'! Because of
these rules, the stated interest rate on loans to executives is often the applicable Federal rate.

If an employer makes a bona fide loan to an employee and subsequently forgives any
outstanding debt, the amount forgiven is includible in gross income as compensation in the year
forgiven and subject to employment taxes. The employer is generally entitled to a compensation
deduction upon such forgiveness, subject to the general rules applicable to deduction of
compensation expenses.

2008 Sec. 162.

2009 Sec. 162(m). This limitation is discussed in Part III.C.6., below.
2010 Sec. 163.

2011 Sec. 7872.

665

=== PAGE 694 ===
Determining whether an arrangement is a loan to an employee or compensation is
generally based on all the facts and circumstances. Present-law rules applicable in making this
determination are discussed below.

Laws other than tax laws may also affect the structure of employee loan transactions.
Federal securities laws regarding reporting of stock transactions by corporate executives have
influenced the decision of whether to use stock of the company to repay a loan. These rules are
discussed in brief, below.

Definition of a bona fide loan

In general

A transfer of funds from one taxpayer to another may constitute a loan, a gift,
compensation for services, a contribution to capital, or something else.2°!? Whether the transfer
will be treated as a loan for tax purposes depends on the intentions of the parties as well as the
objective facts and circumstances of the transaction.2"!

In general, in order for a loan to exist, at the time the transfer of funds takes place, there
must be an unconditional obligation on the part of the transferee to repay the funds coupled with
an unconditional intention on the part of the transferor to secure repayment.”°"* In analyzing
whether there is an unconditional obligation to repay on the part of the payee, courts have
examined whether, under the loan agreement, the obligation to repay the loan is contingent upon
a future event.”°! If the obligation to repay is conditional if the condition of repayment may be
easily satisfied by the borrower~”“or is under the borrower’s control, the transfer of funds
generally will not be regarded as a bona fide loan.70!”

2012 For example, a transfer by a corporation to a shareholder employee may be a
dividend.

2013 rraber v. Commissioner, 52 T.C. 255, 266 (1969) aff'd, 422 F.2d 198 (5th Cir. 1970).

2014 Iq - Haag v. Commissioner, 88 T.C. 604, 615-616 (1987), aff'd 855 F.2d 855 (8th
Cir. 1988).

2015 See, e.g., Frierdich v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo 1989-103, aff'd, 925 F.2d 180 (7th
Cir. 1991); also see Bouchard v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo 1954-243, aff’d, 229 F.2d 703 (7th
Cir. 1956)

2016 saunders v. Commissioner, 720 F.2d 871, 874 (5th Cir. 1983) (holding that where
agreement contained “exceedingly generous” forgiveness clauses and the recipients of the loans
could easily qualify for cancellation of the loan, no creditor-debtor relationship was established).

2017 Yilenbach v. Commissioner, 106 T.C. 184, 197 (1996). In Milenbach, repayment
was to be made out of future profits generated from residential suites the borrower was to
construct at a time in its “reasonable discretion.” The borrower never constructed the suites and
thus never repaid the loan. The Tax Court held that because the agreement provided for only a

666

=== PAGE 695 ===
Courts have often looked beyond the intentions of the parties to objective factors that
may indicate whether a creditor-debtor relationship has been created.°!* Frequently cited factors
include (1) the existence of a promissory note or other evidence of indebtedness, (2) the
existence of a specified repayment schedule including interest, (3) the presence of a collateral or
security for the loan, and (4) the payee’s ability to repay.” Additional factors include whether
repayments were made, and the manner in which the loan was treated in the taxpayers’ books.?”°

Loans in the employment context

Loans to employees may be subject to challenge on the ground that they constitute
compensation for services rather than a true debt. Two factors, in addition to the general rules
for determining whether a bona fide loan exists, have been applied in the employment context.

First, the manner in which the loan is to be repaid--whether through the provision of
services or monetary payments--has been a significant indicator of whether a bona fide loan
exists in the employment context. Generally, loans made with the expectation that they would be
repaid through the provision of future services have been held not to create a creditor-debtor
relationship between the employer and the employee and to constitute advance compensation
rather than loans.””! The same result has been reached even if employment was ultimately
terminated and monetary repayment ensued.°”

Second, if under the loan agreement repayment is to be satisfied with monetary
payments, the focus has been on whether the repayment is to be satisfied solely from the future

conditional obligation to repay the loan, the satisfaction of which was under the sole control of
the borrower, it did not constitute a true loan.

2018 Geftamn v. Commissioner, 154 F.3d 61, 68 (3rd Cir. 1998); Haag, 88 T.C. at 616;
Morgan v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo 1997-132.

2019 Geftamn, 154 F.3d at 68; Morgan, T.C. Memo 1997-132.
2020 Haag, 88 T.C. at 616.

2021 Beaver v. Commissioner, 55 T.C. 85, 91 (1970) (“in the case of a loan, satisfaction is
to be made by making monetary payments pursuant to the parties’ agreement. In such case a
debtor-creditor relationship is established at the outset. In the case of compensation for future
services, satisfaction is to be made by actually performing such services. Only when such
services are not rendered does there arise a debtor-creditor relationship requiring satisfaction by
monetary repayment.”); see also Morgan, T.C. Memo 1997-132 (“‘an intent to repay a purported
loan by the performance of services...[renders the loan] nothing more than an advance salary or
other payment for services”); and Frierdich, T.C. Memo 1989-103 (holding that a loan to an
attorney by his client, the repayment of which was due upon the occurrence of a future event and
which could be offset by legal fees owed to the attorney, was not a loan but advance payment for
legal services).

20
22 See Beaver, supra.

667

=== PAGE 696 ===
earnings of the employee during the period of employment or whether the obligation to repay
continues after the employment relationship is terminated. Thus, in cases in which the loan
agreement provided that repayment was to be made out of the future earnings of the employee
but that the obligation would continue to exist after termination of employment, the transfer was
treated as a true loan.2°"? Conversely, when repayment of the loan was limited to the future
earnings of the employee during employment and could not be enforced against the employee
after termination, the transfer was deemed to constitute compensation rather than a loan.7°4
Further, if there existed a high probability that, in fact, repayment would not be enforced against
the employee or would be forgiven by the employer the transfer was not regarded as a loan but as
compensation for services.”

In a private letter ruling, the IRS ruled that advances made pursuant to an arrangement
whereby they had to be repaid, in effect, only if the employee left the employment prior to the
end of a required period of service constituted advance compensation for services rather than true
loans. Under the loan agreement in the ruling, the employees had to work five years
throughout which portions of the debt were forgiven on a yearly basis. The IRS reasoned that
the fact that the obligation to repay would only arise if the employee’s employment terminated
prematurely rendered the repayment a conditional obligation “not sufficient to characterize the
transfer as a loan.” Any repayment obligation that would arise would be, according to the IRS,
“liquidated damages for breach of the employment contract.”

2023 Rey. Rul. 68-337, 1968-1 C.B. 417 (holding that advance payments made to
employees which were to be repaid out of future earnings, but which included an
acknowledgment of the debt and had to be repaid even if employment was terminated, were true
loans rather than compensation); see also Rosario v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo 2002-70
(holding that payments made pursuant to an income guarantee agreement which were to be
repaid during the term of employment from excess earnings were loans rather than
compensation, if any balance remaining after termination of employment was to be repaid to the
employer).

2024 Rey. Rul. 68-239, 1968-1 C.B. 414 (holding that loans made to employees to be paid
out of future earnings but which would not be enforced if employment were terminated were
“wages” for income tax purposes); see also Kinzy v. United States, 87-2 USTC { 9520, 60 AFTR
2d 5770 (N.D. Ga. 1987), (holding that when an employee received an advance payment which
would be charged off as long as he remained employed and which had to be repaid only if
employment terminated prior to the discharge and even then only out of earned commissions, the
liability was contingent rather than an unconditional obligation to pay the advances and,
therefore, the payment was compensation rather than a loan).

2025 Rev. Rul. 83-12, 1983-1 C.B. 99 (holding that advance payments made to insurance
agents which were to be repaid out of earned commissions and for which the agent was
personally liable beyond the employment relationship, did not constitute true loans where the
employer had a practice of forgiving and not enforcing the debt).

2026 priv. Ltr. Rul. 200040004 (June 12, 2000).

2027 Td.

668

=== PAGE 697 ===
Nontax laws relating to employee loans

SEC reporting requirements regarding insider sales of securities

In some cases, Enron executives used stock to repay loans from Enron. Such transactions
are affected by SEC reporting rules. Generally, any sale or purchase of the stock of a publicly
held by its officers and directors is subject to reporting requirements under the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934,7078 In general, these rules require that purchases or sales of a company’s
stock in public markets must be reported within 10 days of the close of the month in which the
transaction occurs.

However, during the time period covered by the Joint Committee staff review, in the case
of transactions between officers and directors and the company itself, if certain requirements
were satisfied, the transaction did not have to be disclosed until 45 days after the close of the
company’s fiscal year.0? Among the requirements that may apply in order for a transaction to
qualify for delayed reporting is a requirement that the transaction be approved by the Board of
Directors of the company or a committee of the Board consisting solely of two or more
nonemployee directors. For example, if the applicable requirements are met, then transfers of
stock by a corporate insider to the company in order to make payments on a loan from the
company would qualify for delayed reporting.

Following the recent exposures of significant volumes of undisclosed insider-issuer
dispositions and pursuant to section 403 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, the Securities and
Exchange Commission has adopted new disclosure rules relating to transactions between the
issuer and its officers and directors.

Prohibition on loans to executives

The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,”°*° enacted in the aftermath of the Enron bankruptcy,
contains a prohibition on the provision of personal loans to executives of companies with
securities registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.23! Subject to certain
exceptions, the provision prohibits such a company from directly or indirectly (including through
a subsidiary) extending or maintaining credit, arranging for the extension of credit, or renewing
an extension of credit, in the form of a personal loan to or for any director or executive officer
(or equivalent thereof) of the company.

If certain requirements are satisfied, the prohibition on loans does not apply to:

2028 15 U.S.C. sec. 78p(a).

2029 See Rule 16b-3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; 17 CFR § 240.16b-3 which
exempted transaction with the issuer from Rule 16(b).

2030 Pub. L. No. 107-204 (2002).

2031 Sec, 402(a) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.

669

=== PAGE 698 ===
e Home improvement and manufactured home loans as defined in the Home Owners’
Loan Act,2°?

e Consumer credit as defined in the Truth in Lending Act,

e any extension of credit under an open end credit plan or a charge card,”°™* or

certain extensions of credit by a broker or dealer registered under the Securities

Exchange Act of 1934 to any employee of that broker or dealer to buy, trade, or carry
securities.

2033

In order for one of these exceptions to apply, the following requirements must be
satisfied. The loan must be:

e made or provided in the ordinary course of the consumer credit business of the
company,
of a type that is generally made available by the company to the public, and
made by the company on market terms, or terms that are no more favorable than those
offered by the company to the general public for such extensions of credit.

The prohibition also does not apply to loans made or maintained by an insured depository
institution if the loan is subject to the insider lending restrictions of the Federal Reserve Act.

The provision is generally effective on the date of enactment of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
(July 30, 2002), but does not apply to extensions of credit maintained on that date if there is no
material modification to any term of the arrangement or any renewal of the arrangement on or
after that date.

Factual Background
In general

Enron did not have a general policy or program relating to executive loans. However,
from time to time Enron extended loans to various executives. These loans were individually
designed arrangements, and varied considerably. In Enron documents, most of the loans are
described as personal loans. Interviews with current and former Enron personnel indicate that
there was no single person or department that kept track of loan information, and that in some
cases only one or two people within Enron may have been aware of the loan arrangements.
Some of these arrangements have received considerable media attention, particularly the loans
extended to Kenneth L. Lay.

2032 12 U.S.C. 1464(c)(1)).
7033 15 U.S.C. 1602.
2034 These terms are as defined in section 103 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C.

1602) and section 127(c)(4)(e) of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1637(c)(4)(e),
respectively).

670

=== PAGE 699 ===
In repose to requests for information, Enron provided to the Joint Committee staff
account reconciliation statements regarding executive loans. These statements show the amount
of loans, payments made, and interest accrued with respect to loans to Mr. Lay, Jeffrey Skilling,
Rebecca Mark, Rodney Gray, Clifford Baxter, and Mark Frevert. These account reconciliation
statements are included in Appendix D to this Report. Other documents provided by Enron
describe loans to Mark Pickering, and David Oxley. The loans to each of these individuals are
discussed below.2"> The loan arrangements of Mr. Lay and Mr. Skilling are highlighted, due to
the amounts involved, the position they held within Enron (both served as Chief Executive
Officer at different times), and the attention garnered by the these particular arrangements. All
of these arrangements were treated by Enron as loans for Federal tax purposes.

Kenneth L. Lay

On September 1, 1989, Mr. Lay entered into a loan agreement with Enron. Under the
agreement, Enron provided him with a revolving line of credit in the amount of $2.5 million.°%
Mr. Lay also received an advance of $5 million to be used to purchase shares of Enron common
stock, which were used as collateral.?°>” Mr. Lay signed a promissory note and pledged as
collateral certain deferral benefits under the Deferral Plan, death benefits, Enron stock granted
under the 1988 Stock Plan, financed stock held by Enron, and any severance remuneration
payable.” 8 Mr. Lay was responsible for paying the full amount of interest which was to accrue
at the applicable Federal rate. Mr. Lay repaid the entire principal of the $2.5 million loan and the
$5 million advance, plus accrued interest, in 1994,203

On March 25, 1994, Mr. Lay’s employment agreement was renewed to provide him with
a noncollateralized,°”° interest-bearing revolving line of credit in the amount of $4 million.2°*!

On May 3, 1999, the Compensation Committee approved an amendment to the loan
agreement that allowed Mr. Lay to repay his loans with Enron stock, and the loan agreement was
accordingly amended. Compensation Committee minutes indicate that the approval of the new

2035 All of these loan arrangements are also described in proxy materials, except those to
Mr. Frevert, Mr. Pickering, and Mr. Oxley.

2036 The 1996 proxy characterizes the line of credit as a one-time loan. The loan
agreement, however, suggests that the loan was in the form of a line of credit.

2037 The shares were pledged as collateral.
2038 See Loan Commitment Agreement, September 1, 1989 (EC000752817).

2039 ‘The renewed employment agreement signed in 1994 provided that Mr. Lay had to
pay all outstanding balances within 30 days of its execution.

2040 The proxy statements indicate that the loan was not collateralized.

2041 1996 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

671

=== PAGE 700 ===
repayment option was intended as evidence of compliance with the exemption from reporting
under applicable securities laws.7°4?

On August 13, 2001, the amount available to Mr. Lay under the line of credit was
increased to $7.5 million? Mr. Lay resigned on January 23, 2002, with a remaining unpaid
principal balance of $7.5 million. According to Enron, the total outstanding amount, plus
accrued interest, is $7.794 million.?™

The account reconciliation statements for Mr. Lay’s loans show that the aggregate
amounts withdrawn pursuant to his line of credit from 1997 through 2001, was over $106
million.2“> In 2001 alone, Mr. Lay engaged in a series of 25 transactions involving withdrawals
under the line of credit. The total amount of withdrawals for 2001 was $77.525 million (of
which all but $7.5 million was repaid). The account reconciliation statements also show that
during 1997 through 2001, Mr. Lay repaid principal amounts of $99.3 million. Over $94
million of this amount was repaid with 2.1 million shares of Enron stock.?™

The Joint Committee staff sent a series of written questions to Mr. Lay’s counsel, Piper
Rudnick, regarding Mr. Lay’s compensation arrangements. In response to a question regarding
Mr. Lay’s use of stock to repay loans, Mr. Lay’s counsel stated that it was their understanding
that in 2001 Mr. Lay drew down on the Enron line of credit and then repaid it with stock
principally because he needed funds to avoid or, if unavoidable, to pay margin calls on secured
lines of credit Mr. Lay had established with certain banks and brokerage firms. These lines were
secured primarily by Enron stock, the price of which was falling. Mr. Lay’s counsel also stated
jt was their understanding that, because Mr. Lay’s holdings in Enron stock represented a high
percentage of his liquid assets, he used Enron stock to repay the Enron loan.

2042 Minutes of the Meeting of the Compensation Committee, at 10 (May 3, 1999).
2043 C2000026955.

2044 F.C002679852.

2045 See Appendix D to this Report. The total outstanding principal amount at any one
time varied, but did not exceed $7.5 million.

2046 Tn the account reconciliation statements, the use of Enron stock to repay an

outstanding loan is referred to as “swapping in” Enron stock. See, e.g., EC002680500 in
Appendix D.

672

=== PAGE 701 ===
Jeffrey K. Skilling”

On October 13, 1997, Mr. Skilling’s employment agreement was amended to incorporate
a loan provision, allowing Mr. Skilling to borrow $4 million. Interest was to accrue at the
applicable Federal rate until maturity on December 31, 2001. Under the agreement, Mr. Skilling
was responsible for paying the interest. The loan agreement further provided that if Mr. Skilling
remained in the employ of Enron until December 31, 2001, 50 percent of the loan principal
would be forgiven. If, however, he voluntarily terminated his employment prior to that or was
terminated for cause, the entire amount of the loan would become due. As collateral, Mr.
Skilling pledged his Enron restricted stock and the right to receive certain deferral benefits under
the 1994 Deferral Plan.”

Mr. Skilling borrowed $4 million from Enron on October 23, 1997, and signed a
promissory note. On May 3, 1999, the Compensation Committee approved an amendment to the
loan agreement that allowed him to repay his loans with Enron stock and, on that date, he made a
partial repayment in the form of $2 million worth of Enron shares.”“? Compensation Committee
minutes indicate that the approval of the new repayment option was intended as evidence of
compliance with the exemption from reporting under applicable securities laws.7°°° Mr. Skilling
resigned from his position (then as Chief Executive Officer of Enron) on August 14,2001. On
September 15, 2001, he repaid in cash the remaining $2 million balance due on the loan.7°5! Mr.
Skilling recalled that he paid accrued interest on the loan. According to Enron, Mr. Skilling still
owes $88,679 of accrued interest and payment has been requested.”” 2

2047 ‘Jeffrey K. Skilling was appointed President and Chief Operating Officer of Enron
Corp. on December 10, 1996. Prior to his appointment as Chief Operating Officer of Enron, Mr.
Skilling served as the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Enron Gas Services Corp. Mr.
Skilling entered into several loan transactions with Enron during that time: he received a $1.4
million loan in 1991 and another $100,000 loan in 1992. The 1991 loan was collateralized with
pledged personal property. In 1993, Mr. Skilling repaid the principal and interest of both loans
with the proceeds of a newly-issued nonrecourse debt in the amount of $1,606,719, which was
collateralized with Enron stock options and phantom equity in Enron Gas Services. The loan
was repaid in full on July 1, 1993. See 1993 and 1994 Enron Corp. Proxy Statements.

2048 The 1999 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement indicates that the collateral given included
Enron common stock, EOG stock and 1994 Deferral Plan benefits.

2049 002680500. The 1999 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement indicates that he had paid
the total amount of interest that accrued until September 1998 for a total of $215,664. According
to the 2000 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, the total accrued interest for 2000 was $126,747,
which was paid by Mr. Skilling.

2050 Minutes of the Meeting of the Compensation Committee, at 9 (May 3, 1999).

2051 Enron Corp. Account Reconciliation Officers’ Loans as of September 30, 2001,
EC002680504.

2052 C002679852.

673

=== PAGE 702 ===
Other executive loans
Rebecca Mark

Rebecca Mark held numerous positions with Enron, including chairman and Chief
Executive Officer of Enron International, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Azurix, and
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Enron Development Corp.

Ms. Mark received two loans from Enron. First, Ms. Mark received a loan in the amount
of $900,000 on May 7, 1997. The loan bore interest at the mid-term applicable Federal rate and
was collateralized with 24,899 shares of Enron common stock.? In May 1998, the entire
principal of the loan plus the accrued interest, totaling $955,343, were forgiven.” The 1999
proxy statement states that the loan forgiveness was “in consideration of Ms. Mark’s increased
responsibilities.””” 5 The precise nature of these increased duties are not described.7°%6

Second, on May 4, 1998, Ms. Mark received a loan in the amount of $2.5 million.2°7
The loan bore interest at the short-term applicable Federal rate and was collateralized with Enron
stock. In the beginning of 1999, $700,000 of the principal amount was forgiven due to Ms.
Mark’s performance in 1998. In February 1999, Ms. Mark repaid $550,000 on the loan.””* The
remaining amount of $1.25 million as well as the accrued interest (in the amount of $171,099)
was repaid by February 25, 2000.7”

2053 1998 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 26. As of December 1997, accrued interest
totaled $37,367. Id.

2054 1999 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 25.

2055 Id.

2056 Tq. Enron Corp. billed $450,000 of the loan amount to Enron International and
amortized the remaining $450,000 plus the relevant portion of the accrued interest during 2000.
See Account Reconciliation of Officer’s Loans Chart as of December 31,2000 (EC001709350).
It is noted on the chart that Enron Corp. would attempt to shift the remaining $450,000 to Water
Co., and would write it off before year-end if it did not succeed.

2057 According to the 1999 proxy statement, the loan was issued “due to revised vesting
provisions that triggered constructive receipt for tax purposes.” 1999 Enron Corp. Proxy
Statement, at 25.

2058 According to Enron, on the same date Ms. Mark paid $206,150 representing taxes on
the $700,000 that was forgiven. EC002679704.

2059 1999 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 25. (EC001709350).

674

=== PAGE 703 ===
Enron said that it reported both amounts forgiven as income on Ms. Mark’s Form W-
2060

Richard Kinder

Pursuant to his 1989 employment agreement, Richard Kinder received an advance of $3
million to purchase shares of Enron Corp. common stock,” and a loan in the amount of $1.5
million. The loan and advance were to mature on February 8, 1999. 2062 Tn February of 1994, Mr.
Kinder’s employment agreement was renewed to provide that if he and Enron would “not be able
to reach mutually satisfactory terms relating to his future employment,” the loan and the advance
would be forgiven.” In November of 1996, Mr. Kinder entered into an agreement with Enron
whereby he would resign from his position as an officer and director of Enron effective
December 31, 1996, and would terminate his employment with Enron effective February 15,
1997. The outstanding principal and interest balances on his loan and advance -- totaling $3.8
million -- were forgiven as of February 7, 19977064

Rodney Gray

Rodney Gray received a loan from Enron in the amount of $250,000 on August 1, 1994.
Enron Corp. common stock was pledged as collateral and Mr. Gray was responsible for payment
of interest, which accrued at the applicable Federal rate. Mr. Gray terminated employment as
an executive officer with Enron in November 1997. According to documents provided by Enron,
Mr. Gray repaid the loan on August 24, 1999, 7066

Clifford Baxter

Clifford Baxter received a loan from Enron in the amount of $200,000 on September 15,
1995. The loan bore interest at the short-term applicable Federal rate. According to the terms of
the loan agreement as described in proxy materials, if Mr. Baxter remained employed by Enron

2060 F.C002680476.

2061 The stock was pledged as collateral. 1996 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 21.
2062 Td. at 21-22.

2063 Id.

2064 1997 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 25. A former member of the Board of
Directors of Enron told the Joint Committee staff that Mr. Kinder had anticipated succeeding Mr.
Lay as Chief Executive Officer, and that when that failed to occur, Mr. Kinder resigned.

7085 Td. at 24.
2066 £C002680449. According to the 1997 and 1998 proxy statements, Mr. Gray made

interest payments of $15,426 in 1996 and $15,874 in 1997. 1997 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement,
at 24; 1998 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 26.

675

=== PAGE 704 ===
during March 15, 1996, and March 15, 1997, 50 percent of the loan would be forgiven on each

date. In 1996, $100,000 of the principal was forgiven” and in 1997 the remaining balance was
forgiven.°

Mark Frevert

Enron filings with the bankruptcy court indicate that Enron made a $2 million loan to
Mark Frevert.2% Documents provided by Enron indicate that this loan was made in October
2001, the loan bore interest at the applicable Federal.2°” According to Enron, the loan is still
outstanding and repayment has been requested. The outstanding amount, including principal and
interest is $2.093 million.

Mark Pickering

According to documents provided by Enron as well as interviews with Enron employees,
Enron made a loan to Mark Pickering in connection with his relocation to the United States. It
was explained that because Mr. Pickering had no credit in the United States, he was required to
pay a substantial down payment on the purchase of a home and that Enron loaned him the money
for this reason. The loan was made on June 13, 2001, for $400,000 and, according to Enron, is
still outstanding.”"”!

David Oxley

According to information provided by Enron, a loan was made to David Oxley?” on
August 15, 2001, in the amount of $500,000. The loan agreement provided that the loan was to

2067 1997 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 24-25.

2068 1998 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 26-27. According to the 1997 and 1998 proxy
statements, Mr. Baxter paid the accrued interest on the loan, totaling $6,000 in 1996 and $5,788
in 1997. 1997 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 25; 1998 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 27.
While a loan to Mr. Baxter was described in proxy statements, in response to request for
information made by the Joint Committee staff, Enron stated that current staff was unable to
determine what loans were made to Mr. Baxter, and that there may have been two loans.
EC002679704; EC002680476.

2069 In re Enron Corp., Case No. 01-16034, Statement of Financial Affairs, Exhibit 3b.2
(Payments to Insiders).

2070 C000752675.
2071 C002679704; EC002679766.

2072 According to a services agreement entered into between Enron and Mr. Oxley on
August 28, 2000, 2001, he was Vice President of Enron Europe Limited. EC002679832-844.
Pursuant to an amendment to the services agreement dated November 28, 2001, his agreement
was assumed by Enron North America and he was placed on the payroll of Enron North
America. Assignment and Second Amendment Agreement, EX002679848.

676

=== PAGE 705 ===
be repaid within 120 days.° On November 28, 2001, the services agreement between Mr.
Oxley and Enron was amended to provide that the loan would be forgiven if: (1) Mr. Oxley
remained employed by Enron until February 5, 2002; or (2) if earlier, Mr. Oxley were terminated
involuntarily before February 5, 2002.7°* The loan was forgiven on November 29, 2001.7°7

Discussion of Issues

Although Enron had no formal policy regarding loans, there was a practice of making
loans, particularly to key executives. Not counting the loans to Mr. Lay, Enron made loans to
eight executives totaling over $17 million. Enron forgave over $6 million of these loans,
including both principal and interest.

The loans to Mr. Lay stand out from the others by virtue of the total amount involved
over time. The structure of his loans was also different. In other cases the loans, even if
characterized as a line of credit, involved lending on single occasions, whereas Mr. Lay engaged
in a series of transactions in which he borrowed, repaid, and borrowed again. As described
above, the total amount withdrawn by Mr. Lay under his line of credit was over $106 million
(over $77 million of which was in 2001 alone). During the period 1999-2001, Mr. Lay used
stock to repay a portion of his loans; a total of over 2 million shares of Enron stock with a total
value of $94.267 million was given to Enron as repayment for loans.

The loans made by Enron to employees raise both tax and nontax questions. From a
Federal income tax perspective, Enron treated all these arrangements as loans for Federal tax
purposes. That is, no amount was reported as income with respect to the loans, unless the loan
was forgiven. A key issue raised by the various loans to Enron executives is whether certain
loans should have been treated as compensation to the executive rather than a loan. The
arrangements all carried the indicia of loans; there was generally a loan agreement and/or
promissory note, interest was accrued (and in some cases paid), and in some cases there was
collateral for the loan. Two aspects of the various loans raise the question of whether the loans
were in fact compensation when entered into: (1) loan agreements that provide that the loan will
be forgiven if the executive works for a specified period of time; and (2) forgiveness of loans
(without an explicit forgiveness clause in the loan).

Two loans reviewed by the Joint Committee staff, one of Mr. Skilling’s loans and a loan
to Mr. Baxter, contained provisions providing that if the executive remained with Enron until a
specified date, the loan would be forgiven.°”° Mr. Baxter remained employed until the date
specified in his agreement and, as a result, a $200,000 in indebtedness was forgiven. Mr.

2073 1 oan Agreement between Enron North America Corp. and David Oxley
(EC002679827-831).

2074 First Amendment to the Services Agreement, at 2 (EC002679845-847).

2075 C002680476; EX002679849.

2076 As described above, Mr. Baxter’s loan agreement provided for forgiveness in two
stages.

677

=== PAGE 706 ===
Skilling did not remain with Enron until the date specified in his loan agreement, and he repaid
the loan, with interest, after leaving Enron.

As described above, income results to the executive when a loan is forgiven. However,
these loans raise the question of whether they were really in the nature of compensation for
services and should have been treated as taxable compensation when entered into. It can be
argued that the loan is to be satisfied solely from the performance of future services, and
therefore is really compensation for services. From a factual standpoint, at the time the loan was
made, the arrangement is not unlike the pre-bankruptcy bonuses paid by Enron in November
2001, which required the employee to repay the bonus, with a 25 percent penalty, if the
employee did not remain with Enron for a certain period of time. These bonuses were treated by
Enron as compensation and were subject to withholding.

In other cases, Enron forgave loans to executives when the loan agreement did not
require forgiveness. Loans to Ms. Mark and Mr. Kinder were of this type. In these cases, the
question is whether the forgiveness was contemplated at time of the agreement, which would
cast doubt on the intent of the parties to enter into a loan. In order for these arrangements to be
considered compensation, it would have to be shown that it was the understanding of the parties
that repayment was not in fact anticipated.

In addition to tax issues raised, the loan transactions also raise questions of corporate
governance. In particular, some view the use of loans, particularly when substantial amounts are
involved over time or in particular instances, as a use of corporate funds for personal purposes.
From this perspective, some argue that such loans are inappropriate. This view is reflected in the
prohibition on executive loans contained in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.

The use of stock to repay loans also raises corporate governance issues. Some
commentators have argued that Enron executives used stock to repay loans in order to take
advantage of exceptions to securities laws reporting requirements, thereby allowing the
executives to defer reporting on sales of Enron stock during the months before the Enron
bankruptcy. As described above, the loan agreements for Mr. Lay and Mr. Skilling were
amended in 1999 to allow for payment with the use of stock; the changes were specifically
structured to come within the reporting exceptions.

Recommendations

The Sarbanes-Oxley Act contains a prohibition on executive loans. If this prohibition
had been in effect in prior years, it is likely that the loans reviewed by the Joint Committee staff
in this case would not have been made. Thus, the Joint Committee staff is not recommending
further legislative changes at this time.

678

=== PAGE 707 ===
4. Purchase and reconveyance of Kenneth L. Lay’s annuity contracts
Present Law
Taxation of annuity contracts
In general

Present law provides favorable tax treatment for annuity contracts held by individuals.
While no deduction is allowed for the purchase of an annuity contract, income credited to an
annuity contract (i.e., “inside buildup”) generally is not currently includible in the gross income
of the owner of the contract. The extent to which payments received under the contract are
includible in gross income depends on when the payments are received and the taxpayer’s
investment in the contract.”

In general, for amounts received as an annuity, an “exclusion ratio” is provided for
determining the taxable portion of each payment.2°78 The portion that represents recovery of the
taxpayer’s investment in the contract is not taxed. The exclusion ratio is the ratio of the
taxpayer’s investment in the contract to the expected return under the contract, that is, the total of
the payments expected to be received under the contract. The ratio is determined as of the
taxpayer’s annuity starting date. Each annuity payment is multiplied by the exclusion ratio, and
the resulting portion of each payment is treated as nontaxable recovery of the investment in the
contract. Once the taxpayer has recovered his or her investment in the contract, the entire
amount of all further payments are included in income. If the taxpayer dies before the full
investment in the contract is recovered, a deduction is allowed on the final return for the
remaining investment in the contract.

Amounts not received as an annuity generally are included in income if received on or
after the annuity starting date. If amounts not received as an annuity are received before the
annuity starting date, such amounts generally are included in income to the extent allocable to
income on the contract (i.e., as income first).

A 10-percent additional income tax is imposed on certain early withdrawals under an
annuity contract. This additional tax does not apply to any distribution made after the owner of
the contract attains age 59-1/2, made after the owner dies or becomes disabled, made in the form
of certain periodic payments, or that satisfies certain other requirements.

2077 Sec, 72. Section 72 uses the term “investment in the contract” in lieu of the general
tax notion of basis. Investment in the contract is defined (as of the annuity starting date) as the
aggregate amount of premiums or other consideration paid for the contract, minus the aggregate
amount already received under the contract (to the extent it was excludable from income).

2078 Special rules apply to variable annuity contracts. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.72-4(d)(3).

679

=== PAGE 708 ===
Annuities held by nonnatural persons

In general, if an annuity contract is held by a person that is not a natural person, such as a
corporation, then the income on the contract is treated as ordinary income currently received or
accrued during the taxable year. Thus, under this rule, no deferral is permitted to the holder of
the contract. The contract is not treated as an annuity contract for Federal income tax purposes
(except with respect to the insurance company issuing the contract).7°”

Sale or disposition of annuity contracts

In general, a sale or disposition of an annuity contract is subject to the normally
applicable gain recognition rules. That is, the seller of the contract recognizes gain to the extent
that the amount received for the contract exceeds his or her investment in the contract. A
number of courts have held that gain on the sale of an annuity contract is taxed as ordinary
income to the seller.?° In general, if an annuity contract is transferred by an individual for less
than full and adequate consideration, the individual is treated as receiving the difference between
the cash surrender value of the annuity over the investment in the contract as an amount not
received as an annuity.7°8!

Receipt of property for services

’ Property transferred in connection with the performance of services generally is
includible in gross income of the person performing the services for the year in which the service
provider’s right to the property is either transferable or is not subject to a substantial risk of
forfeiture.2°°* The amount includible is the excess of the fair market value of property received
in connection with the performance of services over the amount, if any, paid for the property.

2079 Sec. 72(u). For purposes of this rule, the holding an annuity contract by a trust or
another entity as an agent for a natural person is not taken into account. Section 72(u) provides
several narrow exceptions to the rule of inclusion in the case of an annuity contract that: (1) is
acquired by the estate of a decedent; (2) is held under certain types of retirement plans or
arrangements; (3) is a qualified funding asset for a structured settlement arrangement; or (4) is
purchased by an employer upon termination of certain types of retirement plans and meets
certain other requirements.

2080 First National Bank of Kansas City v. Commissioner, 309 F.2d 587 (8" Cir. 1962);
Roff v. Commissioner, 304 F.2d 450 (ei Cir. 1962); Commissioner v. Phillips, 275 F.2d 33 (4
Cir. 1960).

2081 Sec. 72(e)(4)(C).

2082 Sec. 83. Under a special rule, if property is either nontransferable or is subject to a

substantial risk of forfeiture when transferred, the service provider may elect within 30 days to
apply section 83 as of the time of the transfer.

680

=== PAGE 709 ===
The person for whom the services were performed is entitled to a deduction equal to the
amount includible in the service provider’s gross income” (subject to the $1 million cap on the
deductibility of executive compensation).”°™ The deduction generally is allowable in the taxable
year in which the amount is included in the income of the person performing the services. If the
property is substantially vested upon transfer, the deduction is allowable in accordance with the
method of accounting used by the taxpayer.7°8°

Factual Background

On September 14, 2001, the Compensation Committee of the Enron Board of Directors
approved what the Committee minutes” refer to as an “insurance swap transaction” as part of
the compensation to be provided to Mr. Lay in connection with the resumption of his duties as
Chief Executive Officer following the resignation of Mr. Skilling in August of 2001. 2087
According to documents provided by Enron, this transaction involved two annuity insurance
contracts that had been purchased by Mr. Lay and his wife, one in each of their names. Mr.
Lay’s contract was purchased on September 30, 1999, and Mrs. Lay’s contract was purchased on
February 8, 2000. The contracts were to mature after approximately 30 years. As stated in the
contracts, the initial premium made on each of the contracts was $2.5 million.7>%8

Under the transaction,”™ Enron purchased the annuity contracts from the Lays for $5
million each (a total of $10 million)” and also agreed to reconvey the annuity contracts to Mr.

2083 Sec, 83(h).
2084 Sec, 162(m).
2085 ‘Treas. Reg. sec. 1.83-6(2).

2086 Minutes of the Meeting of the Compensation and Management Development
Committee, September 14, 2001, at 4. EC2 000026740-41.

2087 Mr. Skilling became Chief Executive Officer in February 2001. Prior to that time,
Mr. Lay was both Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer. When Mr. Skilling
became Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Lay retained the title of Chairman.

2088 Mrs. Lay’s insurance contract is EC 00089792 1-50. Mr. Lay’s is EC 000897964-99.
Other internal Enron documents indicate that the amount of the initial investment was $5 million
for each contract. “Inter Office Memorandum to Annuity Contracts, Liquidation for
Compensation - Tax Issues, September 25, 2001,” EC 002680472.

2089 Documents regarding the transaction were executed by the Lays and Enron on
September 21, 2001. Purchase, Sale, and Reconveyance Agreement, EC 000752808-8 14.

2090 Information provided to Joint Committee staff indicated that Mr. Lay and Mrs. Lay

each had a $5 million basis in their respective contracts. However, it is not clear from reviewed
documents whether the Lays made payments in addition to the initial $2.5 million payments.

681

=== PAGE 710 ===
Lay if he remained employed with Enron through December 31, 2005.7" If Mr. Lay were to
leave Enron prior to that date, reconveyance still would take place on the occurrence of one of
four events: (1) retirement with the consent of the Board; (2) disability; (3) involuntary
termination (other than a termination for cause); or (4) termination for “good reason.” 092 Tf Mr.
Lay were to leave Enron prior to December 31, 2005, for a reason other than those provided,
then Enron would have no further obligation to Mr. Lay with respect to the annuity contracts.
The agreement regarding the transaction also provided that if either of the Lays died while Enron
owns the contracts and continues to have a potential obligation to reconvey them to Mr. Lay,
Enron will pay all proceeds received under the contracts to Mr. Lay if the decedent is Mrs. Lay
and to Mr. Lay’s estate if he is the decedent.

At the September 14, 2001, meeting, the Compensation Committee was presented with
two different possible transactions involving the annuity contracts.°°? The first alternative was
the one adopted by the Committee. The second was the same as the first, except that the
contracts would be purchased for their current market value (for a total of $4.691 million for
both contracts combined). Both alternatives indicated that the Lays’ basis in the contracts was
$5 million each (for a total of $10 million) and that the current floor value of the policies was a
total of $11.240 million. The presentation included a comparison of the each alternative with
providing Mr. Lay with additional Enron stock, in terms of issues for Enron (deductibility of the
payment, dilution to common shares outstanding, and taxes) and issues for Mr. Lay (liquidity at
various time frames and vesting).

In addition to the material presented at the Compensation Committee meeting, the
Committee requested a letter from Towers Perrin regarding the transaction. The letter is dated
November 2, 2001, and states that it reflects discussions with Enron that occurred prior to the
date of the Committee meeting.°"4 The letter indicates that the transaction grew out of a desire

2091 ‘Technically, only one of the annuity contracts would be reconveyed. ‘The contract
originally owned by Mrs. Lay would be not be reconveyed to her but conveyed to Mr. Lay. The
term a “reconveyence” is used here because that is how the transaction is described in the
relevant agreements.

2092 «Good reason” is defined by reference to Mr. Lay’s employment contract, and
generally refers to a constructive termination by reason of the occurrence of certain events, such
as a change in his duties or a material reduction in salary without his consent.

2093 Attachment to Minutes of the Meeting of the Compensation and Management
Committee, (Sept. 14, 2001). Committee meeting minutes indicate that this analysis was
presented by employees of Enron, and was prepared in consultation with lawyers at Vinson &
Elkins and others. Mr. Lay was present while the proposed transaction was being discussed, but
was reported as not present when the decision to go forward with the transaction was made.
Minutes of the Meeting of the Compensation and Management Committee, at 4 (EC
2000026740) (Sept. 14, 2001).

2094 1 etter from Charles E. Essick, Principal, Towers Perrin to Dr. Charles A. LeMaistre
(Nov. 2, 2001). EC 000897960-EC 000897961.

682

=== PAGE 711 ===
by Enron to provide an incentive for Mr. Lay to remain with Enron for a period of years.
Members of the Compensation Committee also indicated in interviews with the Joint Committee
staff that the motivation for the transaction was to provide a retention device. The documents
executed in connection with the transaction also state that Mr. Lay’s services have been and are
expected to be of substantial value to Enron and that Enron wishes to encourage Mr. Lay to
remain in the employment of Enron.

The Towers Perrin letter states that a retention incentive typically is handled by issuing
restricted stock, but that Mr. Lay had indicated that he currently had large holdings in Enron
stock and wanted more liquidity. The letter makes a number of points with respect to the
transaction. First, the letter states that the transaction, while involving a current cash flow drain
for Enron, will be beneficial to Enron overall because the $10 million payment to the Lays for
the contracts is less than the current net present value floor value of the contracts of $11.240
million. That is, the letter indicates that the fair value of the contract is more than $10 million.
Second, the letter states that the feature of the arrangement which allows Mr. Lay to earn the
contracts back over four years is similar to the way a restricted stock award would be structured
and thus should serve as a similar retention device.” Third, the letter recommends that because
the arrangement is in lieu of restricted stock, the $10 million value of the payment to Mr. Lay
should be subtracted from future stock or stock option awards that would otherwise be granted to
Mr. Lay over the next four years (at a rate of $2.5 million per year).70° Finally, the letter states
the understanding that an alternative structure that was suggested was to pay Mr. Lay a cash
signing bonus and to purchase his annuity, but not his wife’s. The letter concludes that the
structure adopted by the Committee is preferable to this alternative because it provides a
meaningful retention incentive.

As of January 23, 2002, Mr. Lay was no longer with Enron. Thus, whether he is entitled
to have the annuity contracts reconveyed to him depends on whether his termination meets the
requirements as set forth in the agreement with the Enron. It is unclear whether the contracts
have been or will be reconveyed to Mr. Lay. During the course of interviews, the Joint
Committee staff was informed by counsel for former Compensation Committee members that the
issue of whether Mr. Lay was entitled to receive the annuity contracts given the terms of his
departure was under review by Enron and various legal counsel. At the time of publication,
Enron stated it was unable to give the Joint Committee staff any further information regarding
the status of the annuity contracts and whether they had been or would be reconveyed to Mr.
Lay.

2095 The letter refers to Mr. Lay as being able to “earn back the annuities over 4 years.”
This phraseology implies that Mr. Lay earned the contracts back ratably over the 4-year period,
much as restricted stock might vest over a period of years. However, under the terms of the
purchase, sale, and reconveyance agreement, Mr. Lay had no rights with respect to the annuity

contracts unless he stayed through December 31, 2005 (or was terminated before then for one of
the stated reasons).

2096 The letter states that the Compensation Committee agreed to this reduction.

However, the minutes from the meeting at which the transaction was approved do not mention
this transaction. Thus, it is not clear whether this was the intent of Enron at the time.

683

=== PAGE 712 ===
The Joint Committee staff submitted written questions to Mr. Lay’s counsel, Piper
Rudnic, regarding his compensation arrangements. As part of these questions, the Joint
Committee staff asked if the annuity contracts had been reconveyed to Mr. Lay (or if they would
be) and, if they had been reconveyed, when this occurred. Mr. Lay’s counsel did not respond
directly to the question, but stated that “We are not in a position to give a legal opinion about the
current status of the annuity contracts.” They also stated their understanding that the
characterization of Mr. Lay’s termination for purposes of severance benefits was still under
review.

Discussion of Issues

The purchase and reconveyance arrangement involving the Lays’ annuity contracts can be
analyzed both from the perspective of whether it would accomplish the stated objective of the
arrangement, and from a Federal income tax perspective.”

As described above, the stated purpose of the arrangement was to provide an attractive
retention package to Mr. Lay upon his resumption of duties as Chief Executive Officer. The
total range of options considered by Enron is not clear, but appears to have included (1) giving
Mr. Lay a $5 million cash bonus, and purchasing and possibly reconveying one of the Lays’
annuity contracts to Mr. Lay, and (2) the issuance of restricted stock. The first alternative would
have provided a retention incentive but arguably not as significant an incentive as the
arrangement Enron approved, because the value of the conditional benefit under the first
alternative was less (i.e., the value of one annuity contract versus the value of both the annuity
contracts). The use of restricted stock, an arrangement frequently used by Enron, would provide
a retention incentive, but was not attractive to Mr. Lay because of his interest in more liquidity in
his financial portfolio. Thus, the purchase and reconveyance arrangement provided liquidity to
Mr. Lay, as well as serving as a more significant retention incentive.

In addition to other perceived benefits, from a tax perspective, use of the annuity purchase
and reconveyance arrangement had advantages both for Enron and Mr. Lay when compared to
other arrangements considered by Enron. The tax effects can be analyzed separately for the
purchase aspect of the transaction and the reconveyance.

The purchase of the annuity contracts had current tax advantages for Mr. Lay compared to
payment of a cash bonus (or any arrangement including a cash bonus). If he had been paid a
cash bonus, the amount of the bonus would have been currently includible in gross income and
subject to employment taxes. On the other hand, Mr. Lay would recognize gain on the sale of
the annuity contracts to Enron only to the extent the amount received exceeded the Lays’ basis in
the contracts.

2097 The focus of the Joint Committee staff review is Enron, not individuals. Thus,
examination of the Federal tax consequences to the Lays arising from this transaction is beyond
the scope of this review. Some general discussion is provided in order to give a full picture of
the transaction.

684

=== PAGE 713 ===
Viewing the tax consequences of the purchase of the annuity contracts compared to
payment of a cash bonus from Enron’s perspective, as a practical matter, no deduction would be
allowable with respect to either type of transaction. Enron would not be entitled to a deduction
for the amount of the cost of the contracts; the amount paid would be basis in the contracts. If
Enron paid a cash bonus, given Mr. Lay’s total compensation package, the bonus would not be
deductible due to the $1 million dollar cap on deductibility of compensation of certain
executives.°"> A key difference, however, is that if a cash bonus had been paid, Enron would be
liable for its share of employment taxes;7°? no employment taxes would be due as a result of the
purchase of the annuity contracts. Another important difference is that, as a nonindividual holder
of annuity contracts, Enron would be required to include in income each year the amount of the
income on the contracts. This income inclusion would apply as long as Enron held the contracts.
Thus, from Enron’s perspective the current tax consequences of the annuity purchase and
reconveyance arrangement were less favorable than the payment of a cash bonus or the payment
of restricted stock.

The use of restricted stock would have provided some tax advantage to Mr. Lay compared
to an arrangement involving a cash bonus, depending in part on the specifics of the arrangement.
In general, restricted stock is includible in gross income when no longer subject to a substantial
risk of forfeiture. Thus, for example, if Enron had granted Mr. Lay $10 million of restricted
stock that vested over four years, the value of one fourth of the stock would be includible in
income in each year (and subject to employment taxes). This is more favorable to Mr. Lay from
a tax perspective than a current payment of $10 million, but less favorable than the annuity
purchase arrangement agreed to by Enron which would result in income in excess of basis.

If restricted stock had been used, Enron theoretically would have been entitled to a
compensation deduction when the stock was includible in Mr. Lay’s income. However, as with a
cash bonus, the deduction likely would be limited by the $1 million cap on deductibility of
executive compensation.

With respect to whether Enron treated the purchase properly from a tax perspective, a key
issue is whether Enron paid fair market value for the contracts. If Enron paid the Lays more than
the fair market value for the contracts, then the question would arise as to whether the excess of
the amount paid over such value was disguised compensation. If so, Enron would have had
employment tax obligations.” According to documents provided by Enron, three different
purchase price alternatives were presented to the Compensation Committee: (1) a total of $4.692
million, which was described as the market value of the contract investments; (2) a total of $10
million, which was described as the Lays’ basis in the contracts; and (3) a total of $11.240

2098 Sec. 162 (m).

2099 There is no dollar cap on the amount of compensation subject to the Hospital
Insurance (Medicare) portion of employment taxes.

2100 There also could be tax consequences for the Lays.

685

=== PAGE 714 ===
million, which was described as the net present value floor value of the annuities (i.e., the
minimum amount the annuities were expected to be worth at maturity).7>!

While the documents supplied by Enron do not clearly indicate a fair market value, the net
present value floor value appears to represent the current value of the future payments in the
policy. If this is accurate, the amount paid by Enron did not exceed the fair market value of the
contracts, and there would be no question as to whether some amount should have been treated
as taxable compensation.

If the annuity contracts are reconveyed to Mr. Lay, then the fair market value of the
policies should be treated as compensation by Enron for reporting purposes, and would be
subject to withholding and employment taxes. Enron’s deduction would be limited by the $1
million cap on the deduction of executive compensation.”

5. Split-dollar insurance arrangements
Present Law

Background

Overview

The term “split-dollar life insurance” refers to splitting the cost and benefits of a life
insurance contract. The cost of premiums for the contract often is split between two parties.
One party typically pays the bulk of the premiums, and is repaid in the future from amounts
received under the contract. The other party often pays a small portion of the premiums, but has
the right to designate the recipient of the bulk of the benefits under the contract. This type of
arrangement transfers value from one party to the other party.

Split-dollar life insurance arrangements have been used for several purposes. A principal
use has been by employers to provide low-cost life insurance benefits or to provide funds for
other compensatory benefits (such as nonqualified deferred compensation) for employees on a
tax-favored basis. Split-dollar life insurance arrangements are also used in other contexts. For
example, such an arrangement can be used to fund a buy-sell agreement between shareholders or
owners of a business, or to provide estate liquidity (sometimes with a trust as the owner of the
contract).

The type of life insurance generally used in a split-dollar life insurance arrangement is
referred to as whole life insurance. This does not refer to the period for which the insurance
contract is in effect, but rather, to the fact that the contract has a “cash value,” as well as
providing a death benefit upon the death of the insured person. The cash value arises because the
premiums paid to the insurer for the contract are invested, and some of this investment income is

2101 Attachment in the Minutes of the Compensation and Management Committee, at 7-8
(Sept. 14, 2001). EC 000026744 - EC 000026750.

2102 Sec. 162(m).

686

=== PAGE 715 ===
credited to the contract. The amount of the future death benefit payable under the contract is
funded both by premium payments and by investment earnings on the premium payments. The
amount of the cash value at any point in time generally is the sum of the premiums paid plus the
earnings on premiums that are credited to the policy, reduced by the cost of death benefit
coverage for the current period, fees, and other charges imposed by the insurer. The amount of
the cash value generally is zero or small at first, and increases over the duration of the contract.

The cash value of a whole life insurance contract may be borrowed or withdrawn by the
contract holder (reducing the amount that will be paid as a death benefit under the contract). A
whole life insurance contract can be contrasted with a term life insurance contract, which pays a
death benefit upon the death of the insured person, but has no cash value. Under a term life
insurance contract, the death benefit coverage applies only for a set term (e.g., one year or five
years), and the premium payments are set at a level to fund the death benefit only during that
period. The contract holder does not have the right to borrow or withdraw cash under a term life
insurance contract, because it has no “cash value.”

Methods for splitting the cash value and death benefits of a life insurance contract

The benefits that are split under a split-dollar life insurance arrangement generally are the
death benefit (the amount paid upon the death of the insured person) and the cash value (which
includes the earnings under the contract). Because the arrangement is by contract, the parties can
split these features of the life insurance contract in whatever manner they agree upon. Over the
past 50 years, a variety of split-dollar life insurance products have been developed.

One form of split-dollar life insurance arrangement is known as the endorsement method.
Under this arrangement, as applied, for example, between an employer and an employee, the
employer is the owner of the contract and pays the bulk of the premiums. The employee
generally is the insured person, and pays a smaller amount of the premiums. The employer
endorses over to the employee the right to designate the beneficiary of the death benefit under
the contract. The employer’s premium payments are repaid from the cash value of the contract
or from the death benefit when the insured employee dies. Under some arrangements, ownership
of the contract is turned over, or “rolled out,” to the employee at a contractually agreed time,
such as upon retirement, after the employer has recouped its premium payments.

Another common type of split is referred to as the collateral assignment method. Under
this arrangement, as applied, for example, between an employer and an employee, the employee
(or sometimes a trust he or she establishes) owns the policy and pays the premiums with amounts
loaned by the employer, assigning the life insurance contract as collateral for the loans. The
employer has the right to the portion of the cash value of the contract funded by its premium
loans, but the employee (or trust) has the right to designate the beneficiary of the death benefits.
The employee (or trust) may also have the right to the portion of the cash value of the contract
that exceeds the employer’s share of the cash value, if any.

Other types of splits, in which ownership of the cash value, the right to death benefits, or
both, are split between the parties (e.g., between the employer and employee (or trust)), are also
possible. Arrangements in which the cash value is split between the parties are sometimes
referred to as equity split-dollar arrangements. Another variation, sometimes referred to as a

687

=== PAGE 716 ===
reverse split-dollar arrangement, is created when the owner of the contract and its cash value is
the employee; the employee pays premiums with amounts loaned or reimbursed by the employer.
The employee endorses or assigns to the employer the right to the death benefit under the
contract, and perhaps also a portion of the cash value.

Tax treatment of split-dollar life insurance arrangements between employer and employee

Transfers of property to employees

Under present law, compensation of an employee generally is included in the employee’s
income when it is received (or constructively received). If property is transferred to a person in
connection with the performance of services, the fair market value of the property (reduced by
the amount, if any, that is paid for the property) generally is included in income at the time the
interest in the property is transferable, or is not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture
(whichever is sooner).7!%

Life insurance

Present law provides that no Federal. income tax generally is imposed on a policyholder
with respect to the earnings under a life insurance contract (“inside buildup”). Amounts paid by
reason of the death of the insured under the contract (“death benefits”) are also generally
excluded from income of the recipient.?!™

Other favorable rules apply to amounts paid out or borrowed under a life insurance
contract. Distributions from the contract prior to the death of the insured generally are taxed
only to the extent they exceed the taxpayer’s investment in the contract; that is, the distributions
are first treated as tax-free recovery of the investment in the contract, and then the excess is
included in income.”!®

2103 Sec. 83. The rules of section 83 are discussed in greatér detail in Parts II.C.1. and
TIH.C.2.

2104 Sec. 101(a). An exception is provided to this general rule of exclusion for death
benefits, in the case of a transfer of a life insurance contract for valuable consideration. The
amount of the death benefit includible in the beneficiary’s income under this exception is the
amount that exceeds the premiums and other consideration paid for the contract by the
transferee. However, this rule of inclusion does not apply in certain cases, including when the

transfer is to the insured or to a corporation in which the insured is a shareholder or officer. Sec.
101(a)(2).

2105 Sec. 72. These favorable distribution rules do not apply to certain types of high-
initial-premium policies (those funded more rapidly than seven annual level premiums); for those
contracts, known as modified endowment contracts, distributions (and loans) are treated as
income first, then tax-free recovery of investment in the contract.

688

=== PAGE 717 ===
Present law provides that no deduction is allowed for premiums on any life insurance
contract if the taxpayer is directly or indirectly a beneficiary under the contract?!

1960s rulings: cost of current term insurance protection

Until 2001, IRS guidance as to the Federal income tax treatment of split-dollar
arrangements was limited. In the 1960s, the IRS published rulings”’”’ providing that the amount
includible in an employee’s income under a split-dollar insurance arrangement is the cost of
current term insurance protection (less the amount, if any, paid by the employee). Any
policyholder dividends paid to, or benefiting, the employee are also includible in income.

In determining the cost of current term insurance protection, the employee may use either
the cost as determined under an actuarial table known as the “P.S. 58 table,” or the insurer’s
published rates for one-year term life insurance coverage. This election arguably permitted the
parties to the arrangement to choose the lower rate for determining the amounts includible in the
employee’s income, or the higher rate for determining the employer’s share (as in a reverse split-
dollar arrangement).

Notice 2001-10: loan or compensation

In January 2001, the IRS issued Notice 2001-10. It provided interim guidance for the
tax treatment of split-dollar life insurance, including types of split-dollar life insurance
arrangements between an employer and employee in which the employee has an interest in the
cash value of the contract (equity split-dollar arrangements) that were not addressed by the 1960s

rulings. The IRS has issued subsequent guidance that continues to apply the general concepts of
Notice 2001-10.

Notice 2001-10 provided that the IRS generally would accept the parties’ characterization
of a split-dollar life insurance arrangement in either of two ways. The first way is to treat the
employee as the owner of the contract, and treat the employer’s payments for premiums as loans
to the employee. Foregone interest on the loans is included in the employee’s income under the
rules of present law.?!°

The second way is to treat the employer as owning the contract by reason of paying its
share of premiums. The employee includes compensation income equal to the value of the life
insurance protection. This approach is similar to the requirement under the 1960s rulings that the
cost of current insurance protection be included in income. Notice 2001-10 also specifically
provided that the present-law rules taxing transfers of property to employees”!'® apply to split-

2108 Sec. 264(a)(1).

2107 Rey. Rul. 64-328, 1964-2 C.B. 11, and Rev. Rul. 66-110, 1966-1 C.B. 12.
2108 9001-5 LR.B. 459, Jan. 9, 2001.

2109 Sec. 7872.

2110 Sec, 83.

689

=== PAGE 718 ===
dollar life insurance arrangements in which the employer transfers the cash value of the life
insurance contract to the employee. If the contract is “rolled out” to the employee, he or she
would generally include the cash value in income at that time.

Notice 2001-10 provided a new table, Table 2001, to replace the P.S. 58 table for valuing
the cost of current life insurance protection. The Notice also provided that, after 2003, taxpayers
would no longer be permitted to choose to determine the value of current life insurance
protection by using the insurer’s lower published premium rates (as under the 1960s rulings).
Rather, if an insurer’s published premium rate were used for this purpose, it would have to be a
premium rate at which the insurer regularly sells term insurance (so long as the insurer does not
more commonly sell standard-risk term insurance at higher premium rates).

Notice 2002-8

A year after Notice 2001-10 was issued, it was revoked by Notice 2002-8.7!1!
Notice 2002-8, however, applies the general concepts of the earlier Notice, and provides that
Table 2001 generally applies for valuation purposes for arrangements entered into after January
28, 2002 (the date Notice 2002-8 was issued). It also provides that for valuation purposes under
arrangements entered into after January 28, 2002, the taxpayer may continue to choose the
insurer’s lower published premium rates; however, for such arrangements, after 2003, these rates
must be rates at which the insurer regularly sells term insurance (not just published rates).

Notice 2002-8 specifically provides that the proposed regulations addressing the Federal
tax treatment of split-dollar life insurance arrangements will be effective for arrangements
entered into after the date of publication of final regulations.

Proposed split-dollar life insurance regulations

In general.--The IRS issued proposed regulations on split-dollar life insurance
arrangements on July 5, 2002.7!!? The proposed regulations provide guidance on the income,
employment, and gift tax treatment of split-dollar life insurance arrangements. Somewhat like
the earlier notices, the proposed regulations generally provide two mutually exclusive regimes
for taxing split-dollar arrangements, one taking an economic benefit approach,”"” and the other
applying loan treatment.”"!

A central feature of the proposed regulations is to treat one party as the owner of the
policy, even if more than one party has an interest in the policy. Whether the split-dollar
arrangement comes under the economic benefit approach or the loan approach generally depends

2111 9002-4 LR.B. 398.

2112 REG-164754-0, July 5, 2002. Regulations are proposed under Code sections 61, 83,
301, 1402, 7872, 3121, 3231, 3306, and 3401.

2113 Sec. 61.

2114 See. 7872 (or secs.1271-1275, if the loan is not below-market).

690

=== PAGE 719 ===
on which party is considered the owner. The loan approach generally applies if the party who is
not the owner is making payments (premiums) and is reasonably expected to be repaid from the
contract’s cash value or death benefits. Otherwise, the economic benefit approach generally
applies for income, employment, and gift tax purposes.

The preamble to the proposed regulations states that the economic benefit approach
generally will govern endorsement split-dollar arrangements, and the loan approach generally
will govern collateral assignment split-dollar arrangements.”'!° Special rules provide that the
economic benefit approach always applies to a split-dollar arrangement in connection with the
performance of services if the service provider’s only benefit is current life insurance protection
(a “non-equity” split dollar arrangement).”!'° The economic benefit approach applies to certain
“non-equity” collateral assignment arrangements (if the employee or donee is the listed owner of
the contract), as well as to endorsement arrangements (the employer or donor is the listed
owner).

The proposed regulations would be effective for arrangements entered into after the final
regulations are published in the Federal Register. However, taxpayers may rely on the proposed
regulations if all parties treat the arrangement consistently.

Owner of the contract.—Generally, under the proposed regulations, the owner named in
the contract is treated as the owner or, if more than one is listed, the first one is treated as the
owner.”''7 An employer is treated as the owner if the employee’s only benefit at any time is

current life insurance protection (no cash value or possible future ownership of the contract, for
example).

Split-dollar life insurance arrangement defined._The proposed regulations define a split-
dollar life insurance arrangement broadly, with especially inclusive definitions in the case of

arrangements between service providers and recipients, and between corporations and
shareholders.”"!®

Economic benefit approach.Under this approach, the value of economic benefits under
the life insurance contract is treated as being transferred from the contract owner to the
nonowner (reduced by any consideration paid by the nonowner to the owner). The tax

2115 REG-164754-0, preamble at 11 (under the heading mutually exclusive regimes), July
5, 2002.

et Prop. Treas. Reg. 1.61-22(b)(3)(ii). The economic benefit approach also applies to a
split-dollar arrangement between a donor and donee (e.g., a life insurance trust) if the donee’s
only benefit is the value of current life insurance protection.

2117 However, if multiple listed owners each have an undivided interest in every right
under the contract, the contract is treated as two or more separate contracts that are not part of a
split-dollar arrangement. Prop. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.61-22(c)(1).

2118 Prop. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.61-22(b)(2).

691

=== PAGE 720 ===
consequence of the transfer depends on the relationship of the owner and nonowner;”"”” in the
employment context, compensation for services.

The proposed regulations distinguish between equity split-dollar (in which the nonowner
also has a right to some or all of the cash value of the contract), and non-equity split-dollar (in
which the nonowner has no such right and has only the right to current insurance protection).

In the non-equity split-dollar arrangement, the nonowner includes in income (and also in
wages for employment tax purposes) the cost of current insurance protection. Unlike under the
1960s rulings, the proposed regulations provide that the amount of current insurance protection is
measured as the excess of the average death benefit under the contract over the total amount
payable to the owner (including outstanding policy loans). The cost of this is determined as the
amount of current insurance protection times the “premium factor” published by the IRS in
separate guidance.”!”°

In the equity split-dollar arrangement, the nonowner is also required to include in income
(and for employment tax purposes) the value of any interest in the contract— for example, the
value of any interest in the cash value of the contract provided during the year. 2121

Under the economic benefit approach, in the event of transfer of a contract by the owner
to a nonowner (a “rollout” of the contract by the employer to the employee), the fair market
value of the contract is included in the nonowner’s income (less any portion on which he has
already paid tax). In the service provider context, applicable present-law rules”! permit deferral
of income inclusion (and also the employer’s deduction) if the transferee’s rights in the contract
are not yet substantially vested.

Loan approach.-Under the loan approach, the owner and nonowner are treated as
borrower and lender, respectively, if the nonowner (e.g., employer) paying premiums is
reasonably expected to be repaid from the contract’s cash value or death benefits. If the loan
does not provide sufficient interest, then interest is imputed under the rules of section 7872. In
general, such interest is not deductible by the borrower, but is includible in the income of the
deemed lender in the arrangement. If sufficient interest is provided for, then the general rules for
debt instruments apply (including OID rules). The proposed regulations provide rules for
treatment of term, demand, and contingent payment split-dollar loans.

2119 F g., depending on the relationship, the arrangement may be a payment of
compensation, dividend distribution under section 301, gift under the gift tax rules, or other
transfer. Prop. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.61-22(d)(1).

2120 Prop. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.61-22(d)(2). This separate guidance had not yet been
published as of February 5, 2003.

2121 The proposed regulations do not provide specific guidance for determining the value
of the includible economic benefit. Prop. Treas. Reg. 1.61-22(d)(3)(ii).

2122 Sec, 83.

692

=== PAGE 721 ===
Guidance on valuation

After the issuance of the proposed regulations, the IRS issued further guidance, Notice
2002-59, specifically on valuation of benefits under certain types of reverse split-dollar life
insurance arrangements.”!*3 This Notice provides that the IRS will challenge the use of high
current term insurance rates, prepayment of premiums, or other arrangements to understate the
value of benefits under the life insurance policy that are to be included in income in a reverse
split-dollar life insurance arrangement.

Factual Background
Overview of Enron’s split-dollar insurance arrangements

Enron entered into split-dollar life insurance arrangements with three of its top
management: Mr. Lay, Mr. Skilling, and John Clifford Baxter.”!*

Enron entered into two split-dollar life insurance arrangements with Mr. Lay.” Enron
entered into a split-dollar arrangement with Mr. Lay on April 22, 1994, with respect to a life
insurance contract with a face amount of $30 million.2!”° Mr. Lay’s position was chairman and
chief executive officer of Enron Corp.?!?7 Enron entered into another split-dollar arrangement
with Mr. Lay on December 18, 1996. The face amount of the life insurance contract under the
1996 agreement was $11.9 million.

Another split-dollar life insurance agreement with Mr. Lay for $12.75 million of life
insurance coverage was later approved by the Compensation Committee of the Board of
Directors on May 3, 1999, at Mr. Lay’s request, to trade out his Executive Supplemental Pre-
Retirement Death Benefit under the Houston Natural Gas Corporation Executive Supplemental

2123 Notice 2002-59, 2002-36 LR.B. 1, Aug. 16, 2002.

2124 Enron’s split-dollar arrangements with employees appear to be individualized, rather
than part of a larger plan or arrangement to enter into split-dollar arrangements with employees.

2125 Appendix D contains Enron’s split-dollar life insurance agreements with Mr. Lay.

2126 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 143.

2127 Mir. Lay had been chairman and chief executive officer since February 1986. Enron
Form 10-K for 1996, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

693

=== PAGE 722 ===
Benefit Agreement.”!”8 Although Enron purchased the life insurance contract in 2000, Enron
and Mr. Lay did not enter into the split-dollar arrangement.?!”?

Mr. Skilling entered into a split-dollar arrangement with Enron on May 23, 1997, with
respect to an $8 million life insurance contract.”!%° Mr. Skilling’s position was then president
and chief operating officer of Enron Corp.?3! Mr. Skilling said in an interview with Joint
Committee staff?!*? that his insurance broker noticed Mr. Lay’s split-dollar arrangement in proxy
materials issued by Enron, and the broker suggested that Mr. Skilling should ask Enron to enter
into a similar agreement with him.

Mr. Baxter’s split-dollar arrangement with Enron was dated January 26, 2000, for $5

million of life insurance coverage. At that time, Mr. Baxter’s position was chairman and chief
executive officer of Enron North America Corp? 3

Specific split-dollar arrangements

Split-dollar arrangements with Mr. Lay

1994 arrangement. On April 22, 1994, Enron entered into a split-dollar arrangement with
Mr. Lay and the KLL & LPL Family Partnership, a Texas limited partnership. 7'** KLL and LPL
are the initials of Mr. Lay and his wife, Linda.. The life insurance contract covered the joint lives
of Mr. Lay and his wife, Linda. The life insurance contract had a face amount of $30 million”!

ae Agenda Item No. 8(d), Split Dollar Policy, EC 000752761, and Minutes, Meeting of
the Compensation and Management Development Committee of the Board of Directors, Enron
Corp., May 3, 1999, EC 000752759-EC 000752760.

2129 J etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 31, 2003, answer 12.

2130 Appendix D contains Enron’s split-dollar life insurance arrangement with Mr.
Skilling.

2131 Mir, Skilling took this position in January, 1997. Enron Form 10-K for 1996, as filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

2132 Interview of Mr. Skilling by Joint Committee on Taxation staff on November 13,
2002.

2133 Enron Form 10-K for 2000, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

2134 Appendix D contains the Split Dollar Life Insurance Agreement (dated April 22,
1994) (EC 000752803 - EC 000752807) and the Collateral Agreement (dated April 22, 1994)
(EC 000752801 - EC 000752803).

2135 1 etter from Enron’s counsel (Skadden, Arps) to Lindy L. Paull, Joint Committee on
Taxation, dated January 13, 2003, answer 143.

694

=== PAGE 723 ===
and was issued by Transamerica Occidental Life Insurance Company. The arrangement was a
“collateral assignment,” whereby the family partnership was the owner of the contract, but Enron
agreed to pay each of the nine annual premiums of $280,265. The family partnership assigned
the life insurance contract to Enron as collateral, giving Enron an interest in the cash surrender
value of the policy to secure the repayment of amounts Enron paid as premiums. The family
partnership agreed not to withdraw, surrender, borrow against, or pledge as security for a loan
any portion of the cash value of the policy.

The agreement provided that upon Mr. Lay’s death while the agreement remained in
force, Enron would be entitled to receive, from the death benefit proceeds, the amount of the
premiums that Enron had paid. The beneficiary designated by the family partnership would be
entitled to the balance of the death benefit proceeds. Enron would not be entitled to recoup its
premium payments in the event of Mr. Lay’s death after the termination of the agreement.

The 1994 agreement would be terminated by: (1) payment to Enron of the amount of
premiums it had paid; (2) surrender of the life insurance contract; (3) death of the second of Mr.
Lay and his wife, Linda, to die; or (4) 30 days after the ninth anniversary of the date the contract
was issued or upon Mr. Lay’s retirement from Enron, whichever is later. If the split-dollar
agreement is terminated by the passage of nine years or Mr. Lay’s retirement, Enron relinquishes
the right to recoup its premium payments (unlike the other terminating events).

1996 arrangement.—Effective December 13, 1996, Enron entered into a similar “collateral
assignment” split-dollar arrangement with Mr. Lay and the same family trust. 2136 The life
insurance contract had a face amount of $11.9 million, and was also issued by Transamerica
Occidental Life Insurance Company.?"?” The family partnership was the owner of the contract,
but Enron paid each of the five annual premiums of $250,000. The family partnership assigned
the life insurance contract to Enron as collateral, giving Enron an interest in the cash surrender
value of the policy to secure the repayment of amounts Enron paid as premiums. The family
partnership had no right to sell, assign, transfer, borrow against or withdraw from the cash
surrender value of the policy.

The agreement provided that upon Mr. Lay’s death, Enron would have the right to
receive $1.25 million of the death benefit (the total of the five annual premiums of $250,000), or
the amount of premiums paid by Enron to date if Mr. Lay died before all five premiums were
paid. The balance of the death benefit under the life insurance contract would be paid to the
beneficiaries under the contract, as designated by the family partnership.

The 1996 agreement could be terminated by the family partnership at any time during
Mr. Lay’s life by a lump sum cash payment to Enron of $1.25 million (or, if less, the amount of
premiums Enron had paid by the time Mr. Lay’s employment terminated). In addition, the

2136 Appendix D contains the Split Dollar Agreement (dated December 18, 1996) (EC
000752792 - EC 000752798). The agreement stated that it was to be effective as of December
13, 1996.

2137 The effective date of the life insurance contract was October 14, 1996.

695

=== PAGE 724 ===
agreement would be automatically terminated by bankruptcy, receivership, dissolution, or
cessation of business of Enron, or by mutual written agreement of the parties. In the event of an
automatic termination, the family partnership could acquire Enron’s interest in the life insurance
contract by paying to Enron, within 60 days of the terminating event, the amount of the
aggregate premiums Enron had paid (less any outstanding debt incurred by Enron that is secured
by the policy). Alternatively, Enron could enforce its right to be repaid the amount of the
premiums it had paid.

Split-dollar arrangement with Mr. Skilling

On May 23, 1997, Enron entered into a split-dollar arrangement with Mr. Skilling and the
trustee of the Jeffrey Keith Skilling Family 1996 Trust.7/** The trustee of this trust was Mark
David Skilling. The life insurance contract had a face amount of $8 million, and was issued by
Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company.?" The arrangement was a “collateral
assignment,” whereby the Skilling family trust was the owner of the contract, but Enron paid
most of the five annual premiums of $115,250 for each of the five years 1997 — 2001.

The trustee of the Skilling family trust agreed to pay a portion of the annual premium
(amounts between approximately $4,400 and $7,600) for each of the five years." The
agreement provided that these amounts were “equal to the annual cost of current life insurance
protection on the life of the employee [Mr. Skilling], measured by the Insurer’s current published
minimum premium rate for standard risks.””!*! Enron agreed pay the balance of each of the five
annual premiums. The Skilling family trust assigned the life insurance contract to Enron as
collateral, giving Enron an interest in the cash surrender value of the contract to secure the
repayment of amounts Enron paid as premiums. The Skilling family trust had no right to sell,
assign, transfer, borrow against or withdraw from the cash surrender value of the policy.

The agreement provided that upon Mr. Skilling’s death, Enron would have the right to
receive a portion of the death benefit in cash equal to the aggregate premium payments made by
Enron. The balance of the death benefit under the life insurance contract would be paid to the
beneficiaries under the contract, as designated by the trustee of the Skilling family trust.

The agreement could be terminated by the trustee of the Skilling family trust at any time
during Mr. Skilling’s life upon written notice to Enron by a lump sum cash payment to Enron in
the amount of the aggregate premiums Enron had paid. In addition, the agreement would be

Oe Appendix D contains the Split Dollar Agreement (dated May 23, 1997) (EC
000752568 - EC 7525574), the Assignment of Life Insurance Policy as Collateral (dated June 25,
1997, effective as of May 23, 1997) (EC 000752563 0 EC 000752566), and the Jeffrey K.
Skilling Split Dollar Premium Payment Schedule (EC 000752567).

2139 ‘The effective date of the life insurance contract was May 23, 1997.

2140 Jeffrey K. Skilling Split Dollar Premium Payment Schedule, EC 000752567.
Appendix D contains this document.

2141 split Dollar Agreement at 2 (dated May 23, 1997) (EC 000752569).

696

=== PAGE 725 ===
automatically terminated by bankruptcy, receivership, dissolution, or cessation of business of
Enron, by termination of Mr. Skilling’s employment with Enron for any reason, by failure of the
trustee of the Skilling family trust to pay its portion of the premium (unless Enron agreed to pay),
or by mutual written agreement of the parties. In the event of an automatic termination, Mr.
Baxter’s trust could acquire Enron’s interest in the life insurance contract by paying to Enron,
within 60 days of the terminating event, the amount of the aggregate premiums Enron had paid
(less any outstanding debt incurred by Enron that is secured by the policy). Alternatively, Enron
could enforce its right to be repaid the amount of the premiums it had paid.

Split-dollar arrangement with Mr. Baxter

On January 26, 2000, Enron entered into a split-dollar arrangement with Mr. Baxter and
his insurance trust, of which Margo Baxter was trustee. The life insurance contract had a face
amount of $5 million, and was issued by Transamerica Occidental Life Insurance Company.”!?
Under the terms of the agreement, the arrangement, like Enron’s other split-dollar arrangements,
was a “collateral assignment,” whereby Mr. Baxter’s trust was the owner of the contract, but
Enron paid the annual premium of $50,565. Mr. Baxter’s trust assigned the life insurance
contract to Enron as collateral, giving Enron an interest in the cash surrender value of the policy ~
to secure the repayment of amounts Enron pays as premiums. Mr. Baxter’s trust had no right to
sell, assign, transfer, borrow against or withdraw from the cash surrender value of the policy.

The agreement provided that upon Mr. Baxter’s death, Enron would have the right to
receive a portion of the death benefit in cash equal to the aggregate premium payments made by
Enron. The balance of the death benefit under the life insurance contract would be paid to the
beneficiaries under the contract, as designated by Mr. Baxter’s trust.

The agreement could be terminated by Mr. Baxter’s trust at any time during Mr. Baxter’s
life by a lump sum cash payment to Enron in the amount of the aggregate premiums Enron had
paid. In addition, the agreement would be automatically terminated by bankruptcy,
receivership, dissolution, or cessation of business of Enron, or by mutual written agreement of
the parties. 143 Th the event of an automatic termination, Mr. Baxter’s trust could acquire Enron’s
interest in the life insurance contract by paying to Enron, within 60 days of the terminating event,
the amount of the aggregate premiums Enron had paid (less any outstanding debt incurred by
Enron that is secured by the policy). Alternatively, Enron could enforce its right to be repaid the
amount of the premiums it had paid.

Subsequent developments

Enron filed for bankruptcy under chapter 11 on December 2, 2001. Bankruptcy of Enron
was one of the events giving rise to automatic termination of the split-dollar arrangements with

2142 The effective date of the life insurance contract was January 26, 2000.

2143 Unlike the agreement with Mr. Skilling, the agreement with Mr. Baxter was not
automatically terminated upon the termination of his employment with Enron.

697

=== PAGE 726 ===
Mr. Lay, Mr. Skilling, and Mr. Baxter. Mr. Baxter died on January 25, 2002. 2144
Discussion of Issues

Enron’s split-dollar life insurance arrangements with Mr. Lay, Mr. Skilling, and Mr.
Baxter were entered into between 1994 and 2000, before the issuance of the series of recent IRS
guidance starting with Notice 2001-10 in January, 2001. Under the limited guidance issued by
the IRS prior to Notice 2001-10, the cost of current term insurance protection would be
includible in income of the owner of the life insurance contract (less the amount paid by the
owner).”"5 Enron would not be permitted to deduct the premiums.”!6

Under the two split-dollar life insurance arrangements with Mr. Lay and the arrangement
with Mr. Baxter, Enron paid the entire amount of the premiums under the life insurance
contracts. The portion of this premium that constituted the cost of current term insurance
protection would have been includible in income by the employee.

Under Mr. Skilling’s arrangement, the Skilling family trust paid a portion of each annual
premium under the life insurance contract, while Enron paid the balance of the annual premium.
The terms of the split-dollar agreement provide that the amounts paid by the Skilling family trust
are intended to constitute the full cost of current insurance protection, based on the insurer’s
“published minimum premium rate for standard risks.” Under the 1960s rulings, taxpayers were
permitted to choose to determine the amount includable in income on this basis. Because the
Skilling family trust, rather than Enron, paid this portion of the premiums, no amount would
have been includible in income. Each of the five annual premiums on the $8 million life
insurance contract was $250,000, but the “cost of current insurance protection” was determined
to be an amount between $4,400 and $7,600 each year. This disparity in amount illustrates the
valuation issues that arise from permitting the use of insurers’ “published” premium rates to set
the amount includable in an employee’s income.

2144 His death was alleged to be a suicide. Paul Duggan and Lois Romano, Enron
Official Shaken In Days Before Suicide, Washington Post, Feb. 9, 2002, at Al.

2145 Bx amination of the Federal tax consequences of the split-dollar life insurance
arrangements to the individual Enron employees is beyond the scope of this Report. Some
general discussion is provided in order to illustrate the issues relating to the tax treatment of
split-dollar life insurance arrangements into which Enron entered.

2146 Section 264(a)(1) provides that no deduction is allowed for premiums on any life
insurance contract if the taxpayer is directly or indirectly a beneficiary under the contract. Prior
to amendment in 1997, the rule provided that no deduction was allowed for premiums on a life
insurance contract covering any officer or employee, if the taxpayer is directly or indirectly a
beneficiary under the contract. Enron generally had the right to recoup all of its premium
payments from the death benefits paid by the life insurance contracts, by the terms of the split-
dollar life insurance arrangements. The premium deduction denial rules are discussed in more
detail in Part Three, section IV of this Report, relating to company-owned and trust-owned life
insurance.

698

=== PAGE 727 ===
Enron employees’ split-dollar insurance arrangements were entered into prior to the
issuance of the 2002 proposed regulations. Further, the regulations are in proposed form, and
would become effective generally for arrangements entered into after the date final regulations
are published. However, if the rules of the proposed regulations applied, the tax treatment
probably would be conceptually similar to the treatment under the pre-Notice 2001-10 letter
rulings published by the IRS, in that the value of the economic benefit would be includible in
income. However, the analysis of whether to apply this approach or the proposed regulations’
loan approach would be new, and the process of determining the amount of this cost would differ
from under prior law.

Under the proposed regulations, the tax treatment of the non-equity collateral assignment
split-dollar arrangements that Enron entered into with Mr. Lay, Mr. Skilling and Mr. Baxter
would likely be subject to the “economic benefit” approach. The proposed regulations provide a
special rule that the economic benefit approach always applies to a split-dollar arrangement in
connection with the performance of services if the service provider’s only benefit is current life
insurance protection (a “non-equity” split dollar arrangement). Because the partnership and the
trusts that were the owners of the contracts in these collateral assignment arrangements did not
have the right to borrow or otherwise gain access to the cash value of the life insurance
contracts,”!*’ the contracts would be treated as non-equity split dollar arrangements under the
proposed regulations. In this circumstance, the proposed regulations would provide that the
owner of the contract”!** would include in income the cost of current insurance protection.
Valuation of this cost would be an issue, as the proposed regulations do not provide new
guidance.”!?

Alternatively, if the arrangements were subject to the loan approach under the proposed
regulations, they would be treated as loans of each premium payment made by Enron. The
borrower under this analysis would be the person deemed to be the owner of the life insurance
contracts.7!°° The foregone interest on these deemed loans would be included in the income of
the partnership or trust.

2147 Under each agreement described, the employee’s family partnership or trust had no
right to sell, assign, transfer, borrow against or withdraw from the cash surrender value of the
policy.

2148 : .
Under the proposed regulations, the owner may be the partnership or trust.
However, in the employment context, it could be argued that attribution or look-through to the

employee would be appropriate, because the income is in the nature of compensation for his
services.

2149 Notice 2002-8 provides that until final regulations are published, the P.S. 58 rates, or
the insurer’s lower published premium rates for standard risks as permitted under the 1960s
rulings, may be used to determine the value of current life insurance protection for split-dollar
life insurance arrangements entered into before January 28, 2002.

2150 Under the proposed regulations, the owner may be the Lay family partnership, the
Skilling family trust, or Mr. Baxter’s trust, respectively.

699

=== PAGE 728 ===
The enactment of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, relating to corporate governance, has
raised the issue of whether a split-dollar life insurance arrangement between and employer and
an employee is characterized as a loan, for purposes of that Act’s prohibition of certain loans to
executives.”!>! The resolution of that question is not necessarily related to whether the
arrangement is characterized as a loan, or otherwise, under Federal tax rules.?!*?

Until the issuance of Notice 2001-10 in 2001, the IRS had issued very little guidance on
split-dollar life insurance since the 1960s. During this period, the use of split-dollar life
insurance became more widespread, and variations on the product proliferated. In the absence of
guidance, some taxpayers may have taken a variety of positions as to the includibility in income
of benefits under the arrangements, and as to the timing or amount of items that are includible.
From a tax policy perspective, taxpayers’ failure to include in income the appropriate value of an
economic benefit received by an employee from an employer indicates a need for guidance as to
the proper tax treatment of split-dollar life insurance arrangements.

More recently, since 2001, the IRS has issued far more detailed guidance, both as general
statements published in Notices, and as more specific rules published as proposed regulations. In
addition, the IRS has superceded the previous valuation table, known as the P.S. 58 table, and
supplanted it with Table 2001 for new split-dollar arrangements. The effect has been to treat the
economic benefit received in a split-dollar life insurance arrangement more like other economic
benefits received by employees, specifying the tax treatment in greater detail than previously in
an area in which practices that may not accurately measure income had become increasingly
common.

Recommendations

Requiring taxpayers to include in income the economic value of the benefit received in a
split-dollar life insurance arrangement (or to treat the arrangement as a loan, if that treatment
reflects the nature of the transaction) is consistent with the goal of the income tax system to
accurately measure income. The Notices and proposed regulations generally serve the tax policy
goal of improving accurate income measurement in the case of split-dollar life insurance
arrangements. The Joint Committee staff recommends that guidance relating to split-dollar life
insurance should be finalized.

2151 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, sec. 402, Pub. L. No. 107-204. The Sarbanes-Oxley
Act is discussed in more detail in Part Four, section III.C.3., relating to employee loans.

2152 Bostal, Will SEC Exempt Split-Dollar From Ravages Of Sarbanes-Oxley Loan
Rules?, Insurance Chronicle, Jan. 13, 2003, at 1.

700

=== PAGE 729 ===
6. Limitation on deduction of certain executive compensation in excess of $1 million
Present Law
In general

Present law allows a deduction for ordinary and necessary business expenses, including a
reasonable allowance for salaries and other compensation for personal services actually
rendered.”!* The reasonableness standard has been used primarily to limit payments by closely-
held companies in cases in which nondeductible dividends may be disguised as deductible
compensation. The reasonableness standard has rarely, if ever, been applied in the context of
compensation paid to an employee of a large publicly held corporation, where the question of
whether a payment is really a return to capital is generally not an issue.

Under present law, compensation in excess of $1 million paid by a publicly held
company to the company’s “covered employees” generally is not deductible.”"** Covered
employees are the chief executive officer and the four other most highly compensated employees
of the company as reported in the company’s proxy statement.

Subject to certain exceptions, the deduction limitation applies to all otherwise deductible
compensation of a covered employee for a taxable year, regardless of the form in which the
compensation is paid, whether the compensation is for services as a covered employee, and
regardless of when the compensation was earned. The deduction limitation applies when the
deduction would otherwise be taken. Thus, for example, in the case of a nonqualified stock
option, the deduction is normally taken in the year the option is exercised, even though the
option was granted with respect to services performed in a prior year.

Certain types of compensation are not subject to the deduction limitation and are not
taken into account in determining whether other compensation exceeds $1 million. With respect
to compensation paid to Enron executives, the most relevant exception to the deduction
limitation is for performance-based compensation. In general, performance-based compensation
is compensation payable solely on account of the attainment of one or more performance goals
and with respect to which certain requirements are satisfied, including a shareholder approval
requirement.”!°°

2153 Sec, 162(a)(1).

2154 Sec. 162(m). The $1 million limit is reduced by any amount of excess parachute
payments that are not deductible for the year (as determined under sec. 280G). The deduction
limitation applies for purposes of the regular income tax and the alternative minimum tax.

2155 Th addition, the following types of compensation are not subject to the deduction
limitation and are not taken into account in determining whether other compensation exceeds $1
million: (1) compensation payable on a commission basis; (2) payments to a tax-qualified
retirement plan (including salary reduction contributions); and (3) amounts that are excludable
from the individual’s gross income (such as employer-provided health benefits). In addition,

701

=== PAGE 730 ===
Performance-based compensation: In general

The deduction limitation does not apply to any compensation payable solely on account
of the attainment of one or more performance goals, but only if: (1) the performance goals are
determined by a compensation committee of the board of directors of the publicly held company
which is comprised solely of two or more outside directors; (2) the material terms under which
the remuneration is to be paid, including the performance goals, are disclosed to shareholders
and approved by a majority of the vote in a separate shareholder vote before the payment of such
compensation; and (3) before payment of such compensation, the compensation committee
certifies that the performance goals and any other material terms were in fact satisfied.?!*°

Compensation generally does not satisfy the requirements for performance-based
compensation if the facts and circumstances indicate that the employee would receive all or part
of the compensation regardless of whether the performance goal is attained. However, -
compensation does not fail to be performance-based merely because the compensation may be
paid upon death, disability or change of ownership or control, although compensation actually
paid on account of those events prior to the attainment of the performance goal would not satisfy
the requirements of the exception.?*”

Performance goal requirement
Preestablished objective performance goal

In order to qualify for the exception for performance-based compensation, the
compensation must be paid to the covered employee pursuant to a preestablished objective goal.
A performance goal generally is considered preestablished if it is established in writing by the .
compensation committee not later than 90 days after the commencement of the period of service
to which the performance goal relates, provided that the outcome is substantially uncertain at the
time the compensation committee actually establishes the goal.”!° 8 A performance goal is
considered objective if a third party having knowledge of the relevant facts could determine
whether the goal is met?

under a transition rule, compensation is not subject to the limitation and is not taken into account
in determining if other compensation exceeds $1 million if the compensation is payable under a
written binding contract in effect on February 17, 1993, and at all times thereafter before such
compensation is paid and which was not modified thereafter in any material respect before such
compensation is paid. Sec. 162(m)(4).

7156 Sec, 162(m)(4)(C).

2157 Treas, Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(2)(v).

2158 Ty no event will a performance goal be considered to be preestablished if it is
established after 25 percent of the period of service (as scheduled in good faith at the time the

goal is established) has elapsed. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(2)(i).

2159 Id.

702

=== PAGE 731 ===
The term performance goal is broadly defined. A performance goal can be based on one
or more business criteria that apply to the individual, a business unit, or the corporation as a
whole. Treasury regulations provide that such business criteria could include, for example, stock
price, market share, sales, earnings per share, return on equity, or costs. A performance goal
need not, however, be based upon an increase or positive result under a business criterion and
could include, for example, maintaining the status quo or limiting economic losses (measured, in
each case, by reference to a specific business criterion). A performance goal does not include the
mere continued employment of the covered employee. Thus, for example, a vesting provision
based solely on continued employment does not constitute a performance goal.71°°

A preestablished performance goal must state, in terms of an objective formula or
standard, the method for computing the amount of compensation payable to the employee if the
goal is attained. A formula or standard is objective if a third party having knowledge of the
relevant performance could calculate the amount to be paid to the employee. In addition, a
formula or standard must specify the individual employees or class of employees to which it
applies.

Discretion

The terms of an objective formula or standard must preclude discretion to increase the
amount of compensation payable that would otherwise be due upon attainment of the
performance goal. A performance goal is not discretionary merely because the compensation
committee reduces or eliminates the compensation or other economic benefit that was due upon
attainment of the goal. That is, negative discretion to reduce the amount payable to a covered
employee is generally permitted, as long as such discretion does not result in an increase in the
amount payable to another employee. A formula or standard is not considered discretionary
merely because the amount of compensation to be paid upon attainment of the performance goal
is based on a percentage of base pay or salary and the dollar amount of the salary is not fixed at
the time ao performance goal is established if the maximum dollar amount to be paid is fixed at
that time.

Changes in the timing of payments can affect the amount being paid and thus raise the
question of whether the change involves impermissible discretion. As described below, Treasury
regulations provide guidance on what types of timing changes are or are not considered increases
in the amount payable.”

If compensation is payable upon or after the attainment of a performance goal, and a
change is made to accelerate the payment of compensation to an earlier date after the attainment
of the goal, the change will be treated as an increase in the amount of compensation unless the

2160 Id.
2161 Treas, Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(2)(ii).
2162 ‘Treas. Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(2)(iii)(A).

2163 ‘Treas. Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(2)(iii)(B).

703

=== PAGE 732 ===
amount of compensation paid is discounted to reasonably reflect the time value of money. If
compensation is payable upon or after the attainment of a performance goal, and a change is
made to defer the payment of compensation to a later date, any amount paid in excess of the
amount that was originally owed to the employee will not be treated as an increase in the amount
of compensation if the additional amount is based either on a reasonable rate of interest or on one
or more predetermined actual investments (whether or not assets associated with the amount
originally owed are actually invested therein) such that the amount payable by the employer at
the later date will be based on the actual rate of return of a specific investment (including any
decrease as well as any increase in the value of an investment).”!™

If compensation is payable in the form of property, a change in the timing of the transfer
of that property after the attainment of the goal will not be treated as an increase in the amount of
compensation. Thus, for example, if the terms of a stock grant provide for stock to be transferred
after the attainment of a performance goal and the transfer of the stock also is subject to a vesting
schedule, a change in the vesting schedule that either accelerates or defers the transfer of stock
will not be treated as an increase in the amount of compensation payable under the performance
goal.

Stock option and stock appreciation rights

Compensation attributable to a stock option or a stock appreciation right is deemed to
satisfy the performance goal requirement if: (1) the grant or award is made by the compensation
committee; (2) the plan under which the option or right is granted states the maximum number of
shares with respect to which options or rights may be granted during a specified period to any
employee; and (3) under the terms of the option or right, the amount of compensation the
employee could receive is based solely on an increase in the value of the stock after the date of
the grant or award.

Conversely, if the amount of compensation the employee will receive under the grant or
award is not based solely on an increase in the value of the stock after the date of grant or award
(e.g., in the case of restricted stock, or an option that is granted with an exercise price that is less
than the fair market value of the stock as of the date of grant), none of the compensation
attributable to the grant or award is considered performance-based compensation.”! The rule
that the compensation attributable to a stock option or stock appreciation right must be based
solely on an increase in the value of the stock after the date of grant or award does not apply if
the grant or award is made on account of, or if the vesting or exercisability of the grant or award
is contingent on, the attainment of a performance goal that satisfies the applicable requirements.

2164 7g

2165 yy

2166 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(2)(vi). Whether a stock option grant is based solely on
an increase in the value of the stock after the date of grant is determined without regard to any

dividend equivalent that may be payable, provided that payment of the dividend equivalent is not
made contingent on the exercise of the option.

704

=== PAGE 733 ===
Compensation attributable to a stock option or stock appreciation right does not satisfy
the requirements of the exception for performance-based compensation to the extent that the
number of options granted exceeds the maximum number of shares for which options may be
granted to the employee as specified in the plan.?!©

Outside director requirement

The performance goal under which compensation is paid must be established by a
compensation committee comprised solely of two or more outside directors. A director is an
outside director if the director:

e Is not acurrent employee of the publicly held corporation;
Is not a former employee of the publicly held corporation who receives compensation
for prior services (other than benefits under a tax-qualified retirement plan) during the
taxable year;

e Has not been an officer of the publicly held corporation; and
Does not receive remuneration from the publicly held corporation, either directly or
indirectly, in any capacity other than as a director. For this purpose, remuneration
includes any payment in exchange for goods or services,”!*

Specific rules apply in determining whether a director falls within any of these
categories.”'

2167 Tf an option is canceled, the canceled option continues to be counted against the
maximum number of shares for which options may be granted to the employee under the plan.
If, after grant, the exercise price of an option is reduced, the transaction is treated as a
cancellation of the option and a grant of a new option. In such case, both the option that is
deemed to be canceled and the option that is deemed to be granted reduce the maximum number
of shares for which options may be granted to the employee under the plan. Id.

2168 Treas, Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(3)(i).

2169 Ror example, the determination of whether an individual was an officer of the
publicly held corporation is based on the facts at the time that the individual is serving as a
member of the compensation committee. A director is not precluded from being an outside
director solely because the director is a former officer of a corporation that was previously within
the affiliated group of the publicly held corporation but is no longer within the group when the
individual is serving on the compensation committee. As another example, specific rules apply,
including certain rules disregarding de minimis remuneration, in determining whether and when
the individual is receiving remuneration from the publicly held corporation in a capacity other
than as a director. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(3)(ii) - (viii).

705

=== PAGE 734 ===
Shareholder approval requirement
In general

The material terms of the performance goal under which the compensation is to be paid
must be disclosed to and subsequently approved by the shareholders of the publicly held
corporation before the compensation is paid. The shareholder approval requirement is not
satisfied if the compensation would be paid regardless of whether the material terms are
approved by shareholders.”!”°

The material terms that must be disclosed to shareholders include: (1) the employees
eligible to receive compensation; (2) a description of the business criteria on which the
performance goal is based; and (3) either the maximum amount of compensation that could be
paid to any employee or the formula used to calculate the amount of compensation to be paid to
the employee if the performance goal is attained (except that, in the case of a formula based, in
whole or in part, on a percentage of salary or base pay, the maximum dollar amount of
compensation that could be paid to the employee must be disclosed).”"”! To the extent not
otherwise specifically provided in Treasury regulations, whether the material terms of.a
performance goal are adequately disclosed to shareholders is determined under the same
standards as apply under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.21”

Eligible employees

Disclosure of the employees eligible to receive compensation need not be so specific as
to identify the particular individuals by name. A general description of the class of eligible
employees by title or class is sufficient.?'7?

Business criteria

Disclosure of the business criteria on which the performance goal is based need not
include the specific targets that must be satisfied under the performance goal. For example, if a
bonus plan provides that a bonus will be paid if earnings per share increase by 10 percent, the
10-percent figure is a target that need not be disclosed to shareholders. However, in that case,
disclosure must be made that the bonus plan is based on an earnings-per-share business criterion.
In the case of a plan under which employees may be granted stock options or stock appreciation

2170 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(4)(i).

2171 Iq. The disclosure requirement may be satisfied even though information that
otherwise would be a material term of a performance goal is not disclosed to shareholders if the
compensation committee determines that the information is confidential commercial or business
information, the disclosure of which would have an adverse effect on the publicly held
corporation. Treas. Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(4)(iii)(B).

2172 ‘Treas. Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(4)(v).

2173 ‘Treas, Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(4)(ii).

706

=== PAGE 735 ===
rights, no specific description of the business criteria is required if the grants or awards are based
on a stock price that is not less than current fair market value.”!4

Compensation payable under a performance goal

Disclosure as to the compensation payable under a performance goal must be specific
enough so that shareholders can determine the maximum amount of compensation that could be
paid to any employee during a specified period. If the terms of the performance goal do not
provide for a maximum dollar amount, the disclosure must include the formula under which the
compensation would be calculated. Thus, for example, if compensation attributable to the
exercise of stock options is equal to the difference in the exercise price and the current value of
the stock, disclosure would be required of the maximum number of shares for which grants may
be made to any employee and the exercise price of those options (e.g., fair market value on date
of grant). In that case, shareholders could calculate the maximum amount of compensation that
would be attributable to the exercise of options on the basis of their assumptions as to the future
stock price.

Other rules

Once the material terms of a performance goal are disclosed to and approved by
shareholders, no additional disclosure or approval is required unless the compensation committee
changes the material terms of the performance goal. If, however, the compensation committee
has authority to change the targets under a performance goal after shareholder approval of the
goal, material terms of the performance goal must be disclosed to and reapproved by
shareholders no later than the first shareholder meeting that occurs in the fifth year following the
year in which shareholders previously approved the performance goal.?!75

The material terms of a performance goal are approved by shareholders if, in a separate
vote, a majority of the votes cast on the issue (including abstentions to the extent abstentions are
counted as voting under applicable state law) are cast in favor of approval.”!7°

Factual Background
Statement of Enron policy regarding deduction limitation

Since the enactment of the $1 million deduction limitation,”!”” Enron has expressed the
intent to structure certain compensation arrangements to qualify as performance-based

2174 ‘Treas, Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(4)(iii).
2175 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(4)(vi).
2176 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(4)(vii).
2177 The $1 million deduction limitation was enacted in 1993, effective for amounts that

would otherwise be deductible for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1994. Pub. L.
No. 103-66, sec. 13211(a) (1993).

707

=== PAGE 736 ===
compensation not subject to the $1 million limit. The 1994 Enron Corp proxy statement contains
this initial statement regarding the limitation:”'”

[The deduction limitation], enacted in 1993, generally disallows a tax deduction
to public companies for compensation over $1 million paid to the company’s
Chief Executive Officer and four other most highly compensated executive
officers, as reported in the proxy statement. Qualifying performance-based
compensation will not be subject to the deduction limit if certain requirements are
met. Enron intends to structure the performance-based portion of the
compensation of its executive officers (which currently consists of stock option
grants, certain restricted stock grants, performance unit grants and annual
incentive awards) in a manner that complies with the new statute, including
presentation of each of these plans to stockholders for approval. Occasionally,
Enron may grant restricted stock for specific reasons which would not qualify as
performance-based.

Subsequent annual proxy statements continued to indicate the general intent to structure
most, but not necessarily all, compensation arrangements so as to meet the requirements for
performance-based compensation. For example, the proxy statement for the annual shareholder
meeting in 2001 contains the following statement as part of the “Report from the Compensation
and Management Development Committee Regarding Executive Compensation:””!”

Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended (the “Code”),
generally disallows a tax deduction to public companies for compensation over
$1,000,000 paid to a company’s CEO and four most highly compensated
executive officers, as reported in its proxy statement. Qualifying performance-
based compensation is not subject to the deduction limit if certain requirements
are met. Enron has structured most aspects of the performance-based portion of
the compensation for its executive officers (which includes stock option grants,
performance units, and performance based annual incentive awards) in a manner
that complies with the statute. The Amended and Restated Enron Corp. 1991
Stock Plan, the Amended and Restated Performance Unit Plan, and the Enron
Corp. Annual Incentive Plan were presented to and approved by shareholders at
the 1999 [sic], 1995 and 1999 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, respectively.”!*°
(emphasis added)

2178 1994 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 11.
2179 9001 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 16.

2180 Similar statements were included in previous proxy statements. For example, the
2000 proxy statement contained the same language, except that dates given as to when
shareholder approval was obtained are different. The 2000 proxy contains the following dates of
shareholder approval: 1994, 1997, and 1999 for approval of the Amended and Restated 1991
Stock Plan; 1994 and 1995 for approval of the Amended and Restated Performance Unit Plan;
and 1994 and 1999 for the Annual Incentive Plan. 2000 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, 15.

708

=== PAGE 737 ===
Other proxy statements clarify which portions of the 1991 Stock Plan were intended to
qualify as performance-based compensation (as Amended and Restated Effective May 4, 1999).
For example, the 1999 proxy contains the following: 2181

[E]nron believes that the income generated in connection with the exercise of
stock options granted under the 1991 Stock Plan should qualify as performance-
based compensation and, accordingly, Enron’s deductions for such compensation
should not be limited by [the deduction limitation]. The 1991 Stock Plan has
been designed to provide flexibility with respect to whether restricted stock
awards will qualify as performance-based compensation under [the deduction
limitation]. Enron believes that certain awards of restricted stock under the 1991
Stock Plan will so qualify and Enron’s deduction with respect to cash awards
should not be limited by [the deduction limitation]. However, certain awards of
restricted stock and all awards of phantom stock units will not qualify as
performance-based compensation and, therefore, Enron’s compensation expense

deductions relating to such awards will be subject to the ... deduction limitation.
2182

Shareholder approval

In general

As noted in the proxies, three plans, the 1991 Stock Plan, the Performance Unit Plan, and
the Annual Incentive Plan?!*? were submitted for shareholder approval (and subsequently
approved) so that compensation provided under these plans would qualify as performance based.
As discussed in more detail below, with respect to certain plans, Enron initially took the position
that the plans would be considered performance-based even if the plans would be effective
absent shareholder approval. Treasury regulations made clear that this was not the case.7/*4

2181 1999 Enron Corp. proxy statement, at 16. Similar statements were included in other
proxy materials. See, e.g., 2001 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 32.

2182 The terms of the 1991 Stock Plan (as Amended and Restated Effective May 4, 1999),
which the 1999 proxy describes, distinguished between restricted stock (secs. 5.2(i)-(v) of the
Plan), performance-based restricted stock (sec. 5.2(vi) of the Plan), and phantom stock units
(sec. 5(vi) of the Plan). According to these plan provisions only the performance-based
restricted stock is specifically designed to qualify for the performance-based exemption to the
deduction limitation.

2183 The 1991 Stock Plan and the Performance Unit Plan are discussed in more detail in
Part TIT.C.2., above. The Annual Incentive Plan is discussed in Part III.B.2., above.

2184 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.162-27(e)(4)(i).

709

=== PAGE 738 ===
1991 Stock Plan

The 1991 Stock Plan initially was approved by the shareholders in 1991. Amendments to
the Plan 1991 Stock were presented to the shareholders in 1994, including amendments
determined necessary by Enron to meet the requirements for performance-based compensation
under the deduction limitation.2!®> The 1994 proxy materials state that shareholder approval of
the amendment was required so that certain awards under the 1991 Stock Plan would qualify as
performance-based compensation under the compensation deduction limitation.?!*°

The proxy materials do not state what happens if the amendment is not approved by the
shareholders, and the 1991 Stock Plan amendment submitted with the proxy materials is silent on
the issue. The only reference to an effective date in the amendment is the following:

“NOW, THEREFORE, the Plan is amended as follows:

“1. The plan name will be changed to ‘ENRON CORP. 1991 STOCK PLAN (AS
AMENDED AND RESTATED EFFECTIVE MAY 3, 1994),’ and the Plan shall
be restated to incorporate this and all prior amendments.”?!8

An amended and restated 1991 Stock Plan was submitted to shareholders for approval in
1997. The plan submitted for approval says that it is effective upon approval of the shareholders.

The 1991 Stock Plan (as Amended and Restated Effective May 4, 1999) was again
submitted for shareholder approval in 1999, and again (as Amended and Restated Effective May
1, 2001) in 2001. These versions of the 1991 Stock Plan provided that it is not effective unless
shareholder approval is obtained.”!**

Performance Unit Plan
The Performance Unit Plan was initially presented for approval by the shareholders for

the purpose of meeting the requirements for performance-based compensation under the
deduction limitation in 1994. The proxy materials in 1994 stated that, if shareholder approval

2185 The amendments were also submitted to the shareholders in order to comply with an
exemption under the short-swing profit recovery provisions of the applicable securities laws.
1994 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 31.

2186 1994 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 31.

2187 1994 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, Exhibit C. The Joint Committee staff was
unable to obtain a copy of the 1991 Stock Plan as originally adopted; it is possible the Plan had
separate effective date provisions.

2188 Sec. 9 of the Enron Corp. 1991 Stock Plan (as Amended and Restated Effective
May 4, 1999); sec. 9 of the Enron Corp. 1991 Stock Plan (as Amended and Restated Effective
May 1, 2001). The Plans are included as Exhibit B of the 1999 and 2001 Enron Corp. Proxy
Statements.

710

=== PAGE 739 ===
was not obtained, the Performance Unit Plan would continue but payments made on or after
January 1, 1994, would not be deductible by Enron.”!®? The Performance Unit Plan document
submitted with the proxy did not contain a provision conditioning the effectiveness of the Plan
on shareholder approval.

An amended and restated Performance Unit Plan was presented for approval by the
shareholders in 1995. The amended and restated Performance Unit Plan was substantially the
same plan that was approved in 1994. Proxy materials explain that the Performance Unit Plan
was being resubmitted to shareholders in order to comply with the requirements of the
compensation deduction limitation. The proxy states that Treasury Regulations under the
compensation cap, issued after the proxy materials had been finalized, made it clear that
compensation was not performance based if it would be paid regardless of whether the terms are
approved by the shareholders. The Performance Unit Plan presented in 1995 provided that, if
shareholder approval was not obtained, the Plan would not be continued and grants made in 1994
and 1995 would be cancelled. The proxy materials state that, “Upon further guidance from legal
counsel after consultation with the Internal Revenue Service, the clarification contained herein
now complies with the Internal Revenue Service’s interpretation of this provision.””!° In
addition, the Performance Unit Plan document provided with the 1995 proxy materials expressly
provides that:

Upon approval by the stockholders of the Company at the 1995 annual meeting,
the Plan shall be considered effective for Performance Periods beginning on or
after January 1, 1994. In the event that the Plan is not approved by the
stockholders of the Company at the 1995 annul meeting, all Performance Units
granted prior to such meeting with respect to Performance Periods beginning on
or after January 1, 1994, shall be cancelled without the payment of any amount to
the holders thereof and no Performance Units shall thereafter be granted under the
Plan.

Annual Incentive Plan

The Annual Incentive Plan was initially presented for approval by the shareholders for
the purpose of meeting the requirements for performance-based compensation under the
deduction limitation in 1994. The 1994 proxy materials state that, if the requisite shareholder
approval is not obtained, the Annual Incentive Plan will continue, but payments made on or after
January 1, 1994, will not be tax deductible if compensation to executives exceeds $1 million.2!”
However, the Annual Incentive Plan document provides that “Upon approval by the stockholders

2189 1994 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 28.

2190 1995 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 27.

2191 Section X.G. of the Enron Corp. Performance Unit Plan (As Amended and Restated
Effective May 2, 1995), the Plan is included as Exhibit A to the 1995 Enron Corp. Proxy

Statement.

2192 1994 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 30.

711

=== PAGE 740 ===
of the Company at the 1994 Annual Meeting, the Plan shall be considered effective as of January
1, 1994,” indicating that the Plan would not be effective unless approved by the shareholders.”!”

A new Annual Incentive Plan was presented for shareholder approval at the 1999 annual
meeting. The proxy materials for this meeting state that approval of the shareholders is required
in order for the payments from the Plan to be tax deductible as performance-based compensation
and that the Plan will not become effective unless approved by the shareholders.”"* The Annual
Incentive Plan document submitted with the proxy materials provides that “upon approval by the
shareholders of the Company at the 1999 Annual Meeting, the Plan shall be considered effective
as of January 1, 1999,”2195

Role of the Compensation Committee

Composition of the Committee

During the period of the Joint Committee staff review, the Compensation Committee
consisted of a chairman, Charles A. LeMaistre, and three or four other directors. In 1993, 1994,
and 1995, the other members of the Compensation Committee were Robert A. Belfer, John H.
Duncan, and Joe H. Foy. In 1996, Mr. Foy and Mr. Belfer were replaced by Norman P. Blake
and Robert K. Jedicke. Frank Savage joined the Compensation Committee at the end of 1999.

The 1997 proxy states that changes were made in the composition of the Compensation
Committee in order to comply with the requirements of the $1 million deduction limitation.?7!°°
The proxy does not describe the precise reason for the change. As discussed above, in order to
meet the requirements for performance-based compensation, the compensation must be approved
by a committee consisting of at least two outside directors. Thus, it appears probable that the
change was related to this requirement.

1991 Stock Plan

The 1991 Stock Plan provides that the plan is to be administered by a committee of the
Board of Directors of Enron Corp. designated by the Board and composed of not less than two
nonemployee directors, as defined in Rule 16b-3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The
Compensation Committee acted as the administrator of the 1991 Stock Plan. The 1991 Stock

2193 Sec, XIV of the Enron Corp. Annual Incentive Plan. The Plan is included in as
Exhibit B to the 1994 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

2194 1999 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 29.

2195 Sec, XIV of the Enron Corp. Annual Incentive Plan. The Plan is included as
Exhibit A to the 1999 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement.

2196 1997 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 15-16.

712

=== PAGE 741 ===
Plan!’ provides that, subject to applicable law and the terms of the 1991 Stock Plan, the
Committee has the sole power, authority and discretion to:

e Designate participants,

Determine the types of awards to be granted to a participant,

e Determine the number of shares to be covered by or with respect to which payments,
rights, or other matters are to be calculated in connection with awards,

e Determine the terms and conditions of any award,

e Determine whether, to what extent, under what circumstances and how awards may
be settled or exercised in cash, Enron Corp. common stock, other securities other
awards, or other property, or may be canceled, forfeited, or suspended, determine
whether, to what extent, and under what circumstances cash, shares, other securities,
other awards, other property, and other amounts payable with respect to an award
under the Plan shall be deferred either automatically or at the election of the holder
thereof or of the Committee,

e Interpret, construe, and administer the Plan and any instrument or agreement relating
to an award made under the Plan,

e Establish, amend, suspend, or waive such rules and regulations and appoint such
agents as it shall deem appropriate for the proper administration of the Plan,

e Make a determination as to the right of any person to receive payment of an award or
other benefits,

2 Except for awards made to persons subject to Section 16 of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934, delegate to individuals in specified officer positions of the company the
authority to make and issue awards for a specified number of shares subject to the
terms and provisions of the Plan?! and

¢ Make any other determination and take any other action that the Committee deems
necessary or desirable for the administration of the Plan.

The Plan provides that a majority of the Committee constitutes a quorum and that the acts
of a majority of the members present at any meeting at which a quorum is present or acts
approved in writing by all members of the Committee are considered acts of the Committee.”’”

Performance Unit Plan

The Performance Unit Plan provides that the Compensation Committee of the Board of
Directors” is responsible for the administration of the Plan. The Compensation Committee is

2197 Except as otherwise described, Plan provisions are included in both the 1999 and
2001 Restatements of the 1991 Stock Plan.

2198 This provision was not in the 1999 Restatement of the 1991 Stock Plan.

2199 The authority of the Committee to make plan amendments was added in the 2001
restatement; it was not in the 1999 restated Plan.

2200 Th some years, the Compensation Committee was called the Compensation and
Management Committee.

713

=== PAGE 742 ===
granted certain specific authority under the Plan, as described below, and also has such other
powers and authority necessary or proper for the administration of the Plan, as determined from
time to time by the Compensation Committee. Notwithstanding that the Compensation
Committee is the Plan administrator, day-to-day administration of the Plan is the responsibility
of the Vice President of Human Resources, who in carrying out such day-to-day administrative
activities is acting as the Committee’s delegate. The Compensation Committee may also
delegate to any person designated by the Compensation Committee any power or duty granted to
it under the Plan. The Compensation Committee may adopt such rules for the administration of
the Plan as it deems necessary.

As part of the specific authority granted to the Compensation Committee under the
Performance Unit Plan, the Committee is responsible for designating, in its sole discretion,
which eligible employees will receive an award of performance units for the year. Prior to the
Compensation Committee making its designation, the Office of the Chairman of the Company is
to present a nomination list to the Compensation Committee of those eligible employees, if any,
recommended to the Committee for consideration as recipients of performance units. The
Performance Unit Plan provides that the Compensation Committee is to make its designation
after “giving due consideration to the nomination list.” The Compensation Committee is not
bound by the nomination list, and may include any, all, or none of the eligible employees on the
nomination list and may include other eligible employees as the Compensation Committee
considers appropriate. The Compensation Committee is to provide each designated eligible
employee with a written notice of any performance units granted to the employee during the
year. The Committee also determines, in its sole discretion, the number of performance units to
be granted to any eligible employee, subject to the terms of the Plan.

The Compensation Committee is to maintain, or is to cause to be maintained, accounts
reflecting each participants interest in the Performance Unit Plan. The Compensation Committee
has the authority, in its discretion, to determine whether benefit payments with respect to
performance units are made in cash, Enron Corp. common stock, or both.

The Plan provides that the Board, or the Compensation Committee acting on behalf of the
Board, may amend or modify the Performance Unit Plan at any time and in any manner, except
that no change in any grant previously made may be made which would impair the rights of the
recipient of a grant without the consent of the recipient. In addition, no amendment may be
made without the approval of stockholders if the amendment would:

e Change the class of eligible employees who may be designated to receive an award
under the Performance Unit Plan,

© Change the criteria used to determine the adjusted value to a performance measure
other than total shareholder return,

e Change the schedule used to determine adjusted value,

e Increase the maximum grant of performance units that any eligible employee may
receive in a year, or

e Otherwise modify the material terms of the Performance Unit Plan.

714

=== PAGE 743 ===
Annual Incentive Plan?!

The Compensation Committee of the Board is responsible for administering the Annual
Incentive Plan and has a variety of duties and responsibilities under the Annual Incentive Plan.
It has the sole discretion to: (1) interpret the Annual Incentive Plan; (2) approve preestablished,
objective annual performance measures; (3) certify the level to which the performance measures
were attained prior to any payment under the Annual Incentive Plan; (4) approve the amount of
awards made under the Annual Incentive Plan; and (5) determine who is to receive any payment
under the Annual Incentive Plan. The Annual Incentive Plan provides that decisions of the
Compensation Committee are conclusive and that the Compensation Committee shall have no
liability for any action taken or decision made in good faith relating to the Annual Incentive Plan
or any award made under the Annual Incentive Plan.

The Annual Incentive Plan as approved by shareholders in 1994 provided that the
Compensation Committee was to establish annually an award fund, expressed as a percentage of
after-tax net income, prior to the beginning of the year (or such later date as permitted under
applicable law). The Annual Incentive Plan as restated in 1999 provides that the maximum
annual award fund is five percent of recurring after-tax net income of Enron and eligible
employees are limited to Section 16 officers. Recurring after-tax net income means after-tax net
income subject to downward adjustment by the Compensation Committee in its sole discretion
for what it considers unordinary or nonrecurring items of after-tax net income and other items or
events, including, but not limited to, financial impact on Enron resulting from changes in law
and/or regulations pertaining to Federal taxes imposed on corporations.

The maximum permitted individual target award under the 1994 Plan was one-half of one
percent (.5 percent) of the after-tax net income of Enron. The 1999 Annual Incentive Plan
provides that, for eligible participants subject to the deduction limitation (and officers subject to
section 16 of the Securities Exchange Act), the Compensation Committee is to establish an
individual target award level, expressed as a percentage of recurring after-tax net income. The
maximum individual target award level that can be established under the Annual Incentive Plan
is one percent of the recurring after-tax net income of Enron.

Under the 1999 Annual Incentive Plan, the Compensation Committee is to verify the
actual recurring after-tax net income of the Company, if any, and the resulting award fund,
taking into consideration any downward adjustments that the committee may make at is sole
discretion. The Compensation Committee then determines which participants will receive
payments under the Plan, and the amount of such payments. Discretionary upward adjustment of
the actual award level above the target aware level is not allowed.”

2201 Unless otherwise indicated, this description is based on the 1999 Annual Incentive
Plan.

2202 The Compensation Committee had similar responsibilities under the 1994 Annual
Incentive Plan.

715

=== PAGE 744 ===
The 1994 Annual Incentive Plan provided that the Compensation Committee has the
authority to modify or terminate the plan at any time, except that, without prior approval of the
shareholders, no amendment may be made that would: (1) change the class of participants
eligible to receive awards under the plan. (2) base the award on a performance measure other
than after-tax net income. (3) base the award fund on a performance measure other than recurring
net after-tax income. (4) increase the maximum individual target award level under the plan, or
(5) modify any other material terms of the plan. The 1999 Annual Incentive Plan contains
similar authority, except that, consistent with plan terms in effect at the time, provides that the
Compensation Committee cannot change the total fund to an amount greater than five percent of
recurring after-tax net income or base an award on a performance measure other than net after-
tax income without the consent of the shareholders.

Information from third-party consultants

In 1998, Towers Perrin was asked to provide information regarding how other companies
address the $1 million deduction limitation. Towers Perrin provided a letter which was
presented to the Compensation Committee at the February 9, 1998, meeting.” The report says
that in May 1997, Towers Perrin conducted a survey of 275 companies regarding annual
incentive plan design issues. The survey showed that about 45 percent of the survey participants
have sought shareholder approval of their annual incentive plans because of the deduction
limitation. Towers Perrin suspected that this was relatively low because many companies either
do not have cash compensation in excess of $1 million for covered employees or manage the
deduction limitation by deferring compensation-in excess of $1 million. The latter technique was
reportedly used by about 10 percent of surveyed companies.

Towers Perrin did not have data regarding how companies structure annual incentive
plans to comply with the deduction limitation, but stated that it was their understanding that
companies often establish a “soft” incentive funding target for covered employees which makes
it likely that the total amount the company desires to pay such employees will be within the cap.
Towers Perrin explained that this is done because the deduction limitation permits bonuses to be
less than the shareholder-approved target.

Towers Perrin reported that they conducted a survey in August 1997 of 150 large U.S.
companies. This survey showed that annual bonuses for management employees represent from
two percent to 10 percent of after-tax profit, with a median of five percent. They suggested that,
if a company were attempting to leave room for a reduction in the target amount, it would be
common to set the funding pool approved by shareholders somewhat above these levels.

Towers Perrin also described a second approach of having shareholders approve the
maximum dollar payouts to individuals under the Plan, with a laundry list of possible
performance measures that can be used. The compensation committee could then select the
performance measures to be used under the Plan each year, subject to the dollar limits. Towers
Perrin commented that this approach would give the Compensation Committee considerable

2203 1 etter from Towers Perrin to Vice President, Compensation and Benefits, Enron
Corp., (April 21, 1998). EC000104240 - EC000104241.

716

=== PAGE 745 ===
latitude, but that some shareholder groups recommend against approval of this type of Plan
because the standards of performance are not revealed.

As described above, Enron adopted an approach that gave an overall target based on
after-tax net earnings.

Other actions of the Compensation Committee

Proxy statements included an annual report from the Compensation Committee. These
reports typically discussed the overall Enron philosophy regarding executive compensation and
the activities of the Compensation Committee regarding executive compensation, including the
methods for determining appropriate levels and components of executive compensation. 2204 Th
years since the enactment of the $1 million deduction limitation, this report has included a
section regarding compliance with the deduction limitation. As reflected above, this portion of
the report typically stated the intent to structure certain compensation arrangements in order to
meet the exception to the $1 million limitation for performance-based compensation.”

Despite the apparent attention paid by the Compensation Committee to the deduction
limitation, as reflected in Compensation Committee meetings and reports, one member of the
Committee interviewed by the Joint Committee staff indicated that he was not aware that there
was such a limitation.

Data

Table 26, Table 27, and Table 28, below, show the aggregate amount of total
compensation, performance-based compensation, additional deductible compensation, and
nondeductible compensation for Enron’s covered employees for 1998, 1999, and 2000.

2204 Soe, e.g., 1999 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 13-16.

2205 1994 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, 12; 1995 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 14-
15; 1996 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 13-14; 1997 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 15-16;
1998 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 15; 1999 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 16; 2000 Enron
Corp. Proxy Statement, at 15; 2001 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 16.

717

=== PAGE 746 ===
Table 26.-Application of $1 Million Deduction Limitation for 1998

(Millions of Dollars)
Employee (6) (2) (3) (4)
Total Performance- Additional Nondeductible
Compensation Based Deductible Compensation
Compensation | Compensation** | [(4)=(1)-(2)-(3)]
Employee 1 14.942 13.570 1.0 372
Employee 2 8.214 3.336 1.0 3.878
Employee 3 16.700 2.148 1.0 13.552
Employee 4 8.651 1.884 1.0 5.767
Employee 5 Information not | Information not Unknown Information not
provided by provided by provided by
Enron Enron Enron
Total* 48.505 20.937 4.0 23.568
*Details may not add to totals due to rounding.
** Additional deductible compensation is the amount of total compensation, minus performance-based
compensation, not in excess of $1 million.
Table 27-Application of $1 Million Deduction Limitation for 1999
(Millions of Dollars)
Employee (1) (2) (3) (4)
Total Performance- Additional Nondeductible
Compensation Based Deductible Compensation
Compensation | Compensation** | [(4)=(1)-(2)-G)]
Employee 1 48.478 47.058 1.000 420
Employee 2 54.322 48.680 1.000 4.642
Employee 3 7.204 2.832 1.000 3.372
Employee 4 6.874 6.517 357 0
Employee 5 7.324 6.484 839 0
Total* 124.202 111.572 4.100 8.434

*Details may not add to totals due to rounding.

** Additional deductible compensation is the amount of total compensation, minus performance-based
compensation, not in excess of $1 million.

718


=== PAGE 747 ===
Table 28.-Application of $1 Million Deduction Limitation for 2000

(Millions of Dollars)
Employee (1) (2) (3) (4)
Total Performance- Additional Nondeductible
Compensation Based Deductible Compensation
Compensation | Compensation**
Employee 1 105.990 104.376 1.000 614.153
Employee 2 81.988 66.894 1.000 14.094
Employee 3 29.897 30.022 0.0 0.0
Employee 4 21.427 18.631 1.000 1.796
Employee 5 21.597 21.077 520 0.0
Total* 260.899 241.00 520 16.504

*Details may not add to totals due to rounding.

** Additional deductible compensation is the amount of total compensation, minus performance-based
compensation, not in excess of $1 million.

The amounts shown in these tables are from information provided by Enron to the IRS in
connection with the IRS’ review of Enron’s tax returns for 1998, 1999, and 2000. The
information was provided in response to specific questions regarding the deduction limitation.
The Joint Committee staff has compared this information with other information provided by
Enron to the IRS and the Joint Committee staff, as well as proxy information. This comparison
yielded a number of inconsistencies that stem from a variety of sources. In some cases Enron
has provided information which was later modified by Enron, in other cases there are internal
inconsistencies with the information provided, and in other cases it is difficult to reconcile
various pieces of information. These inconsistencies may raise questions as to the accuracy of
the information provided. For example, seemingly straightforward and simple information such
as the job title of a particular individual varies between proxy statements and information
provided to the IRS. In one case, shown on Table 28, performance-based compensation of an
individual was more than the individual’s total compensation.

Some of the inconsistencies discovered could have a significant impact on the amount of
compensation subject to the $1 million cap. As shown in Table 28, above, based on information
provided by Enron to the IRS, in 2000, the top-five highest paid officers received total
compensation of $261 million. However, based on information relating to total the highest paid
200 employees for 2000 provided by Enron to the Joint Committee staff, the five highest paid
employees received compensation of over twice that amount--$573 million.” On the top-200
list for 2000, the highest paid employee is listed as having the title Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer of Enron (the list does not include names) and as having total compensation of

$169 million. This amount of compensation does not correspond to any amount provided to the
IRS for 2000.

2206 The information relating to the highest paid 200 employees provided by Enron to the
Joint Committee staff for 1998 through 2001 is in Appendix D to this Report.

719

=== PAGE 748 ===
In interviews with the Joint Committee staff, IRS personnel also indicated that they had
discovered inconsistencies with information provided by Enron and expressed difficulty in
obtaining complete compensation information. The IRS attributed this, in part, to Enron’s
recordkeeping system. According to the IRS, Enron personnel stated to the IRS that Enron did
not maintain a centralized file for each executive reflecting total compensation for that executive.

The IRS informed the Joint Committee staff that, as part of its examination of Enron’s
returns for 1998, 1999, and 2000, it is investigating discrepancies of this nature. The Joint
Committee staff has not attempted to duplicate this work. While the information provided below
may not be completely accurate, it is the best information available.

Discussion of Issues

The $1 million limitation on the deductibility of certain executive compensation does not
appear to have had a substantial impact on either the amount of compensation paid by Enron or
the structure of its compensation arrangements.

Table 29, below, shows total compensation, performance-based compensation, additional
deductible compensation, and nondeductible compensation for 1998 through 2000. This is the
combined information contained in Table 26, Table 27, and Table 28.

Table 29-Application of $1 Million Deduction Limitation for 1998-2000

(Millions of Dollars)
Year 3) (2) (3) eG)
Total Performance- Additional Nondeductible
Compensation Based Deductible Compensation
of Covered Compensation | Compensation**
Employees
1998 48.5 20.9 4.0 - 23.6
1999 124.2 111.6 4.2 8.4
2000 260.9 241.0 3.5 16.5
Total 1998-2000* 433.6 373.5 11.7 48.5

* Details may not add to totals due to rounding.

** Additional deductible compensation is the amount of total compensation, minus performance-based
compensation, not in excess of $1 million.

It appears evident that the existence of the $1 million deduction limitation had no effect
on the total compensation provided to Enron executives. Based on information provided by
Enron to the IRS, as shown in Table 29, above, total compensation for the top-five executives for
1998-2000 was $433.6 million.”

207 Enron also paid compensation in excess of $1 million to many employees not subject
to the deduction limitation. The information regarding the top-200 most highly compensated
employees provided by Enron to the Joint Committee staff indicates that 46 employees, 93

720

=== PAGE 749 ===
Enron intended certain of its compensation arrangements to qualify as performance-based
for purposes of the deduction limitation, and treated substantial amounts of compensation as
meeting this requirement. Based on information provided by Enron to the IRS, as shown in [link
to table 4], above, performance-based compensation for 1999 and 2000 was comparable, 90
percent and 92 percent, respectively. In those years, seven percent and six percent, respectively,
of total compensation of covered employees was not deductible. In the case of certain
individuals, the amount of performance-based compensation was so great compared to total

compensation that less than $1 million of compensation was potentially subject to the deduction
cap.

For 1998, however, performance-based compensation was only 43 percent of total
compensation of covered employees, and 49 percent of the total compensation of covered
employees was not deductible. This is due in large part to the compensation provided to two
covered employees. The nondeductible compensation for those two employees was 82 percent
of the total nondeductible compensation of all five covered employees. Seventy-six percent of
the total compensation for those two employees was not deductible.

Although Enron treated substantial amounts of compensation as performance-based, the
$1 million deduction limitation does not appear to have had a significant impact on the overall
structure of Enron’s compensation arrangements. The arrangements that Enron considered to
provide performance-based compensation were generally utilized prior to the enactment of the
deduction limitation. Enron made certain modifications to its compensation arrangements in
order to meet the Code’s definition of performance-based compensation; however, these
modifications were generally limited to relatively minor changes needed to meet the
requirements rather than changes to the overall structure of its compensation arrangements. For
example. in the case of bonuses, the Compensation Committee was advised by its outside
consultants to establish a high enough “soft” target that could be approved by the shareholders so
that whatever level of bonuses Enron ultimately paid would be within the target and thus would
not fail to be performance based. It is possible that certain arrangements might not have been
submitted for shareholder approval had this not been required in order to meet the requirements
for performance-based compensation.

The Compensation Committee was required to take certain actions in order for
compensation to qualify as performance-based. A review of the Compensation Committee
minutes indicates that the deduction limitation was discussed from time to time, and the role of
the Compensation Committee with respect to approval of performance targets was mentioned.”7°8
In addition, the annual report of the Compensation Committee in proxy statements discussed the
deduction limitation. While the deduction limitation was discussed in Compensation Committee
meetings, it appears that more time was spent on broader compensation issues, such as overall

employees, and all 200 top-paid employees received compensation in excess of $1 million in
1998, 1999, and 2000 and 2001, respectively. This information is included in Appendix D to this
Report.

2208 Soe, e. g., Minutes of the Meeting of the Compensation Committee, at 2 (Feb. 9,
1998).

721

=== PAGE 750 ===
compensation targets. One former member of the Compensation Committee interviewed by the
Joint Committee staff indicated he had no knowledge of the deduction limitation and did not
remember it ever being discussed. This may be an indication that the limitation was not a
significant concern for Enron.

The existence of the $1 million deduction limitation did not prevent Enron from paying
nondeductible compensation. From 1998 through 2001, $48.5 million of nondeductible
compensation was paid to covered employees.”

Another aspect of the deduction limitation that can be observed from the review of Enron
is the discrepancy between the operation of the limitation, which is based on generally applicable
tax rules, and compensation as reported in Federal proxy statements. Proxy statements include a
summary compensation table for covered employees (referred to as “named officers” under the
securities laws) as well as other information regarding executive compensation.

Because of timing differences and other factors, compensation as reported for proxy
purposes can vary significantly from compensation subject to the $1 million deduction
limitation. For example, because the deduction limitation applies when amounts would
otherwise be deductible, compensation may be taken into account for purposes of the limitation
at a different time that it is reported for proxy purposes. Restricted stock is an example of such a
timing difference. For proxy purposes, the value of restricted stock is shown in the year the
stock is granted,”?"° whereas restricted stock is taken into account for purposes of the deduction
limitation when it is includible in income, i.e., as it vests. Salary and certain other compensation
that is deferred may also be reported at a different time for proxy purposes than when it is taken
into account under the deduction limitation. Income attributable to the exercise of stock options
is also treated differently for proxy reporting purposes and tax purposes.

The securities laws requiring that certain compensation information be reported in the
proxy statement and the Federal income tax laws have different purposes. Thus, each set of laws
may appropriately treat items of compensation differently in order to accomplish their respective
purposes. However, the difference in the treatment may cause confusion for persons who are
attempting to determine the amount of nondeductible compensation from publicly available
sources; it is not possible to make this determination based on proxy information.

The IRS is reviewing the application of the $1 million deduction limitation to Enron for
the years 1998 through 2001. Determining whether the requirements for performance-based
compensation were in fact met involves extensive, labor intensive factual determinations. The
Joint Committee staff has not attempted to duplicate the efforts of the IRS. Issues that would
need to be addressed include an analysis of the total compensation of covered employees, terms
of all plans and arrangements and individual compensation agreements, examining materials
provided to shareholders for approval, and determining whether the Compensation Committee
took required actions with respect to the compensation. As described above, there are a number

2209 See Table 29, above.

2210 Soe e. g., 1998 Enron Corp. Proxy Statement, at 20.

722

=== PAGE 751 ===
of inconsistencies in the information provided by Enron regarding compensation, making the
examination more difficult in this case.

Recommendations

The Joint Committee staff believes that the $1 million deduction limitation is ineffective
at accomplishing its purpose, overrides normal income tax principles, and should be repealed.
The concerns reflected in the limitation can be better addressed though laws other than the
Federal tax laws.

The $1 million deduction limitation reflects corporate governance issues regarding
excessive compensation, rather than issues of tax policy.””"' It is often difficult for tax laws to
have the desired effect on corporate behavior.??!? Taxpayers may simply choose to incur the
adverse tax consequences rather than change their behavior. In Enron’s case, due to the
existence of net operating losses, the denial of the deduction may not have been an issue.

In Enron’s case, the $1 million deduction limitation appeared to have little, if any, effect
on the overall level of compensation paid to Enron executives or the structure of compensation
arrangements. To the extent that performance-based compensation is viewed as being a
preferable form of compensation, some may argue that the $1 million limitation was effective in
the Enron case, because such a large part of compensation was structured to be performance-
based. However, as noted above, the deduction limitation did not appear to be a motivating
factor in the structure of Enron’s compensation and the arrangements that it treated as
performance-based (or similar arrangements) generally predated the enacted of the limitation. In
addition, some may question whether the compensation was truly performance based,
particularly given Enron’s financial decline; to the extent the limitation affected Enron’s
compensation arrangements, it may have merely placed more emphasis on the desire to increase
reported earnings.”” 3

2211 47 R. Rep. No. 103-111, at 646 (1993).

2212 Another example of tax laws that are aimed at corporate governance issues are the
golden parachute rules that limit the compensation that may be paid to certain employees due to
the change of control of a company. Sec. 280G. Failure to comply with these rules results in a
denial of the deduction to the company and the imposition of a 20 percent excise tax, payable by
the employee. Sec. 4999. Commentators generally observe that the golden parachute rules have
done little to affect the amount of compensation payable upon a change of control. Rather, the
rules are often thought of as providing a road map as to how to structure compensation
arrangements. It is not uncommon for employment agreements to provide that, in the event the
employee is subject to the excise tax, the tax will be paid by the company, with a gross up to
reflect the income tax payable as a result of the employer’s payment of the tax.

2213 Soe Part I. of Part One of this Report.

723
