
=== PAGE 1 ===
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

17 CFR PART 241

[RELEASE NOS. 33-8810; 34-55929; FR-77; File No. S7-24-06]

Commission Guidance Regarding Management’s Report on Internal Control Over
Financial Reporting Under Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934

AGENCY: Securities and Exchange Commission.

ACTION: Interpretation.

SUMMARY: The SEC is publishing this interpretive release to provide guidance for

management regarding its evaluation and assessment of internal control over financial

reporting. The guidance sets forth an approach by which management can conduct a top-

down, risk-based evaluation of internal control over financial reporting. An evaluation

that complies with this interpretive guidance is one way to satisfy the evaluation

requirements of Rules 13a-15(c) and 15d-15(c) under the Securities Exchange Act of

1934.

EFFECTIVE DATE: June 27, 2007.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Josh K. Jones, Professional

Accounting Fellow, Office of the Chief Accountant, at (202) 551-5300, or N. Sean

Harrison, Special Counsel, Division of Corporation Finance, at (202) 551-3430, U.S.

Securities and Exchange Commission, 100 F Street, NE, Washington, DC 20549.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The amendments to Rules 13a-15(c) 1 and

15d-15(c) 2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 3 (the “Exchange Act”), which

1
    17 CFR 240.13a-15(c).
2
    17 CFR 240.15d-15(c).
3
    15 U.S.C. 78a et seq.

=== PAGE 2 ===
clarify that an evaluation of internal control over financial reporting that complies with

this interpretive guidance is one way to satisfy those rules, are being made in a separate

release. 4

I. Introduction

          Management is responsible for maintaining a system of internal control over

financial reporting (“ICFR”) that provides reasonable assurance regarding the reliability

of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in

accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The rules we adopted in June

2003 to implement Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 5 (“Sarbanes-Oxley”)

require management to annually evaluate whether ICFR is effective at providing

reasonable assurance and to disclose its assessment to investors. 6 Management is

responsible for maintaining evidential matter, including documentation, to provide

reasonable support for its assessment. This evidence will also allow a third party, such as

the company’s external auditor, to consider the work performed by management.

          ICFR cannot provide absolute assurance due to its inherent limitations; it is a

process that involves human diligence and compliance and is subject to lapses in

judgment and breakdowns resulting from human failures. ICFR also can be

circumvented by collusion or improper management override. Because of such

limitations, ICFR cannot prevent or detect all misstatements, whether unintentional errors

or fraud. However, these inherent limitations are known features of the financial




4
    Release No. 34-55928 (Jun. 20, 2007).
5
    15 U.S.C. 7262.
6
    Release No. 33-8238 (Jun. 5, 2003) [68 FR 36636] (hereinafter “Adopting Release”).


                                              Page 2

=== PAGE 3 ===
reporting process, therefore, it is possible to design into the process safeguards to reduce,

though not eliminate, this risk.

          The “reasonable assurance” referred to in the Commission’s implementing rules

relates to similar language in the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 (“FCPA”). 7

Exchange Act Section 13(b)(7) defines “reasonable assurance” and “reasonable detail” as

“such level of detail and degree of assurance as would satisfy prudent officials in the

conduct of their own affairs.” 8 The Commission has long held that “reasonableness” is

not an “absolute standard of exactitude for corporate records.” 9 In addition, the

Commission recognizes that while “reasonableness” is an objective standard, there is a

range of judgments that an issuer might make as to what is “reasonable” in implementing

Section 404 and the Commission’s rules. Thus, the terms “reasonable,” “reasonably,”

and “reasonableness” in the context of Section 404 implementation do not imply a single

conclusion or methodology, but encompass the full range of appropriate potential

conduct, conclusions or methodologies upon which an issuer may reasonably base its

decisions.

          Since companies first began complying in 2004, the Commission has received

significant feedback on our rules implementing Section 404. 10 This feedback included

requests for further guidance to assist company management in complying with our ICFR
7
    Title 1 of Pub. L. 95-213 (1977).
8
  15 U.S.C. 78m(b)(7). The conference committee report on the 1988 amendments to the FCPA
also noted that the standard “does not connote an unrealistic degree of exactitude or precision.
The concept of reasonableness of necessity contemplates the weighing of a number of relevant
factors, including the costs of compliance.” Cong. Rec. H2116 (daily ed. Apr. 20, 1988).
9
    Release No. 34-17500 (Jan. 29, 1981) [46 FR 11544].
10
  Release Nos. 33-8762; 34-54976 (Dec. 20, 2006) [71 FR 77635] (hereinafter “Proposing
Release”). For a detailed history of the implementation of Section 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley, see
Section I., Background, of the Proposing Release. An analysis of the comments we received on
the Proposing Release is included in Section III of this release.


                                             Page 3

=== PAGE 4 ===
evaluation and disclosure requirements. This guidance is in response to those requests

and reflects the significant feedback we have received, including comments on the

interpretive guidance we proposed on December 20, 2006. In addressing a number of the

commonly identified areas of concerns, the interpretive guidance:

   •   Explains how to vary evaluation approaches for gathering evidence based on risk

       assessments;

   •   Explains the use of “daily interaction,” self-assessment, and other on-going

       monitoring activities as evidence in the evaluation;

   •   Explains the purpose of documentation and how management has flexibility in

       approaches to documenting support for its assessment;

   •   Provides management significant flexibility in making judgments regarding what

       constitutes adequate evidence in low-risk areas; and

   •   Allows for management and the auditor to have different testing approaches.

       The Interpretive Guidance is organized around two broad principles. The first

principle is that management should evaluate whether it has implemented controls that

adequately address the risk that a material misstatement of the financial statements would

not be prevented or detected in a timely manner. The guidance describes a top-down,

risk-based approach to this principle, including the role of entity-level controls in

assessing financial reporting risks and the adequacy of controls. The guidance promotes

efficiency by allowing management to focus on those controls that are needed to

adequately address the risk of a material misstatement of its financial statements. The

guidance does not require management to identify every control in a process or document

the business processes impacting ICFR. Rather, management can focus its evaluation



                                           Page 4

=== PAGE 5 ===
process and the documentation supporting the assessment on those controls that it

determines adequately address the risk of a material misstatement of the financial

statements. For example, if management determines that a risk of a material

misstatement is adequately addressed by an entity-level control, no further evaluation of

other controls is required.

       The second principle is that management’s evaluation of evidence about the

operation of its controls should be based on its assessment of risk. The guidance provides

an approach for making risk-based judgments about the evidence needed for the

evaluation. This allows management to align the nature and extent of its evaluation

procedures with those areas of financial reporting that pose the highest risks to reliable

financial reporting (that is, whether the financial statements are materially accurate). As

a result, management may be able to use more efficient approaches to gathering evidence,

such as self-assessments, in low-risk areas and perform more extensive testing in high-

risk areas. By following these two principles, we believe companies of all sizes and

complexities will be able to implement our rules effectively and efficiently.

         The Interpretive Guidance reiterates the Commission’s position that

management should bring its own experience and informed judgment to bear in order to

design an evaluation process that meets the needs of its company and that provides a

reasonable basis for its annual assessment of whether ICFR is effective. This allows

management sufficient and appropriate flexibility to design such an evaluation process. 11


11
  Exchange Act Rules 13a-15 and 15d-15 [17 CFR 240.13a-15 and 15d-15] require management
to evaluate the effectiveness of ICFR as of the end of the fiscal year. For purposes of this
document, the term “evaluation” or “evaluation process” refers to the methods and procedures
that management implements to comply with these rules. The term “assessment” is used in this
document to describe the disclosure required by Item 308 of Regulations S-B and S-K [17 CFR
228.308 and 229.308]. This disclosure must include discussion of any material weaknesses


                                           Page 5

=== PAGE 6 ===
Smaller public companies, which generally have less complex internal control systems

than larger public companies, can use this guidance to scale and tailor their evaluation

methods and procedures to fit their own facts and circumstances. We encourage smaller

public companies 12 to take advantage of the flexibility and scalability to conduct an

evaluation of ICFR that is both efficient and effective at identifying material weaknesses.

        The effort necessary to conduct an initial evaluation of ICFR will vary among

companies, partly because this effort will depend on management’s existing financial

reporting risk assessment and control monitoring activities. After the first year of

compliance, management’s effort to identify financial reporting risks and controls should

ordinarily be less, because subsequent evaluations should be more focused on changes in

risks and controls rather than identification of all financial reporting risks and the related

controls. Further, in each subsequent year, the documentation of risks and controls will

only need to be updated from the prior year(s), not recreated anew. Through the risk and

control identification process, management will have identified for testing only those

controls that are needed to meet the objective of ICFR (that is, to provide reasonable

assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting) and for which evidence about

their operation can be obtained most efficiently. The nature and extent of procedures


which exist as of the end of the most recent fiscal year and management’s assessment of the
effectiveness of ICFR, including a statement as to whether or not ICFR is effective. Management
is not permitted to conclude that ICFR is effective if there are one or more material weaknesses in
ICFR.
12
    While a company’s individual facts and circumstances should be considered in determining
whether a company is a smaller public company and the resulting implications to management’s
evaluation, a company’s public market capitalization and annual revenues are useful indicators of
its size and complexity. The Final Report of the Advisory Committee on Smaller Public
Companies to the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (Apr. 23, 2006), available
at http://www.sec.gov/info/smallbus/acspc/acspc-finalreport.pdf, defined smaller companies,
which included microcap companies, and the SEC’s rules include size characteristics for
“accelerated filers” and “non-accelerated filers” which approximately fit the same definitions.


                                             Page 6

=== PAGE 7 ===
implemented to evaluate whether those controls continue to operate effectively can be

tailored to the company’s unique circumstances, thereby avoiding unnecessary

compliance costs.

          The guidance assumes management has established and maintains a system of

internal accounting controls as required by the FCPA. Further, it is not intended to

explain how management should design its ICFR to comply with the control framework

management has chosen. To allow appropriate flexibility, the guidance does not provide

a checklist of steps management should perform in completing its evaluation.

          The guidance in this release shall be effective immediately upon its publication in

the Federal Register. 13

          As a companion 14 to this interpretive release, we are adopting amendments to

Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(c) and 15d-15(c) and revisions to Regulation S-X. 15 The

amendments to Rules 13a-15(c) and 15d-15(c) will make it clear that an evaluation that is

conducted in accordance with this interpretive guidance is one way to satisfy the annual

management evaluation requirement in those rules. We are also amending our rules to

define the term “material weakness” and to revise the requirements regarding the

auditor’s attestation report on ICFR. Additionally, we are seeking additional comment on

the definition of the term “significant deficiency.” 16

13
  The Commission finds good cause under 5 U.S.C. 808(2) for this interpretation to take effect on
the date of Federal Register publication. Further delay would be unnecessary and contrary to the
public interest because following the guidance is voluntary. Additionally, delay may deter
companies from realizing all the efficiencies intended by this guidance, and immediate
effectiveness will assist in preparing for 2007 evaluations and assessments of internal control
over financial reporting.
14
     Release No. 34-55928.
15
     17 CFR 210.1-01 et seq.
16
     Release No. 34-55930 (Jun. 20, 2007).


                                             Page 7

=== PAGE 8 ===
II. Interpretive Guidance – Evaluation and Assessment of Internal Control Over
Financial Reporting

   The interpretive guidance addresses the following topics:

   A. The Evaluation Process

      1. Identifying Financial Reporting Risks and Controls

              a.     Identifying Financial Reporting Risks

              b.     Identifying Controls that Adequately Address Financial Reporting
                     Risks

              c.     Consideration of Entity-Level Controls

              d.     Role of Information Technology General Controls

              e.     Evidential Matter to Support the Assessment

      2. Evaluating Evidence of the Operating Effectiveness of ICFR

              a.     Determining the Evidence Needed to Support the Assessment

              b.     Implementing Procedures to Evaluate Evidence of the Operation of
                     ICFR

              c.     Evidential Matter to Support the Assessment

      3. Multiple Location Considerations

   B. Reporting Considerations

          1. Evaluation of Control Deficiencies

          2. Expression of Assessment of Effectiveness of ICFR by Management

          3. Disclosures about Material Weaknesses

          4. Impact of a Restatement of Previously Issued Financial Statements on
              Management’s Report on ICFR

          5. Inability to Assess Certain Aspects of ICFR




                                        Page 8

=== PAGE 9 ===
A. The Evaluation Process

         The objective of internal control over financial reporting 17 (“ICFR”) is to provide

reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of

financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted

accounting principles (“GAAP”). The purpose of the evaluation of ICFR is to provide

management with a reasonable basis for its annual assessment as to whether any material

weaknesses 18 in ICFR exist as of the end of the fiscal year. 19 To accomplish this,

management identifies the risks to reliable financial reporting, evaluates whether controls

exist to address those risks, and evaluates evidence about the operation of the controls


17
  Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) [17 CFR 240.13a-15(f) and 15d-15(b)] define
internal control over financial reporting as:
     A process designed by, or under the supervision of, the issuer’s principal executive and
     principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, and effected by the
     issuer’s board of directors, management and other personnel, to provide reasonable
     assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
     statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting
     principles and includes those policies and procedures that:
         (1) Pertain to the maintenance of records that in reasonable detail accurately and
             fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the issuer;
         (2) Provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to
             permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
             accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the issuer are being
             made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
             registrant; and
         (3) Provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
             unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the issuer’s assets that could have a
             material effect on the financial statements.
18
  As defined in Exchange Act Rule 12b-2 [17 CFR 240.12b-2] and Rule 1-02 of Regulation S-X
[17 CFR 210.1-02], a material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in
ICFR such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the registrant’s
annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. See
Release No. 34-55928.
19
  This focus on material weaknesses will lead to a better understanding by investors about the
company’s ICFR, as well as its inherent limitations. Further, the Commission’s rules
implementing Section 404, by providing for public disclosure of material weaknesses,
concentrate attention on the most important internal control issues.


                                               Page 9

=== PAGE 10 ===
included in the evaluation based on its assessment of risk. 20 The evaluation process will

vary from company to company; however, the top-down, risk-based approach which is

described in this guidance will typically be the most efficient and effective way to

conduct the evaluation.

        The evaluation process guidance is described in two sections. The first section

explains the identification of financial reporting risks and the evaluation of whether the

controls management has implemented adequately address those risks. The second

section explains an approach for making judgments about the methods and procedures for

evaluating whether the operation of ICFR is effective. Both sections explain how entity-

level controls 21 impact the evaluation process, as well as how management should focus

its evaluation efforts on the highest risks to reliable financial reporting. 22




20
  If management’s evaluation process identifies material weaknesses, but all material weaknesses
are remediated by the end of the fiscal year, management may conclude that ICFR is effective as
of the end of the fiscal year. However, management should consider whether disclosure of such
remediated material weaknesses is appropriate or required under Item 307 or Item 308 of
Regulations S-K or S-B or other Commission disclosure rules.
21
   The term “entity-level controls” as used in this document describes aspects of a system of
internal control that have a pervasive effect on the entity’s system of internal control such as
controls related to the control environment (for example, management’s philosophy and operating
style, integrity and ethical values; board or audit committee oversight; and assignment of
authority and responsibility); controls over management override; the company's risk assessment
process; centralized processing and controls, including shared service environments; controls to
monitor results of operations; controls to monitor other controls, including activities of the
internal audit function, the audit committee, and self-assessment programs; controls over the
period-end financial reporting process; and policies that address significant business control and
risk management practices. The terms “company-level” and “entity-wide” are also commonly
used to describe these controls.
22
  Because management is responsible for maintaining effective ICFR, this interpretive guidance
does not specifically address the role of the board of directors or audit committee in a company’s
evaluation and assessment of ICFR. However, we would ordinarily expect a board of directors or
audit committee, as part of its oversight responsibilities for the company’s financial reporting, to
be reasonably knowledgeable and informed about the evaluation process and management’s
assessment, as necessary in the circumstances.


                                             Page 10

=== PAGE 11 ===
        Under the Commission’s rules, management’s annual assessment of the

effectiveness of ICFR must be made in accordance with a suitable control framework’s 23

definition of effective internal control. 24 These control frameworks define elements of

internal control that are expected to be present and functioning in an effective internal

control system. In assessing effectiveness, management evaluates whether its ICFR

includes policies, procedures and activities that address the elements of internal control

that the applicable control framework describes as necessary for an internal control

system to be effective. The framework elements describe the characteristics of an

internal control system that may be relevant to individual areas of the company’s ICFR,

pervasive to many areas, or entity-wide. Therefore, management’s evaluation process

includes not only controls involving particular areas of financial reporting, but also the

entity-wide and other pervasive elements of internal control defined by its selected

control framework. This guidance is not intended to replace the elements of an effective

system of internal control as defined within a control framework.


23
   In the Adopting Release, the Commission specified characteristics of a suitable control
framework and identified the Internal Control—Integrated Framework (1992) created by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (“COSO”) as an example
of a suitable framework. We also cited the Guidance on Assessing Control published by the
Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants (“CoCo”) and the report published by the Institute of
Chartered Accountants in England & Wales Internal Control: Guidance for Directors on the
Combined Code (known as the Turnbull Report) as examples of other suitable frameworks that
issuers could choose in evaluating the effectiveness of their ICFR. We encourage companies to
examine and select a framework that may be useful in their own circumstances; we also
encourage the further development of existing and alternative frameworks.
24
   For example, both the COSO framework and the Turnbull Report state that determining
whether a system of internal control is effective is a subjective judgment resulting from an
assessment of whether the five components (that is, control environment, risk assessment, control
activities, monitoring, and information and communication) are present and functioning
effectively. Although CoCo states that an assessment of effectiveness should be made against
twenty specific criteria, it acknowledges that the criteria can be regrouped into different
structures, and includes a table showing how the criteria can be regrouped into the five-
component structure of COSO.


                                            Page 11

=== PAGE 12 ===
1. Identifying Financial Reporting Risks and Controls

       Management should evaluate whether it has implemented controls that will

achieve the objective of ICFR (that is, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the

reliability of financial reporting). The evaluation begins with the identification and

assessment of the risks to reliable financial reporting (that is, materially accurate financial

statements), including changes in those risks. Management then evaluates whether it has

controls placed in operation (that is, in use) that are designed to adequately address those

risks. Management ordinarily would consider the company’s entity-level controls in both

its assessment of risks and in identifying which controls adequately address the risks.

       The evaluation approach described herein allows management to identify controls

and maintain supporting evidential matter for its controls in a manner that is tailored to

the company’s financial reporting risks (as defined below). Thus, the controls that

management identifies and documents are those that are important to achieving the

objective of ICFR. These controls are then subject to procedures to evaluate evidence of

their operating effectiveness, as determined pursuant to Section II.A.2.

a. Identifying Financial Reporting Risks

       Management should identify those risks of misstatement that could, individually

or in combination with others, result in a material misstatement of the financial

statements (“financial reporting risks”). Ordinarily, the identification of financial

reporting risks begins with evaluating how the requirements of GAAP apply to the

company’s business, operations and transactions. Management must provide investors

with financial statements that fairly present the company’s financial position, results of

operations and cash flows in accordance with GAAP. A lack of fair presentation arises




                                           Page 12

=== PAGE 13 ===
when one or more financial statement amounts or disclosures (“financial reporting

elements”) contain misstatements (including omissions) that are material.

       Management uses its knowledge and understanding of the business, and its

organization, operations, and processes, to consider the sources and potential likelihood

of misstatements in financial reporting elements. Internal and external risk factors that

impact the business, including the nature and extent of any changes in those risks, may

give rise to a risk of misstatement. Risks of misstatement may also arise from sources

such as the initiation, authorization, processing and recording of transactions and other

adjustments that are reflected in financial reporting elements. Management may find it

useful to consider “what could go wrong” within a financial reporting element in order to

identify the sources and the potential likelihood of misstatements and identify those that

could result in a material misstatement of the financial statements.

       The methods and procedures for identifying financial reporting risks will vary

based on the characteristics of the company. These characteristics include, among others,

the size, complexity, and organizational structure of the company and its processes and

financial reporting environment, as well as the control framework used by management.

For example, to identify financial reporting risks in a larger business or a complex

business process, management’s methods and procedures may involve a variety of

company personnel, including those with specialized knowledge. These individuals,

collectively, may be necessary to have a sufficient understanding of GAAP, the

underlying business transactions and the process activities, including the role of computer

technology, that are required to initiate, authorize, record and process transactions. In

contrast, in a small company that operates on a centralized basis with less complex




                                          Page 13

=== PAGE 14 ===
business processes and with little change in the risks or processes, management’s daily

involvement with the business may provide it with adequate knowledge to appropriately

identify financial reporting risks.

        Management’s evaluation of the risk of misstatement should include

consideration of the vulnerability of the entity to fraudulent activity (for example,

fraudulent financial reporting, misappropriation of assets and corruption), and whether

any such exposure could result in a material misstatement of the financial statements. 25

The extent of activities required for the evaluation of fraud risks is commensurate with

the size and complexity of the company’s operations and financial reporting

environment. 26

        Management should recognize that the risk of material misstatement due to fraud

ordinarily exists in any organization, regardless of size or type, and it may vary by

specific location or segment and by individual financial reporting element. For example,

one type of fraud risk that has resulted in fraudulent financial reporting in companies of

all sizes and types is the risk of improper override of internal controls in the financial

reporting process. While the identification of a fraud risk is not necessarily an indication

that a fraud has occurred, the absence of an identified fraud is not an indication that no



25
   For example, COSO’s Internal Control Over Financial Reporting – Guidance for Smaller
Public Companies (2006), Volume 1: Executive Summary, Principle 10: Fraud Risk (page 10)
states, “The potential for material misstatement due to fraud is explicitly considered in assessing
risks to the achievement of financial reporting objectives.”
26
  Management may find resources such as “Management Antifraud Programs and Controls –
Guidance to Help Prevent, Deter, and Detect Fraud,” which was issued jointly by seven
professional organizations and is included as an exhibit to AU Sec. 316, Consideration of Fraud
in a Financial Statement Audit (as adopted on an interim basis by the PCAOB in PCAOB Rule
3200T) helpful in assessing fraud risks. Other resources also exist (for example, the American
Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ (AICPA) Management Override of Internal Controls:
The Achilles’ Heel of Fraud Prevention (2005)), and more may be developed in the future.


                                             Page 14

=== PAGE 15 ===
fraud risks exist. Rather, these risk assessments are used in evaluating whether adequate

controls have been implemented.

b. Identifying Controls that Adequately Address Financial Reporting Risks

        Management should evaluate whether it has controls 27 placed in operation (that is,

in use) that adequately address the company’s financial reporting risks. The

determination of whether an individual control, or a combination of controls, adequately

addresses a financial reporting risk involves judgments about whether the controls, if

operating properly, can effectively prevent or detect misstatements that could result in

material misstatements in the financial statements. 28 If management determines that a

deficiency in ICFR exists, it must be evaluated to determine whether a material

weakness exists. 29 The guidance in Section II.B.1. is designed to assist management

with that evaluation.

        Management may identify preventive controls, detective controls, or a

combination of both, as adequately addressing financial reporting risks. 30 There might



27
  A control consists of a specific set of policies, procedures, and activities designed to meet an
objective. A control may exist within a designated function or activity in a process. A control’s
impact on ICFR may be entity-wide or specific to an account balance, class of transactions or
application. Controls have unique characteristics – for example, they can be: automated or
manual; reconciliations; segregation of duties; review and approval authorizations; safeguarding
and accountability of assets; preventing or detecting error or fraud. Controls within a process
may consist of financial reporting controls and operational controls (that is, those designed to
achieve operational objectives).
28
  Companies may use “control objectives,” which provide specific criteria against which to
evaluate the effectiveness of controls, to assist in evaluating whether controls can prevent or
detect misstatements.
29
   A deficiency in the design of ICFR exists when (a) necessary controls are missing or (b)
existing controls are not properly designed so that, even if the control operates as designed, the
financial reporting risks would not be addressed.
30
  Preventive controls have the objective of preventing the occurrence of errors or fraud that could
result in a misstatement of the financial statements. Detective controls have the objective of
detecting errors or fraud that has already occurred that could result in a misstatement of the


                                              Page 15

=== PAGE 16 ===
be more than one control that addresses the financial reporting risks for a financial

reporting element; conversely, one control might address the risks of more than one

financial reporting element. It is not necessary to identify all controls that may exist or

identify redundant controls, unless redundancy itself is required to address the financial

reporting risks. To illustrate, management may determine that the risk of a misstatement

in interest expense, which could result in a material misstatement of the financial

statements, is adequately addressed by a control within the company’s period-end

financial reporting process (that is, an entity-level control). In such a case, management

may not need to identify, for purposes of the ICFR evaluation, any additional controls

related to the risk of misstatement in interest expense.

       Management may also consider the efficiency with which evidence of the

operation of a control can be evaluated when identifying the controls that adequately

address the financial reporting risks. When more than one control exists and each

adequately addresses a financial reporting risk, management may decide to select the

control for which evidence of operating effectiveness can be obtained more efficiently.

Moreover, when adequate information technology (“IT”) general controls exist and

management has determined that the operation of such controls is effective, management

may determine that automated controls are more efficient to evaluate than manual

controls. Considering the efficiency with which the operation of a control can be

evaluated will often enhance the overall efficiency of the evaluation process.

       In addition to identifying controls that address the financial reporting risks of

individual financial reporting elements, management also evaluates whether it has


financial statements. Preventive and detective controls may be completely manual, involve some
degree of computer automation, or be completely automated.


                                           Page 16

=== PAGE 17 ===
controls in place to address the entity-level and other pervasive elements of ICFR that its

chosen control framework prescribes as necessary for an effective system of internal

control. This would ordinarily include, for example, considering how and whether

controls related to the control environment, controls over management override, the

entity-level risk assessment process and monitoring activities, 31 controls over the period-

end financial reporting process, 32 and the policies that address significant business

control and risk management practices are adequate for purposes of an effective system

of internal control. The control frameworks and related guidance may be useful tools for

evaluating the adequacy of these elements of ICFR.

        When identifying the controls that address financial reporting risks, management

learns information about the characteristics of the controls that should inform its

judgments about the risk that a control will fail to operate as designed. This includes, for

example, information about the judgment required in its operation and information about

the complexity of the controls. Section II.A.2. discusses how these characteristics are

considered in determining the nature and extent of evidence of the operation of the

controls that management evaluates.

        At the end of this identification process, management has identified for evaluation

those controls that are needed to meet the objective of ICFR (that is, to provide

31
  Monitoring activities may include controls to monitor results of operations and controls to
monitor other controls, including activities of the internal audit function, the audit committee, and
self-assessment programs.
32
  The nature of controls within the period-end financial reporting process will vary based on a
company’s facts and circumstances. The period-end financial reporting process may include
matters such as: procedures to enter transaction totals into the general ledger; the initiation,
authorization, recording and processing of journal entries in the general ledger; procedures for the
selection and application of accounting policies; procedures used to record recurring and non-
recurring adjustments to the annual and quarterly financial statements; and procedures for
preparing annual and quarterly financial statements and related disclosures.


                                              Page 17

=== PAGE 18 ===
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting) and for which

evidence about their operation can be obtained most efficiently.

c. Consideration of Entity-Level Controls

        Management considers entity-level controls when identifying financial reporting

risks and related controls for a financial reporting element. In doing so, it is important

for management to consider the nature of the entity-level controls and how those

controls relate to the financial reporting element. The more indirect the relationship to a

financial reporting element, the less effective a control may be in preventing or detecting

a misstatement. 33

        Some entity-level controls, such as certain control environment controls, have an

important, but indirect, effect on the likelihood that a misstatement will be prevented or

detected on a timely basis. These controls might affect the other controls management

determines are necessary to adequately address financial reporting risks for a financial

reporting element. However, it is unlikely that management will identify only this type

of entity-level control as adequately addressing a financial reporting risk identified for a

financial reporting element.

        Other entity-level controls may be designed to identify possible breakdowns in

lower-level controls, but not in a manner that would, by themselves, adequately address

financial reporting risks. For example, an entity-level control that monitors the results of

operations may be designed to detect potential misstatements and investigate whether a

breakdown in lower-level controls occurred. However, if the amount of potential

33
  Controls can be either directly or indirectly related to a financial reporting element. Controls
that are designed to have a specific effect on a financial reporting element are considered directly
related. For example, controls established to ensure that personnel are properly counting and
recording the annual physical inventory relate directly to the existence of the inventory.


                                             Page 18

=== PAGE 19 ===
misstatement that could exist before being detected by the monitoring control is too high,

then the control may not adequately address the financial reporting risks of a financial

reporting element.

        Entity-level controls may be designed to operate at the process, application,

transaction or account-level and at a level of precision that would adequately prevent or

detect on a timely basis misstatements in one or more financial reporting elements that

could result in a material misstatement of the financial statements. In these cases,

management may not need to identify or evaluate additional controls relating to that

financial reporting risk.

d. Role of Information Technology General Controls

        Controls that management identifies as addressing financial reporting risks may

be automated, 34 dependent upon IT functionality, 35 or a combination of both manual and

automated procedures. 36 In these situations, management’s evaluation process generally

considers the design and operation of the automated or IT dependent application controls

and the relevant IT general controls over the applications providing the IT functionality.

While IT general controls alone ordinarily do not adequately address financial reporting

risks, the proper and consistent operation of automated controls or IT functionality often

depends upon effective IT general controls. The identification of risks and controls

within IT should not be a separate evaluation. Instead, it should be an integral part of



34
  For example, application controls that perform automated matching, error checking or edit
checking functions.
35
  For example, consistent application of a formula or performance of a calculation and posting
correct balances to appropriate accounts or ledgers.
36
  For example, a control that manually investigates items contained in a computer generated
exception report.


                                            Page 19

=== PAGE 20 ===
management’s top-down, risk-based approach to identifying risks and controls and in

determining evidential matter necessary to support the assessment.

          Aspects of IT general controls that may be relevant to the evaluation of ICFR will

vary depending upon a company’s facts and circumstances. For purposes of the

evaluation of ICFR, management only needs to evaluate those IT general controls that are

necessary for the proper and consistent operation of other controls designed to adequately

address financial reporting risks. For example, management might consider whether

certain aspects of IT general control areas, such as program development, program

changes, computer operations, and access to programs and data, apply to its facts and

circumstances. 37 Specifically, it is unnecessary to evaluate IT general controls that

primarily pertain to efficiency or effectiveness of a company’s operations, but which are

not relevant to addressing financial reporting risks.

e. Evidential Matter to Support the Assessment

          As part of its evaluation of ICFR, management must maintain reasonable support

for its assessment. 38 Documentation of the design of the controls management has

placed in operation to adequately address the financial reporting risks, including the

entity-level and other pervasive elements necessary for effective ICFR, is an integral part

of the reasonable support. The form and extent of the documentation will vary

depending on the size, nature, and complexity of the company. It can take many forms

(for example, paper documents, electronic, or other media). Also, the documentation


37
   However, the reference to these specific IT general control areas as examples within this
guidance does not imply that these areas, either partially or in their entirety, are applicable to all
facts and circumstances. As indicated, companies need to take their particular facts and
circumstances into consideration in determining which aspects of IT general controls are relevant.
38
     See instructions to Item 308 of Regulations S-K and S-B.


                                              Page 20

=== PAGE 21 ===
can be presented in a number of ways (for example, policy manuals, process models,

flowcharts, job descriptions, documents, internal memorandums, forms, etc). The

documentation does not need to include all controls that exist within a process that

impacts financial reporting. Rather, the documentation should be focused on those

controls that management concludes are adequate to address the financial reporting

risks. 39

            In addition to providing support for the assessment of ICFR, documentation of

the design of controls also supports other objectives of an effective system of internal

control. For example, it serves as evidence that controls within ICFR, including changes

to those controls, have been identified, are capable of being communicated to those

responsible for their performance, and are capable of being monitored by the company.

2. Evaluating Evidence of the Operating Effectiveness of ICFR

        Management should evaluate evidence of the operating effectiveness of ICFR.

The evaluation of the operating effectiveness of a control considers whether the control is

operating as designed and whether the person performing the control possesses the

necessary authority and competence to perform the control effectively. The evaluation

procedures that management uses to gather evidence about the operation of the controls it

identifies as adequately addressing the financial reporting risks for financial reporting

elements (pursuant to Section II.A.1.b) should be tailored to management’s assessment of

the risk characteristics of both the individual financial reporting elements and the related

controls (collectively, ICFR risk). Management should ordinarily focus its evaluation of

the operation of controls on areas posing the highest ICFR risk. Management’s

39
 Section II.A.2.c also provides guidance with regard to the documentation required to support
management’s evaluation of operating effectiveness.


                                            Page 21

=== PAGE 22 ===
assessment of ICFR risk also considers the impact of entity-level controls, such as the

relative strengths and weaknesses of the control environment, which may influence

management’s judgments about the risks of failure for particular controls.

        Evidence about the effective operation of controls may be obtained from direct

testing of controls and on-going monitoring activities. The nature, timing and extent of

evaluation procedures necessary for management to obtain sufficient evidence of the

effective operation of a control depend on the assessed ICFR risk. In determining

whether the evidence obtained is sufficient to provide a reasonable basis for its evaluation

of the operation of ICFR, management should consider not only the quantity of evidence

(for example, sample size), but also the qualitative characteristics of the evidence. The

qualitative characteristics of the evidence include the nature of the evaluation procedures

performed, the period of time to which the evidence relates, the objectivity 40 of those

evaluating the controls, and, in the case of on-going monitoring activities, the extent of

validation through direct testing of underlying controls. For any individual control,

different combinations of the nature, timing, and extent of evaluation procedures may

provide sufficient evidence. The sufficiency of evidence is not necessarily determined by

any of these attributes individually.




40
  In determining the objectivity of those evaluating controls, management is not required to make
an absolute conclusion regarding objectivity, but rather should recognize that personnel will have
varying degrees of objectivity based on, among other things, their job function, their relationship
to the control being evaluated, and their level of authority and responsibility within the
organization. Personnel whose core function involves permanently serving as a testing or
compliance authority at the company, such as internal auditors, normally are expected to be the
most objective. However, the degree of objectivity of other company personnel may be such that
the evaluation of controls performed by them would provide sufficient evidence. Management’s
judgments about whether the degree of objectivity is adequate to provide sufficient evidence
should take into account the ICFR risk.


                                             Page 22

=== PAGE 23 ===
a. Determining the Evidence Needed to Support the Assessment

       Management should evaluate the ICFR risk of the controls identified Section

II.A.1.b as adequately addressing the financial reporting risks for financial reporting

elements to determine the evidence needed to support the assessment. This evaluation

should consider the characteristics of the financial reporting elements to which the

controls relate and the characteristics of the controls themselves. This concept is

illustrated in the following diagram.




                                          Page 23

=== PAGE 24 ===
  Determining the Sufficiency of Evidence Based on ICFR Risk


          High
Misstatement                                 More
Risk of                                      Evidence*
Financial
Reporting
Element Medium

                   Less
                   Evidence*


           Low                      Medium                     High
                      Risk of Control Failure



             * The references to “more” or “less” include both the quantitative and
             qualitative characteristics of the evidence (that is, its sufficiency).




                                     Page 24

=== PAGE 25 ===
       Management’s consideration of the misstatement risk of a financial reporting

element includes both the materiality of the financial reporting element and the

susceptibility of the underlying account balances, transactions or other supporting

information to a misstatement that could be material to the financial statements. As the

materiality of a financial reporting element increases in relation to the amount of

misstatement that would be considered material to the financial statements,

management’s assessment of misstatement risk for the financial reporting element

generally would correspondingly increase. In addition, management considers the extent

to which the financial reporting elements include transactions, account balances or other

supporting information that are prone to material misstatement. For example, the extent

to which a financial reporting element: (1) involves judgment in determining the recorded

amounts; (2) is susceptible to fraud; (3) has complex accounting requirements; (4)

experiences change in the nature or volume of the underlying transactions; or (5) is

sensitive to changes in environmental factors, such as technological and/or economic

developments, would generally affect management’s judgment of whether a misstatement

risk is higher or lower.

       Management’s consideration of the likelihood that a control might fail to operate

effectively includes, among other things:

   •   The type of control (that is, manual or automated) and the frequency with which it

       operates;

   •   The complexity of the control;

   •   The risk of management override;

   •   The judgment required to operate the control;



                                            Page 25

=== PAGE 26 ===
     •   The competence of the personnel who perform the control or monitor its

         performance;

     •   Whether there have been changes in key personnel who either perform the control

         or monitor its performance;

     •   The nature and materiality of misstatements that the control is intended to prevent

         or detect;

     •   The degree to which the control relies on the effectiveness of other controls (for

         example, IT general controls); and

     •   The evidence of the operation of the control from prior year(s).

For example, management’s judgment of the risk of control failure would be higher for

controls whose operation requires significant judgment than for non-complex controls

requiring less judgment.

         Financial reporting elements that involve related party transactions, critical

accounting policies, 41 and related critical accounting estimates 42 generally would be

assessed as having a higher misstatement risk. Further, when the controls related to these

financial reporting elements are subject to the risk of management override, involve




41
   “Critical accounting policies” are defined as those policies that are most important to the
financial statement presentation, and require management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex
judgments, often as the result of a need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are
inherently uncertain. See Release No. 33-8040 (Dec. 12, 2001) [66 FR 65013].
42
  “Critical accounting estimates” relate to estimates or assumptions involved in the application of
generally accepted accounting principles where the nature of the estimates or assumptions is
material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain
matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change and the impact of the estimates and
assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material. See Release No. 33-
8350 (Dec. 19, 2003) [68 FR 75056]. For additional information, see, for example, Release No.
33-8098 (May 10, 2002) [67 FR 35620].


                                             Page 26

=== PAGE 27 ===
significant judgment, or are complex, they should generally be assessed as having higher

ICFR risk.

       When a combination of controls is required to adequately address the risks related

to a financial reporting element, management should analyze the risk characteristics of

the controls. This is because the controls associated with a given financial reporting

element may not necessarily share the same risk characteristics. For example, a financial

reporting element involving significant estimation may require a combination of

automated controls that accumulate source data and manual controls that require highly

judgmental determinations of assumptions. In this case, the automated controls may be

subject to a system that is stable (that is, has not undergone significant change) and is

supported by effective IT general controls and are therefore assessed as lower risk,

whereas the manual controls would be assessed as higher risk.

       The consideration of entity-level controls (for example, controls within the

control environment) may influence management’s determination of the evidence needed

to sufficiently support its assessment of ICFR. For example, management’s judgment

about the likelihood that a control fails to operate effectively may be influenced by a

highly effective control environment and thereby impact the evidence evaluated for that

control. However, a strong control environment would not eliminate the need to evaluate

the operation of the control in some manner.

b. Implementing Procedures to Evaluate Evidence of the Operation of ICFR

       Management should evaluate evidence that provides a reasonable basis for its

assessment of the operating effectiveness of the controls identified in Section II.A.1.

Management uses its assessment of ICFR risk, as determined in Section II.A.2 to




                                          Page 27

=== PAGE 28 ===
determine the evaluation methods and procedures necessary to obtain sufficient evidence.

The evaluation methods and procedures may be integrated with the daily responsibilities

of its employees or implemented specifically for purposes of the ICFR evaluation.

Activities that are performed for other reasons (for example, day-to-day activities to

manage the operations of the business) may also provide relevant evidence. Further,

activities performed to meet the monitoring objectives of the control framework may

provide evidence to support the assessment of the operating effectiveness of ICFR.

        The evidence management evaluates comes from direct tests of controls, on-going

monitoring, or a combination of both. Direct tests of controls are tests ordinarily

performed on a periodic basis by individuals with a high degree of objectivity relative to

the controls being tested. Direct tests provide evidence as of a point in time and may

provide information about the reliability of on-going monitoring activities. On-going

monitoring includes management’s normal, recurring activities that provide information

about the operation of controls. These activities include, for example, self-assessment 43

procedures and procedures to analyze performance measures designed to track the

operation of controls. 44 Self-assessment is a broad term that can refer to different types

of procedures performed by individuals with varying degrees of objectivity. It includes

assessments made by the personnel who operate the control as well as members of

management who are not responsible for operating the control. The evidence provided

43
  For example, COSO’s 1992 framework defines self-assessments as “evaluations where persons
responsible for a particular unit or function will determine the effectiveness of controls for their
activities.”
44
  Management’s evaluation process may also consider the results of key performance indicators
(“KPIs”) in which management reconciles operating and financial information with its knowledge
of the business. The procedures that management implements pursuant to this section should
evaluate the effective operation of these KPI-type controls when they are identified pursuant to
Section II.A.1.b. as addressing financial reporting risk.


                                             Page 28

=== PAGE 29 ===
by self-assessment activities depends on the personnel involved and the manner in which

the activities are conducted. For example, evidence from self-assessments performed by

personnel responsible for operating the control generally provides less evidence due to

the evaluator’s lower degree of objectivity.

       As the ICFR risk increases, management will ordinarily adjust the nature of the

evidence that is obtained. For example, management can increase the evidence from on-

going monitoring activities by utilizing personnel who are more objective and/or

increasing the extent of validation through periodic direct testing of the underlying

controls. Management can also vary the evidence obtained by adjusting the period of

time covered by direct testing. When ICFR risk is assessed as high, the evidence

management obtains would ordinarily consist of direct testing or on-going monitoring

activities performed by individuals who have a higher degree of objectivity. In situations

where a company’s on-going monitoring activities utilize personnel who are not

adequately objective, the evidence obtained would normally be supplemented with direct

testing by those who are independent from the operation of the control. In these

situations, direct testing of controls corroborates evidence from on-going monitoring

activities as well as evaluates the operation of the underlying controls and whether they

continue to adequately address financial reporting risks. When ICFR risk is assessed as

low, management may conclude that evidence from on-going monitoring is sufficient and

that no direct testing is required. Further, management’s evaluation would ordinarily

consider evidence from a reasonable period of time during the year, including the fiscal

year-end.




                                          Page 29

=== PAGE 30 ===
       In smaller companies, management’s daily interaction with its controls may

provide it with sufficient knowledge about their operation to evaluate the operation of

ICFR. Knowledge from daily interaction includes information obtained by on-going

direct involvement with and direct supervision of the execution of the control by those

responsible for the assessment of the effectiveness of ICFR. Management should

consider its particular facts and circumstances when determining whether its daily

interaction with controls provides sufficient evidence to evaluate the operating

effectiveness of ICFR. For example, daily interaction may be sufficient when the

operation of controls is centralized and the number of personnel involved is limited.

Conversely, daily interaction in companies with multiple management reporting layers or

operating segments would generally not provide sufficient evidence because those

responsible for assessing the effectiveness of ICFR would not ordinarily be sufficiently

knowledgeable about the operation of the controls. In these situations, management

would ordinarily utilize direct testing or on-going monitoring-type evaluation procedures

to obtain reasonable support for the assessment.

       Management evaluates the evidence it gathers to determine whether the operation

of a control is effective. This evaluation considers whether the control operated as

designed. It also considers matters such as how the control was applied, the consistency

with which it was applied, and whether the person performing the control possesses the

necessary authority and competence to perform the control effectively. If management

determines that the operation of the control is not effective, a deficiency exists that must

be evaluated to determine whether it is a material weakness.




                                          Page 30

=== PAGE 31 ===
c. Evidential Matter to Support the Assessment

       Management’s assessment must be supported by evidential matter that provides

reasonable support for its assessment. The nature of the evidential matter may vary based

on the assessed level of ICFR risk of the underlying controls and other circumstances.

Reasonable support for an assessment would include the basis for management’s

assessment, including documentation of the methods and procedures it utilizes to gather

and evaluate evidence.

       The evidential matter may take many forms and will vary depending on the

assessed level of ICFR risk for controls over each of its financial reporting elements. For

example, management may document its overall strategy in a comprehensive

memorandum that establishes the evaluation approach, the evaluation procedures, the

basis for management’s conclusion about the effectiveness of controls related to the

financial reporting elements and the entity-level and other pervasive elements that are

important to management’s assessment of ICFR.

       If management determines that the evidential matter within the company’s books

and records is sufficient to provide reasonable support for its assessment, it may

determine that it is not necessary to separately maintain copies of the evidence it

evaluates. For example, in smaller companies, where management’s daily interaction

with its controls provides the basis for its assessment, management may have limited

documentation created specifically for the evaluation of ICFR. However, in these

instances, management should consider whether reasonable support for its assessment

would include documentation of how its interaction provided it with sufficient evidence.




                                          Page 31

=== PAGE 32 ===
This documentation might include memoranda, e-mails, and instructions or directions to

and from management to company employees.

       Further, in determining the nature of supporting evidential matter, management

should also consider the degree of complexity of the control, the level of judgment

required to operate the control, and the risk of misstatement in the financial reporting

element that could result in a material misstatement of the financial statements. As these

factors increase, management may determine that evidential matter supporting the

assessment should be separately maintained. For example, management may decide that

separately maintained documentation in certain areas will assist the audit committee in

exercising its oversight of the company’s financial reporting.

       The evidential matter constituting reasonable support for management’s

assessment would ordinarily include documentation of how management formed its

conclusion about the effectiveness of the company’s entity-level and other pervasive

elements of ICFR that its applicable framework describes as necessary for an effective

system of internal control.

3. Multiple Location Considerations

       Management’s consideration of financial reporting risks generally includes all of

its locations or business units. 45 Management may determine that financial reporting

risks are adequately addressed by controls which operate centrally, in which case the

evaluation approach is similar to that of a business with a single location or business unit.

When the controls necessary to address financial reporting risks operate at more than one


45
   Consistent with the guidance in Section II.A.1., management may determine when identifying
financial reporting risks that some locations are so insignificant that no further evaluation
procedures are needed.


                                           Page 32

=== PAGE 33 ===
location or business unit, management would generally evaluate evidence of the

operation of the controls at the individual locations or business units.

        Management may determine that the ICFR risk of the controls (as determined

through Section II.A.2.a) that operate at individual locations or business units is low. In

such situations, management may determine that evidence gathered through self-

assessment routines or other on-going monitoring activities, when combined with the

evidence derived from a centralized control that monitors the results of operations at

individual locations, constitutes sufficient evidence for the evaluation. In other

situations, management may determine that, because of the complexity or judgment in the

operation of the controls at the individual location, the risk that controls will fail to

operate is high, and therefore more evidence is needed about the effective operation of

the controls at the location.

        Management should generally consider the risk characteristics of the controls for

each financial reporting element, rather than making a single judgment for all controls at

that location when deciding whether the nature and extent of evidence is sufficient.

When performing its evaluation of the risk characteristics of the controls identified,

management should consider whether there are location-specific risks that might impact

the risk that a control might fail to operate effectively. Additionally, there may be

pervasive risk factors that exist at a location that cause all controls, or a majority of

controls, at that location to be considered higher risk.




                                            Page 33

=== PAGE 34 ===
B. Reporting Considerations

1. Evaluation of Control Deficiencies

        In order to determine whether a control deficiency, or combination of control

deficiencies, is a material weakness, management evaluates the severity of each control

deficiency that comes to its attention. Control deficiencies that are determined to be a

material weakness must be disclosed in management’s annual report on its assessment of

the effectiveness of ICFR. Control deficiencies that are considered to be significant

deficiencies are reported to the company’s audit committee and the external auditor

pursuant to management’s compliance with the certification requirements in Exchange

Act Rule 13a-14. 46

        Management may not disclose that it has assessed ICFR as effective if one or

more deficiencies in ICFR are determined to be a material weakness. As part of the

evaluation of ICFR, management considers whether each deficiency, individually or in

combination, is a material weakness as of the end of the fiscal year. Multiple control

deficiencies that affect the same financial statement amount or disclosure increase the

likelihood of misstatement and may, in combination, constitute a material weakness if

there is a reasonable possibility 47 that a material misstatement of the financial statements


46
   Pursuant to Exchange Act Rules 13a-14 and 15d-14 [17 CFR 240.13a-14 and 240.15d-14],
management discloses to the auditors and to the audit committee of the board of directors (or
persons fulfilling the equivalent function) all material weaknesses and significant deficiencies in
the design or operation of internal controls which could adversely affect the issuer's ability to
record, process, summarize and report financial data. The term “material weakness” is defined in
the Commission’s rules in Exchange Act Rule 12b-2 and Rule 1-02 of Regulation S-X. See
Release No. 34-55928. The Commission is seeking additional comment on the definition of the
term “significant deficiency” in the Commission’s rules in Exchange Act Rule 12b-2 and Rule 1-
02 of Regulation S-X. See Release No. 34-55930.
47
  There is a reasonable possibility of an event when the likelihood of the event is either
“reasonably possible” or “probable” as those terms are used in Financial Accounting Standards
Board Statement No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies. The use of the phrase “reasonable


                                             Page 34

=== PAGE 35 ===
would not be prevented or detected in a timely manner, even though such deficiencies

may be individually less severe than a material weakness. Therefore, management

should evaluate individual control deficiencies that affect the same financial statement

amount or disclosure, or component of internal control, to determine whether they

collectively result in a material weakness.

         The evaluation of the severity of a control deficiency should include both

quantitative and qualitative factors. Management evaluates the severity of a deficiency in

ICFR by considering whether there is a reasonable possibility that the company's ICFR

will fail to prevent or detect a misstatement of a financial statement amount or disclosure;

and the magnitude of the potential misstatement resulting from the deficiency or

deficiencies. The severity of a deficiency in ICFR does not depend on whether a

misstatement actually has occurred but rather on whether there is a reasonable possibility

that the company’s ICFR will fail to prevent or detect a misstatement on a timely basis.

         Risk factors affect whether there is a reasonable possibility 48 that a deficiency, or

a combination of deficiencies, will result in a misstatement of a financial statement

amount or disclosure. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following:

     •   The nature of the financial reporting elements involved (for example, suspense

         accounts and related party transactions involve greater risk);




possibility that a material misstatement of the financial statements would not be prevented or
detected in a timely manner” is intended solely to assist management in identifying matters for
disclosure under Item 308 of Regulation S-K. It is not intended to interpret or describe
management’s responsibility under the FCPA or modify a control framework’s definition of what
constitutes an effective system of internal control.
48
  The evaluation of whether a deficiency in ICFR presents a reasonable possibility of
misstatement can be made without quantifying the probability of occurrence as a specific
percentage or range.


                                            Page 35

=== PAGE 36 ===
   •   The susceptibility of the related asset or liability to loss or fraud (that is, greater

       susceptibility increases risk);

   •   The subjectivity, complexity, or extent of judgment required to determine the

       amount involved (that is, greater subjectivity, complexity, or judgment, like that

       related to an accounting estimate, increases risk);

   •   The interaction or relationship of the control with other controls, including

       whether they are interdependent or redundant;

   •   The interaction of the deficiencies (that is, when evaluating a combination of two

       or more deficiencies, whether the deficiencies could affect the same financial

       statement amounts or disclosures); and

   •   The possible future consequences of the deficiency.

       Factors that affect the magnitude of the misstatement that might result from a

deficiency or deficiencies in ICFR include, but are not limited to, the following:

   •   The financial statement amounts or total of transactions exposed to the deficiency;

       and

   •   The volume of activity in the account balance or class of transactions exposed to

       the deficiency that has occurred in the current period or that is expected in future

       periods.

       In evaluating the magnitude of the potential misstatement, the maximum amount

that an account balance or total of transactions can be overstated is generally the recorded

amount, while understatements could be larger. Also, in many cases, the probability of a

small misstatement will be greater than the probability of a large misstatement.




                                           Page 36

=== PAGE 37 ===
         Management should evaluate the effect of compensating controls 49 when

determining whether a control deficiency or combination of deficiencies is a material

weakness. To have a mitigating effect, the compensating control should operate at a level

of precision that would prevent or detect a misstatement that could be material.

         In determining whether a deficiency or a combination of deficiencies represents a

material weakness, management considers all relevant information. Management should

evaluate whether the following situations indicate a deficiency in ICFR exists and, if so,

whether it represents a material weakness:

     •   Identification of fraud, whether or not material, on the part of senior

         management; 50

     •   Restatement of previously issued financial statements to reflect the correction of a

         material misstatement; 51

     •   Identification of a material misstatement of the financial statements in the current

         period in circumstances that indicate the misstatement would not have been

         detected by the company's ICFR; and

     •   Ineffective oversight of the company’s external financial reporting and internal

         control over financial reporting by the company’s audit committee.

         When evaluating the severity of a deficiency, or combination of deficiencies, in

ICFR, management also should determine the level of detail and degree of assurance that
49
  Compensating controls are controls that serve to accomplish the objective of another control
that did not function properly, helping to reduce risk to an acceptable level.
50
  For purposes of this indicator, the term “senior management” includes the principal executive
and financial officers signing the company’s certifications as required under Section 302 of
Sarbanes Oxley as well as any other members of senior management who play a significant role
in the company’s financial reporting process.
51
 See FAS 154, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections, regarding correction of a
misstatement.


                                            Page 37

=== PAGE 38 ===
would satisfy prudent officials in the conduct of their own affairs that they have

reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit the preparation

of financial statements in conformity with GAAP. If management determines that the

deficiency, or combination of deficiencies, might prevent prudent officials in the conduct

of their own affairs from concluding that they have reasonable assurance that transactions

are recorded as necessary to permit the preparation of financial statements in conformity

with GAAP, then management should treat the deficiency, or combination of

deficiencies, as an indicator of a material weakness.

2. Expression of Assessment of Effectiveness of ICFR by Management

        Management should clearly disclose its assessment of the effectiveness of ICFR

and, therefore, should not qualify its assessment by stating that the company’s ICFR is

effective subject to certain qualifications or exceptions. For example, management

should not state that the company’s controls and procedures are effective except to the

extent that certain material weakness(es) have been identified. In addition, if a material

weakness exists, management may not state that the company’s ICFR is effective.

However, management may state that controls are ineffective for specific reasons.

3. Disclosures about Material Weaknesses

        The Commission’s rule implementing Section 404 was intended to bring

information about material weaknesses in ICFR into public view. Because of the

significance of the disclosure requirements surrounding material weaknesses beyond

specifically stating that the material weaknesses exist, companies should also consider

including the following in their disclosures: 52

52
  Significant deficiencies in ICFR are not required to be disclosed in management’s annual report
on its evaluation of ICFR required by Item 308(a).


                                            Page 38

=== PAGE 39 ===
      •   The nature of any material weakness,

      •   Its impact on the company’s financial reporting and its ICFR, and

      •   Management’s current plans, if any, or actions already undertaken, for

          remediating the material weakness.

          Disclosure of the existence of a material weakness is important, but there is other

information that also may be material and necessary to form an overall picture that is not

misleading. 53 The goal underlying all disclosure in this area is to provide an investor

with disclosure and analysis that goes beyond describing the mere existence of a material

weakness. There are many different types of material weaknesses and many different

factors that may be important to the assessment of the potential effect of any particular

material weakness. While management is required to conclude and state in its report that

ICFR is ineffective when there are one or more material weaknesses, companies should

also consider providing disclosure that allows investors to understand the cause of the

control deficiency and to assess the potential impact of each particular material weakness.

This disclosure will be more useful to investors if management differentiates the potential

impact and importance to the financial statements of the identified material weaknesses,

including distinguishing those material weaknesses that may have a pervasive impact on

ICFR from those material weaknesses that do not.

4. Impact of a Restatement of Previously Issued Financial Statements on
    Management’s Report on ICFR

          Item 308 of Regulation S-K requires disclosure of management’s assessment of

the effectiveness of the company’s ICFR as of the end of the company’s most recent

fiscal year. When a material misstatement of previously issued financial statements is

53
     See Exchange Act Rule 12b-20 [17 CFR 240.12b-20].


                                            Page 39

=== PAGE 40 ===
discovered, a company is required to restate those financial statements. However, the

restatement of financial statements does not, by itself, necessitate that management

consider the effect of the restatement on the company’s prior conclusion related to the

effectiveness of ICFR.

       While there is no requirement for management to reassess or revise its conclusion

related to the effectiveness of ICFR, management should consider whether its original

disclosures are still appropriate and should modify or supplement its original disclosure

to include any other material information that is necessary for such disclosures not to be

misleading in light of the restatement. The company should also disclose any material

changes to ICFR, as required by Item 308(c) of Regulation S-K.

       Similarly, while there is no requirement that management reassess or revise its

conclusion related to the effectiveness of its disclosure controls and procedures,

management should consider whether its original disclosures regarding effectiveness of

disclosure controls and procedures need to be modified or supplemented to include any

other material information that is necessary for such disclosures not to be misleading.

With respect to the disclosures concerning ICFR and disclosure controls and procedures,

the company may need to disclose in this context what impact, if any, the restatement has

on its original conclusions regarding effectiveness of ICFR and disclosure controls and

procedures.

5.     Inability to Assess Certain Aspects of ICFR

       In certain circumstances, management may encounter difficulty in assessing

certain aspects of its ICFR. For example, management may outsource a significant

process to a service organization and determine that evidence of the operating




                                          Page 40

=== PAGE 41 ===
effectiveness of the controls over that process is necessary. However, the service

organization may be unwilling to provide either a Type 2 SAS 70 report or to provide

management access to the controls in place at the service organization so that

management could assess effectiveness. 54 Finally, management may not have

compensating controls in place that allow a determination of the effectiveness of the

controls over the process in an alternative manner. The Commission’s disclosure

requirements state that management’s annual report on ICFR must include a statement as

to whether or not ICFR is effective and do not permit management to issue a report on

ICFR with a scope limitation. 55 Therefore, management must determine whether the

inability to assess controls over a particular process is significant enough to conclude in

its report that ICFR is not effective.




54
   AU Sec. 324, Service Organizations (as adopted on an interim basis by the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (“PCAOB”) in PCAOB Rule 3200T), defines a report on controls
placed in operation and test of operating effectiveness, commonly referred to as a “Type 2 SAS
70 report.” This report is a service auditor's report on a service organization's description of the
controls that may be relevant to a user organization's internal control as it relates to an audit of
financial statements, on whether such controls were suitably designed to achieve specified control
objectives, on whether they had been placed in operation as of a specific date, and on whether the
controls that were tested were operating with sufficient effectiveness to provide reasonable, but
not absolute, assurance that the related control objectives were achieved during the period
specified.
55
     See Item 308(a)(3) of Regulations S-K and S-B [17 CFR 229.308(a)(3) and 228.308(a)(3)].


                                             Page 41

=== PAGE 42 ===
III. Discussion of Comments on the Proposing Release

        The Proposing Release proposed for public comment interpretive guidance for

management regarding the annual evaluation of ICFR required by Rules 13a-15(c) and

15d-15(c) under the Exchange Act. We received letters from 211 commenters in

response to the Proposing Release. 56 The majority of commenters were supportive of the

Commission’s efforts in developing this Interpretive Guidance. We have reviewed and

considered all of the comments received on the proposal, and we discuss our conclusions

with respect to the comments in more detail in the following sections.

A. Alignment between Management’s Evaluation and Assessment and the External
   Audit

        Commenters expressed concern that confusion and inefficiencies may arise from

differences between the proposed guidance for management’s evaluation of ICFR and the

PCAOB’s proposed auditing standard for ICFR. 57 Commenters cited a lack of alignment

between the two with regard to the terminology and definitions used 58 as well as


56
  Of the 211 commenters, 43 were issuers, 33 professional associations and business groups, 19
foreign private issuers and foreign professional associations, 10 investor advocacy and other
similar groups, 8 major accounting firms, 11 smaller accounting firms and Section 404 service
providers, 8 banks and banking associations, 4 law firms and law associations, and 75 other
interested parties including students, academics, and other individuals. The comment letters are
available for inspection in the Commission’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE,
Washington DC 20549 in File No. S7-24-06, or may be viewed at
http://www.sec.gov/comments/s7-24-06/s72406.shtml.
57
  In PCAOB Release No. 2006-007 the PCAOB proposed for public comment An Audit of
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is Integrated With An Audit of Financial
Statements and Considering and Using the Work of Others in an Audit. See
http://www.pcaobus.org/Rules/Docket_021/2006-12-19_Release_No._2006-007.pdf (hereinafter
“Proposed Auditing Standard”).
58
  See, for example, letters from American Bar Association’s Committees on Federal Regulation
of Securities and Law and Accounting of the Section of Business Law (ABA), Association of
Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA), Edison Electric Institute (EEI), European Federation of
Accountants (FEE), Financial Executives International Committee on Corporate Reporting (FEI
CCR), Frank Gorrell (F. Gorrell), Society of Corporate Secretaries and Governance Professionals,
and The Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW).


                                            Page 42

=== PAGE 43 ===
differences in the overall approach. Some commenters that were supportive of the

principles-based approach to the proposed interpretive guidance expressed concern that

improvements in the efficiency of management’s evaluation of ICFR would be limited by

what they viewed as comparatively more prescriptive guidance for external auditors in

the Proposed Auditing Standard. 59 Other commenters suggested that maximizing their

auditor’s ability to rely on the work performed in management’s evaluation would require

aligning the evaluation approach for management with the Proposed Auditing Standard. 60

Even so, some of these commenters still viewed the interpretive guidance as an

improvement because it provides management the ability to choose whether, and to what

extent, it should align its evaluation with the auditing standard; whereas commenters said

that management feels compelled to align with the auditing standard under the current

rules. Other commenters suggested that the proposed interpretive guidance was

compatible with the Proposed Auditing Standard and that improvements in

implementation could be attained with close coordination between management and

auditors. 61

          In response to the comment letters, we have revised our proposal to more closely

align it with how we anticipate the PCAOB will revise its proposed auditing standard.

For example, the definition of a material weakness and the related guidance for




59
  See, for example, letters from Eli Lilly and Company (Eli Lilly), FEI CCR, Hutchinson
Technology Inc. (Hutchinson), Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA), MetLife
Inc. (MetLife), Procter & Gamble Company (P&G), and Supervalu Inc. (Supervalu).
60
     See, for example, letters from Heritage Financial Corporation and Southern Company.
61
  See, for example, letters from BDO Seidman LLP (BDO), McGladrey & Pullen LLP (M&P),
and PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (PwC).


                                             Page 43

=== PAGE 44 ===
evaluating deficiencies, including indicators of a material weakness, have been revised. 62

In addition, alignment revisions were made to the guidance for evaluating whether

controls adequately address financial reporting risks, including entity-level controls, the

factors to consider when identifying financial reporting risks and the factors for assessing

the risk associated with individual financial reporting elements and controls.

        However, some differences between our final interpretive guidance for

management and the PCAOB’s audit standard remain. These differences are not

necessarily contradictions or misalignment; rather they reflect the fact that management

and the auditor have different roles and responsibilities with respect to evaluating and

auditing ICFR. Management is responsible for designing and maintaining ICFR and

performing an evaluation annually that provides it with a reasonable basis for its

assessment as to whether ICFR is effective as of fiscal year-end. Management's daily

involvement with its internal control system provides it with knowledge and information

that may influence its judgments about how best to conduct the evaluation and the

sufficiency of evidence it needs to assess the effectiveness of ICFR. In contrast, the

auditor is responsible for conducting an independent audit that includes appropriate

professional skepticism. Moreover, the audit of ICFR is integrated with the audit of the

company’s financial statements. While there is a close relationship between the work

performed by management and its auditor, the ICFR audit will not necessarily be limited

to the nature and extent of procedures management has already performed as part of its

evaluation of ICFR. There will be differences in the approaches used by management

and the auditor because the auditor does not have the same information and

62
  The revisions made to the proposed definition of material weakness and the related guidance,
including the strong indicators, are discussed in Section III.F. of this document.


                                            Page 44

=== PAGE 45 ===
understanding as management and because the auditor will need to integrate its tests of

ICFR with the financial statement audit. We agree with those commenters that suggested

coordination between management and auditors on their respective efforts will ensure

that both the evaluation by management and the independent audit are completed in an

efficient and effective manner.

B. Principles-based Nature of Guidance for Conducting the Evaluation

          The guidance is intended to assist management in complying with two broad

principles: (1) evaluate whether controls have been implemented to adequately address

the risk that a material misstatement of the financial statements would not be prevented or

detected in a timely manner and (2) evaluate evidence about the operation of controls

based on an assessment of risk. We believe the guidance will enable companies of all

sizes and complexities to comply with our rules effectively and efficiently.

          Commenters expressed support for the proposed guidance’s principles-based

approach. 63 However, some requested that the proposal be revised to include additional

guidance and illustrative examples in the following areas: 64

               •   the identification of controls that address financial reporting risks; 65

               •   the assessment of ICFR risk, including how evidence gained over prior

                   periods should impact management’s assessment of risks associated with



63
  See, for example, letters from ACE Limited (ACE), American Electric Power Company, Inc.
(AEP), Business Roundtable (BR), Canadian Bankers Association, Center for Audit Quality
(Center), Ernst & Young LLP (EY), Grant Thornton LLP (GT), ING Groep N.V. (ING),
Manulife Financial (Manulife), PwC, P&G, and Reznick Group, P.C. (Reznick).
64
  See, for example, letters from Brown-Forman, Ford Motor Company, MasterCard Incorporated
(MasterCard), Northrop Grumman Corporation, Supervalu, UFP Technologies (UFP), and
UnumProvident Corporation (UnumProvident).
65
     See, for example, letter from Nina Stofberg (N. Stofberg).


                                               Page 45

=== PAGE 46 ===
                  controls identified and therefore, the evidence needed to support its

                  assessment; 66

              •   how varying levels of risk impact the nature of the evidence necessary to

                  support its assessment; 67

              •   when on-going monitoring activities, including self-assessments, could be

                  used to support management’s assessment and reduce direct testing; 68

              •   sampling techniques, sample sizes, and testing methods; 69

              •   the type and manner in which supporting evidence should be

                  maintained; 70 including specific guidelines regarding the amount, form

                  and medium of evidence; 71 and

              •   how management should document the effectiveness of monitoring

                  activities utilized to support its assessment, as well as how management

                  should support the evidence obtained from its daily interaction with

                  controls as part of its assessment. 72


66
 See, for example, letters from ISACA and IT Governance Institute (ISACA), Manulife, and
Ohio Society of Certified Public Accountants (Ohio).
67
 See, for example, letters from Cardinal Health, Inc. (Cardinal), Cleary Gottlieb Steen &
Hamilton LLP (Cleary), and ISACA.
68
  See, for example, letters from BASF Aktiengesellschaft (BASF), Cardinal, Computer Sciences
Corporation (CSC), ING, ISACA, Ohio, PPL Corporation (PPL), R. Malcolm Schwartz, N.
Stofberg, and UnumProvident.
69
  See, for example, letters from BDO, National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts,
Reznick, and UFP.
70
  See, for example, letters from AEP, BDO, Center, EEI, Frank Consulting, PLLP (Frank), The
Hundred Group of Finance Directors (100 Group), Institut Der Wirtschaftsprufer [Institute of
Public Auditors in Germany] (IDW), Managed Funds Association (MFA), Nasdaq Stock Market,
Inc. (Nasdaq), Ohio, N. Stofberg, and UFP.
71
     See, for example, letter from Nasdaq.
72
     See, for example, letters from BDO and Center.


                                               Page 46

=== PAGE 47 ===
        We have considered the requests for additional guidance and decided to retain the

principles-based nature of the proposed guidance. We believe an evaluation of ICFR will

be most effective and efficient when management makes use of all available facts and

information to make reasonable judgments about the evaluation methods and procedures

that are necessary to have a reasonable basis for the assessment of the effectiveness of

ICFR and the evidential matter maintained in support of the assessment. Additional

guidance and examples in the areas requested would likely have the negative

consequence of establishing “bright line” or “one-size fits all” evaluation approaches.

Such an outcome would be contrary to our view that the evaluations must be tailored to a

company’s individual facts and circumstances to be both effective and efficient.

Moreover, an evaluation by management that is focused on compliance with detailed

guidance, rather than the risks to the reliability of its financial reporting, would likely

lead to evaluations that are inefficient, ineffective or both.

        Detailed guidance and examples from the Commission may also limit or hinder

the natural evolution and further development of control frameworks and evaluation

methodologies as technology, control systems, and financial reporting evolve. As we

have previously stated, the Commission supports and encourages the further development

of control frameworks and related implementation guidance. For example, the July 2006

small business guidance issued by COSO addresses the identification of financial

reporting risks and the related controls. Additionally, we note that COSO is currently

working on a project to further define how the effectiveness of control systems can be




                                           Page 47

=== PAGE 48 ===
monitored. 73 As such, companies may find that there are other sources for the additional

guidance in the areas they are seeking.

          Commenters also expressed the view that companies may abuse the flexibility

afforded by the proposed principles-based guidance to perform inadequate evaluations,

thereby undermining the intended investor protection benefits. 74 Other commenters have

observed that material weakness disclosures to investors are too often simultaneous with,

rather than in advance of, the restatement of financial statements, which undermines the

usefulness of the disclosures. 75 In response to these comments, we note that this

principles-based guidance enables management to tailor its evaluation so that it focuses

on those areas of financial reporting that pose the highest risk to reliable financial

reporting. We believe that a tailored evaluation approach that focuses resources on areas

of highest risk will improve, rather than degrade, the effectiveness of many company’s

evaluations and improve the timeliness of material weakness disclosures to investors.

C. Scalability and Small Business Considerations

          Commenters believed that the proposed interpretive guidance can be scaled to

companies of all sizes and will benefit smaller public companies in completing their




73
   In a press release on January 8, 2007, COSO announced that Grant Thornton LLP had been
commissioned to develop guidance to help organizations monitor the quality of their internal
control systems. According to that press release, the guidance will serve as a tool for effectively
monitoring internal controls while complying with Sarbanes-Oxley. The press release is
available at
http://www.coso.org/Publications/COSO%20Monitoring%20GT%20Final%20Release_1.8.07.pd
f.
74
 See, for example, letters from Joseph V. Carcello, Consumer Federation of America, Consumer
Action, U.S. Public Interest Research Group (CFA), and Moody’s Investors Service (Moody’s).
75
     See, for example, letters from CFA and Moody’s.


                                             Page 48

=== PAGE 49 ===
assessments. 76 However, some commenters requested more guidance to enable them to

conduct the evaluation in an effective and efficient manner. For example, commenters

requested more guidance on how some of the unique characteristics of smaller

companies, including a lack of segregation of duties, should be considered in the

evaluation. 77

        Other commenters, mostly comprised of investor groups, requested that the

guidance emphasize that scaled or tailored evaluation methods and procedures for smaller

public companies should be based on both the size and complexity of the business and do

not imply less rigorous evaluation methods and procedures. 78

        Some commenters indicated that smaller public companies should continue to be

exempt at least until a thorough examination is conducted of both the Interpretive

Guidance and the new Auditing Standard to ensure that smaller companies are not

disproportionately burdened. 79 Some commenters requested that the SEC further delay



76
 See, for example, letters from American Bankers Association (American Bankers), Anthony S.
Chan, Chandler (U.S.A.), Inc. (Chandler), CNB Corporation & Citizens National Bank of
Cheboygan (CNB), Financial Services Forum, GT, Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce,
Minn-Dak Farmers Cooperative (MDFC), RAM Energy Resources, Inc., and San Jose Water
Company.
77
  See, for example, letters from American Electronics Association (AeA), EY, Financial
Executives International Small Public Company Task Force (FEI SPCTF), Frank, Institute of
Management Accountants (IMA), MFA, U.S. Chamber of Commerce (Chamber), and U.S. Small
Business Administration’s Office of Advocacy (SBA).
78
  See, for example, letters from California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS),
CFA, Council of Institutional Investors, Ethics Resource Center, International Brotherhood of
Teamsters, and Pension Reserves Investment Management Board (PRIMB).
79
  See, for example, letters from AeA, Biotechnology Industry Organization, Committee on
Capital Markets Regulation (CCMR), Financial Reporting Committee of the Association of the
Bar of the City of New York (NYC Bar), International Association of Small Broker Dealers and
Advisers, National Venture Capital Association, SBA, Silicon Valley Leadership Group (SVLG),
Small Business Entrepreneurship Council, TechNet, and Telecommunications Industry
Association.


                                            Page 49

=== PAGE 50 ===
the implementation for one additional year80 or continued to call for a complete

exemption from Section 404 for smaller public companies. 81 Other commenters

requested that smaller public companies not be exempted. 82

          We believe the principles-based guidance permits flexible and scalable evaluation

approaches that will enable management of smaller public companies to evaluate and

assess the effectiveness of ICFR without undue cost burdens. The guidance recognizes

that internal control systems and the methods and procedures necessary to evaluate their

effectiveness may be different in smaller public companies than in larger companies.

However, the flexibility provided in the guidance is not meant to imply that evaluations

for smaller public companies be conducted with less rigor, or to provide anything less

than reasonable assurance as to the effectiveness of ICFR at such companies. Rather,

smaller public companies should utilize the flexibility provided in the guidance to cost-

effectively tailor and scale their methods and approaches for identifying and documenting

financial reporting risks and the related controls and for evaluating whether operation of

controls is effective (for example, by utilizing evidence gathered through management’s

daily interaction with its controls), so that they provide the evidence needed to assess

whether ICFR is effective.

          In addition, as previously mentioned, companies may find that there are other

sources for guidance, such as the July 2006 guidance for applying the COSO framework

to smaller public companies. We believe our guidance, when used in conjunction with
80
 See, for example, letters from American Bankers, America’s Community Bankers, Chandler,
CNB, FEI SPCTF, F. Gorrell, ICBA, MFA, and Washington Legal Foundation (WLF).
81
     See, for example, letters from American Stock Exchange, ICBA, UFP, and WLF.
82
  See, for example, letters from American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial
Organizations (AFL-CIO), CalPERS, Frank, F. Gorrell, PRIMB, and WithumSmith+Brown
Global Assurance, LLC.


                                            Page 50

=== PAGE 51 ===
other such guidance, will enable smaller public companies to have a better understanding

of the requirements of a control framework, its role in effective internal control systems

and the relationship to our evaluation and disclosure requirements. This should enable

management to plan and conduct its evaluation in an effective and efficient manner.

       The Commission believes that compliance with the ICFR evaluation and

assessment requirements by smaller public companies will further the primary goal of

Sarbanes-Oxley which is to enhance the quality of financial reporting and increase

investor confidence in the fairness and integrity of the securities markets. We note that

all financial statements filed with the Commission, even those by smaller public

companies, result from a system of internal controls. Such systems are required by the

FCPA to operate at a level that provides “reasonable assurance” about the reliability of

financial reporting. Our rules implementing Section 404 direct management of all

companies to evaluate and assess whether the company’s system of internal controls is

effective at achieving reasonable assurance. Our guidance is intended to help them do so

in a cost-effective manner. Given the principles-based nature of our guidance and the

flexibility it provides, we do not believe further postponement of the evaluation

requirements are needed for smaller companies. We believe that the timing of the

issuance of the Interpretive Guidance is adequate to allow for its effective

implementation in 2007 evaluations.

D. Identifying Financial Reporting Risks and Controls

       1. Summary of the Proposal

       The proposal directed management to consider the sources and potential

likelihood of misstatements, including those arising from fraudulent activity, and identify




                                          Page 51

=== PAGE 52 ===
those that could result in a material misstatement of the financial statements (that is,

financial reporting risks). The proposal indicated that management’s consideration of the

risk of misstatement generally includes all of its locations or business units and that the

methods and procedures for identifying financial reporting risks will vary based on the

characteristics of the individual company. The proposal discussed factors for

management to consider in selecting methods and procedures for evaluating financial

reporting risks and in identifying the sources and potential likelihood of misstatement.

       The proposal directed management to evaluate whether controls were placed in

operation to adequately address the financial reporting risks it identifies. The proposal

indicated that controls were not adequate when their design was such that there was a

reasonable possibility that a misstatement in a financial reporting element that could

result in a material misstatement of the financial statements would not be prevented or

detected in a timely manner. The proposal discussed the fact that some controls may be

automated or may depend upon IT functionality. In these situations, the proposal stated

that management’s evaluation should consider not only the design and operation of the

automated or IT dependent controls, but also the aspects of IT general controls necessary

to adequately address financial reporting risks.

       The proposal also indicated that entity-level controls should be considered when

identifying financial reporting risks and related controls for a financial reporting element.

The proposal discussed the nature of entity-level controls, how they relate to a financial

reporting element and the need to consider whether they would prevent or detect material

misstatements. If a financial reporting risk for a financial reporting element is adequately

addressed by an entity-level control, the proposal indicated that no further controls




                                          Page 52

=== PAGE 53 ===
needed to be identified and tested by management for purposes of the evaluation of

ICFR.

          2. Comments on the Proposal and Revisions Made

          The Commission received a number of comments on the proposed guidance for

identifying financial reporting risks and controls. As discussed in Section III.B above,

many of these commenters requested more examples or more detailed guidance. Other

comments received related to the identification of fraud risks and related controls; entity-

level controls; and IT general controls.

          Identification of fraud risks and related controls

          Commenters suggested the guidance be revised to more strongly emphasize

management’s responsibility to identify and evaluate fraud risks and the related controls

that address those risks. 83 Commenters also discussed the nature of fraud risks that most

often lead to materially misstated financial statements and requested additional guidance

regarding which fraud related controls are within the scope of the evaluation; 84 whether

management can consider the risk of fraud through the overall risk assessment or if a

specific fraud threat analysis is required; 85 and examples of the types of fraud that should

be considered. 86 Other commenters noted that there is existing guidance for

management, beyond what was referenced in the proposal, for assessing fraud risks and




83
  See, for example, letters from ACE, ACCA, BDO, Center, CSC, Deloitte & Touche LLP
(Deloitte), GT, IMA, KPMG LLP (KPMG), M&P, Moody’s, and PwC.
84
     See, for example, letters from BASF, BDO, and GT.
85
     See, for example, letter from Tatum LLC (Tatum).
86
     See, for example, letters from FEI CCR, P&G, and N. Stofberg.


                                             Page 53

=== PAGE 54 ===
the related controls. These commenters suggested that the proposal be revised to directly

incorporate the most relevant elements of such guidance. 87

          In response to the comments, the proposal was revised to clarify that fraud risks

are expected to exist at every company and that the nature and extent of the fraud risk

assessment activities should be commensurate with the size and complexity of the

company. Additionally, we expanded the references to existing guidance to include the

AICPA’s 2005 Management Override of Internal Controls: The Achilles’ Heel of Fraud

Prevention and COSO’s July 2006 Guidance for Smaller Public Companies. Given the

availability of existing information and guidance on fraud and consistent with the

principles-based nature of the interpretive guidance, we determined that it was

unnecessary to provide a list of fraud risks expected to be present at every company or a

list of the areas of financial reporting expected to have a risk of material misstatement

due to fraud. Moreover, providing such a list may result in a “checklist” type approach to

fraud risk assessments that would likely be ineffective as financial reporting changes over

time, or given the wide variety of facts and circumstances that exist in different

companies and industries. While management may find such checklists a useful starting

point, effective fraud risk assessments will require sound and thoughtful judgments that

reflect a company’s individual facts and circumstances.

          Entity-Level Controls

          Commenters requested further clarification of how entity-level controls can

address financial reporting risks in a top-down, risk based approach. 88 Commenters also



87
     See, for example, letters from Center, GT, KPMG, and M&P.
88
     See, for example, letters from EY, Frank, MetLife, and UnumProvident.


                                             Page 54

=== PAGE 55 ===
suggested that the guidance place more emphasis on entity-level controls given their

pervasive impact on all other aspects of ICFR. 89

       In response to the comments received, we expanded the discussion of entity-level

controls and how they relate to financial reporting elements. This discussion further

clarifies that some entity-level controls, such as controls within the control environment,

have an important, but indirect, effect on the likelihood that a misstatement will be

prevented or detected on a timely basis. While these controls might affect the other

controls management determines are necessary to address financial reporting risks for a

financial reporting element, it is unlikely management will identify only this type of

entity-level control as adequately addressing a financial reporting risk. Further, the

guidance clarifies that some entity-level controls may be designed to identify possible

breakdowns in lower-level controls, but not in a manner that would, by themselves,

adequately address financial reporting risks. In these cases, management would identify

the additional controls needed to adequately address financial reporting risks, which may

include those that operate at the transaction or account balance level. Consistent with

the proposal, management does not need to identify or evaluate additional controls

relating to a financial reporting risk if it determines that the risk is being adequately

addressed by an entity-level control.

          We have also revised the proposed guidance to further clarify that the controls

management identifies in Section II.A.1 should include the entity-level and pervasive

elements of its ICFR that are necessary to have a system of internal control that provides

reasonable assurance as to the reliability of financial reporting. Management can use the

89
 See, for example, letters from ACCA, ACE, Eli Lilly, European Association of Listed
Companies (EALIC), and PwC.


                                          Page 55

=== PAGE 56 ===
existing control frameworks and related guidance to assist them in evaluating the

adequacy of these aspects of their ICFR.

          Information Technology General Controls

          Commenters expressed concern that the proposal’s guidance on IT general

controls was too vague or that it lacked sufficient clarity 90 and requested further guidance

and illustrative examples 91 to clarify the extent to which IT general controls are within

the scope of the ICFR evaluation. 92 Commenters also suggested that the Commission

directly incorporate the May 16, 2005 Staff Guidance 93 on IT general controls 94 and that

we clarify that IT general controls alone, without consideration of application controls,

will not sufficiently address the risk of material misstatement. 95 One commenter noted

that providing such guidance could have the unintended consequence of setting a

precedent for providing more detailed guidance in other areas of the evaluation. 96

          Commenters also suggested that we revise the proposal to clarify how a top-down

approach considers IT general controls, 97 that we encourage a “benchmarking” approach

for evaluating automated controls, 98 and that we permit companies who implement IT



90
     See, for example, letters from Aerospace Industries Association, MasterCard, and Nasdaq.
91
     See, for example, letter from Microsoft Corporation (MSFT).
92
 See, for example, letters from Faisal Danka, ISACA, MSFT, Rod Scott, and The Travelers
Companies, Inc. (Travelers).
93
  Division of Corporation Finance and Office of the Chief Accountant: Staff Statement on
Management’s Report on Internal Control Financial Reporting (May 16, 2005), available at
http://www.sec.gov/spotlight/soxcom/.htm.
94
     See, for example, letters from FEI CCR and P&G.
95
     See, for example, letter from IDW.
96
     See, for example, letter from ICAEW.
97
     See, for example, letters from Cardinal and ISACA.
98
     See, for example, letter from CSC.


                                              Page 56

=== PAGE 57 ===
systems late in the year to do so while still being able to satisfy their ICFR

responsibilities. 99

          We made several revisions to the proposed guidance based on the comment

letters. We revised the proposal to explain that the identification of risks and controls

within IT should be integral to, and not separate from, management’s top-down, risk-

based approach to evaluating ICFR and in determining the necessary supporting

evidential matter. We clarified that controls which address financial reporting risks may

be automated, dependent upon IT functionality, or require a combination of both manual

and automated procedures and that IT general controls alone, without consideration of

application controls, ordinarily do not adequately address financial reporting risks. We

also incorporated guidance from the May 16, 2005 Staff Statement which explains that it

is unnecessary to evaluate IT general controls that primarily pertain to efficiency or

effectiveness of operations, but which are not relevant to addressing financial reporting

risks.

          We have declined to further specify categories or areas of IT general controls that

will be relevant to the ICFR evaluation for all companies. We continue to believe that

such determinations require consideration of each company’s individual facts and

circumstances. Moreover, we have concluded it is not necessary to include a discussion

of a “benchmarking” approach to evaluating automated controls. The lack of such

discussion in our guidance does not preclude management from taking such an approach

if they believe it to be both efficient and effective.




99
     See, for example, letter from Chamber.


                                              Page 57

=== PAGE 58 ===
       Additionally, we did not revise the proposed guidance to discuss implementation

of IT systems, or changes thereto, late in the year because we do not believe such

decisions should be impacted by the requirement to evaluate and assess the effectiveness

of ICFR. Even without the evaluation and assessment requirements, the implementation

of an IT system late in the year does not change management’s responsibility to maintain

a system of internal control that provides reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of

financial reporting. Allowing an exclusion from the evaluation for controls placed in

operation late in the year could have the unintended consequence of negatively impacting

the reliability of financial reporting. Management has the ability to mitigate the risk of

material misstatement that arises from ineffective controls in a new IT system. For

example, management may perform pre-implementation testing of the IT controls needed

to adequately address financial reporting risks. Additionally, management may

implement compensating controls, such as manual reconciliations and verification, until

such time that management has concluded that the IT controls within the system are

adequate. Accordingly, we do not believe it is necessary or appropriate to exclude new

IT systems or changes to existing systems from the scope of the evaluation of ICFR.

E. Evaluating Evidence of the Operating Effectiveness of ICFR

       1. Summary of the Proposal

       Our proposal indicated that management should consider both the risk

characteristics of the financial reporting elements to which the controls relate and the risk

characteristics of the controls themselves (collectively, ICFR risk) in making judgments

about the nature and extent of evidence necessary to provide a reasonable basis for the

assessment of whether the operation of controls is effective. The proposal identified




                                          Page 58

=== PAGE 59 ===
significant accounting estimates, related party transactions and critical accounting

policies as examples of financial reporting areas that generally would be assessed as

having a higher risk of misstatement and control failure. However, the proposed

guidance recognizes that since not all controls have the same risk characteristics, when a

combination of controls is required to adequately address the risks to a financial reporting

element, management should analyze the risk characteristics of each control separately.

Further, under the proposed guidance, when evaluating risks in multi-location

environments, management should generally consider the risk characteristics of the

controls related to each financial reporting element, rather than making a single judgment

for all controls at a particular location when determining the sufficiency of evidence to

support its assessment.

       Our proposal indicated that the evidence of the operation of controls that

management evaluates may come from a combination of on-going monitoring and direct

testing and that management should vary the nature, timing and extent of these based on

its assessment of the ICFR risk. Our proposal stated that this evidence would ordinarily

cover a reasonable period of time during the year and include the fiscal year-end. The

proposal also acknowledged that, in smaller companies, those responsible for assessing

the effectiveness of ICFR may, through their on-going direct knowledge and supervision

of the operation of controls (that is, daily interaction) have a reasonable basis to evaluate

the effectiveness of some controls without performing direct tests specifically for

purposes of the evaluation.

       The proposal explained that the evidential matter constituting reasonable support

for the assessment would generally include the basis for management’s assessment and




                                           Page 59

=== PAGE 60 ===
documentation of the evaluation methods and procedures for gathering and evaluating

evidence. Additionally, the proposal indicated that the nature of the supporting evidential

matter, including documentation, may take many forms and may vary based on

management’s assessment of ICFR risk. For example, management may determine that it

is not necessary to maintain separate copies of the evidence evaluated if such evidence

already exists in the company’s books and records. The proposal also indicates that as

the degree of complexity of the control, the level of judgment required to operate the

control, and the risk of misstatement in the financial reporting element increase,

management may determine that separate evidential matter supporting a control’s

operation should be maintained.

       2. Comments on the Proposal and Revisions Made

       The Commission received a number of comments on the proposed guidance for

evaluating whether the operation of controls was effective. As discussed in Section III.B

above, many of these commenters requested more examples or more detailed guidance.

Other comments received related to the appropriateness of various “rotational”

approaches to evaluating evidence of whether the operation of controls was effective; the

nature of on-going monitoring activities, including self-assessments and daily interaction;

the time period to be covered by evaluation procedures; and supporting evidential matter.

       Rotational Approaches to Evaluating Evidence

       Commenters requested that the guidance explicitly allow management to rotate its

evaluation of evidence of the operation of controls and a variety of different approaches

for doing so were suggested. These approaches included, for example, a rotational




                                          Page 60

=== PAGE 61 ===
approach for lower risk controls, 100 a rotational approach in areas where management

determines there are no changes in the controls since the previous assessment, 101 or a

rotational approach where there is both lower risk and no changes in controls. 102 In

addition, some suggested a “benchmarking” approach, similar to that used for IT

controls, be allowed for non-IT controls. 103 Other commenters agreed with the

proposal’s requirement that management consider evidence of the operation of controls

each year. 104 Others noted that while they believed it is appropriate for management to

consider the results of its prior year assessments, the guidance should make it clear that

the evaluation of operating effectiveness is an annual requirement. 105

           Other commenters raised the issue of a rotational approach specific to multi-

location considerations. For example, commenters suggested that the guidance allow for

rotation of locations based upon risk (for example, once every three years). 106 However,

some commenters suggested that the risk-based approach provided in the proposed

guidance would appropriately allow companies to vary testing in locations based more on

risk than coverage, which would improve the efficiency of their assessment. 107

           After considering the comments, the Commission has retained the guidance

substantially as proposed. We did not introduce a concept that allows management to


100
      See, for example, letters from CSC, EALIC, ING, MasterCard, and NYC Bar.
101
      See, for example, letters from P&G and Travelers.
102
      See, for example, letters from EEI and Supervalu.
103
      See, for example, letters from Eli Lilly and FEI CCR.
104
      See, for example, letters from CCMR, Deloitte, and KPMG.
105
      See, for example, letters from AFL-CIO, Center, CFA, Deloitte, and PwC.
106
      See, for example, letter from CSC.
107
  See, for example, letters from MSFT, New York State Society of Certified Public
Accountants, and Plains Exploration & Production Company.


                                               Page 61

=== PAGE 62 ===
eliminate from its annual evaluation those controls that are necessary to adequately

address financial reporting risks. For example, management cannot decide to include

controls for a particular location or process within the scope of its evaluation only once

every three years or exclude controls from the scope of its evaluation based on prior year

evaluation results. To have a reasonable basis for its assessment of the effectiveness of

ICFR, management must have sufficient evidence supporting the operating effectiveness

of all aspects of its ICFR as of the date of its assessment. The guidance provides a

framework to assist management in making judgments regarding the nature, timing and

extent of evidence needed to support its assessment. Management can use this

framework to scale its evaluation methods and procedures in response to the risks

associated with both the financial reporting elements and related controls in its particular

facts and circumstances.

       However, the guidance has been clarified to reflect that management’s experience

with a control’s operation both during the year and as part of its prior year assessment(s)

may influence its decisions regarding the risk that controls will fail to operate as

designed. This, in turn, may have a corresponding impact on the evidence needed to

support management’s conclusion that controls operated effectively as of the date of

management’s assessment.

        Nature of On-Going Monitoring Activities

       Commenters expressed concern that, as defined in the proposal, some on-going

monitoring activities would not be deemed to provide sufficient evidence. 108 Other

commenters were concerned that the guidance placed too much emphasis on the amount

108
  See, for example, letters from BASF and Cees Klumper & Matthew Shepherd (C. Klumper &
M. Shepherd).


                                          Page 62

=== PAGE 63 ===
of evidence that could be obtained from on-going monitoring activities and called for

further examples of when they may provide sufficient evidence and when direct testing

would be required. 109 With regard to self-assessments, commenters suggested that self-

assessments can be an integral source of evidence when their effective operation is

verified by direct testing over varying periods of time based on the manner in which the

self-assessments were conducted and on the level of risk associated with the controls. 110

Other commenters requested the proposed guidance be revised to clarify how, based on

the definitions provided, self-assessments differed from direct testing. 111

           Some commenters questioned the sufficiency of evidence that would result from

management’s daily interaction with controls and requested more specifics on when it

would be appropriate as a source of evidence 112 and how management should

demonstrate that its daily interaction with controls provided it with sufficient evidence to

have a reasonable basis to assess whether the operation of controls was effective. 113

           Based on the feedback received, we modified the discussion of on-going

monitoring activities, including self-assessments, and direct testing to clarify how the

evidence obtained from each of the activities can vary. As commenters in this area noted,

on-going monitoring, including self-assessments, encompasses a wide array of activities

that can be performed by a variety of individuals within an organization. These

individuals have varying degrees of objectivity, ranging from internal auditors to the

personnel involved in business processes, and can include both those responsible for

109
      See, for example, letters from Center and EY.
110
      See, for example, letters from GT and C. Klumper & M. Shepherd.
111
      See, for example, letter from Cardinal.
112
      See, for example, letters from BDO, EY, Ohio, and Tatum.
113
      See, for example, letter from Ohio.


                                                Page 63

=== PAGE 64 ===
executing a control as well as those responsible for overseeing its effective operation.

Because of the varying degrees of objectivity, the sufficiency of the evidence

management obtains from on-going monitoring activities is determined by the nature of

the activities (that is, what they entail and how they are performed).

       We clarified the proposed guidance to indicate that when evaluating the

objectivity of personnel, management is not required to make an absolute conclusion

regarding objectivity, but rather should recognize that personnel will have varying

degrees of objectivity based on, among other things, their job function, their relationship

to the control being evaluated, and their level of authority and responsibility within the

organization. Management should consider the ICFR risk of the controls when

determining whether the objectivity of the personnel involved in the monitoring activities

results in sufficient evidence. For example, for areas of high ICFR risk, management’s

on-going monitoring activities may provide sufficient evidence when the monitoring

activities are carried out by individuals with a high degree of objectivity. However, when

management’s support includes evidence obtained from activities performed by

individuals who are not highly objective, management would ordinarily supplement the

evidence with some degree of direct testing by individuals who are independent from the

operation of the control to corroborate the information from the monitoring activity.

       With regard to requests for more guidance related to management’s daily

interaction, we have adopted the guidance substantially as proposed. We believe that in

smaller companies, management’s daily interaction with the operation of controls may

provide it with sufficient evidence to assess whether controls are operating effectively.

The guidance is not intended to limit management’s flexibility with regard to the areas of




                                          Page 64

=== PAGE 65 ===
ICFR where its interaction can provide it with sufficient evidence or the manner by which

management obtains knowledge of the operation of the controls. However, as noted in

the guidance, daily interaction as a source of evidence for the operation of controls

applies to management who are responsible for assessing the effectiveness of ICFR and

whose knowledge about the effective operation is gained from its on-going direct

knowledge and direct supervision of controls. In addition, the evidence management

maintains in support of its assessment should include the design of the controls that

adequately address the financial reporting risks as well as how its interaction provides an

adequate basis for its assessment of the effectiveness of ICFR.

        Time Period Covered by Evaluation Procedures

        Commenters requested that the guidance allow for, and encourage, management

to gather evidence throughout the year to support its assessment in lieu of having to

gather some evidence close to or as-of year-end. 114 These commenters believed that such

guidance would encourage companies to better integrate their evaluation procedures into

the normal activities of their daily operations, spread the effort more evenly throughout

the year, and help reduce the strain on resources at year-end when company personnel are

preparing the annual financial statements and complying with other financial reporting

activities.

        We agree with the comments received in this area with respect to allowing

management the flexibility to gather evidence in support of its assessment during the

year. Since management’s assessment is performed as of the end of its fiscal year-end,

the evidence management utilizes to support its assessment would ordinarily include a

114
   See, for example, letters from Eli Lilly, The Financial Services Roundtable, and Neenah Paper,
Inc.


                                            Page 65

=== PAGE 66 ===
reasonable period of time during the year, including some evidence as of the date of its

assessment. However, the proposal was not intended to limit management’s flexibility to

conduct its evaluation activities during the year. Rather, the proposed guidance was

intended to provide management with the ability to perform a variety of activities

covering periods of time that vary based on its assessment of risk in order to provide it

with a sufficient basis for its evaluation. This could include, for example, a strategy that

employs direct testing over a control during the year (but prior to year-end), that is

supplemented with a self-assessment activity at year-end. As a result, we have adopted

the guidance related to the period of time for which management should obtain evidence

of the operation of controls substantially as proposed.

          Supporting Evidential Matter

          Commenters expressed support for the guidance in the proposal related to the

supporting evidential matter and believed it would allow management to make better

judgments and allow for sufficient flexibility to vary the nature and extent of evidence

based on the company’s particular facts and circumstances. 115 Other commenters

observed that a certain level of documentation was required in order to facilitate an

efficient and effective audit and suggested the guidance explicitly state this fact and/or

clarify how the guidance for management was intended to interact with the requirements

provided to auditors. 116 One commenter requested that we clarify our intention related to




115
      See, for example, letters from BR, EY, Hudson Financial Solutions (HFS), and MSFT.
116
   See, for example, letters from Center, Deloitte, EY, GT, M&P, MetLife, MDFC, PwC, and N.
Stofberg.


                                             Page 66

=== PAGE 67 ===
the audit committee’s involvement in the review of evidential matter prepared by

management in support of its assessment. 117

          After consideration of the comments, we are adopting the guidance substantially

as proposed. We continue to believe that management should have considerable

flexibility as to the nature and extent of the documentation it maintains to support its

assessment, while at the same time maintaining sufficient evidence to provide reasonable

support for its assessment. Providing specific guidelines and detailed examples of

various types of documentation would potentially limit the flexibility we intended to

afford management.

          With respect to the concerns raised regarding the interaction of the proposed

guidance and the audit requirements, we determined that no changes were necessary.

Similar to an audit of the financial statements, the nature and extent of evidential matter

maintained by management may impact how an auditor conducts the audit and the

efficiency of the audit. We believe that the most efficient implementation by

management and the auditor is achieved when flexibility exists to determine the

appropriate manner by which to complete their respective tasks. However, we also

believe that the Proposed Auditing Standard allows auditors sufficient flexibility to

consider various types of evidence utilized by management. The audit standard allows

auditors to adjust their approach in certain circumstances, if necessary, so that audit

procedures should not place any undue burden or expense on management’s evaluation

process.




117
      See, for example, letter from ABA.


                                           Page 67

=== PAGE 68 ===
F. Evaluation of Control Deficiencies

       1. Summary of the Proposal

       The proposal directed management to evaluate each control deficiency that comes

to its attention in order to determine whether the deficiency, or combination of control

deficiencies, is a material weakness. The proposal defined a material weakness as a

deficiency, or combination of deficiencies, in ICFR such that there is a reasonable

possibility that a material misstatement of the company’s annual or interim financial

statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis by the company’s ICFR.

The proposal contained guidance on the aggregation of deficiencies by indicating that

multiple control deficiencies that affect the same financial reporting element increase the

likelihood of misstatement and may, in combination, constitute a material weakness, even

though such deficiencies may be individually insignificant. The proposal also

highlighted four circumstances that were strong indicators that a material weakness in

ICFR existed. In summary, the following four items were listed:

             •   An ineffective control environment, including identification of fraud of

                 any magnitude on the part of senior management; significant

                 deficiencies that remain unaddressed after some reasonable period of

                 time; and ineffective oversight by the audit committee (or entire board of

                 directors if no audit committee exists).

             •   Restatement of previously issued financial statements to reflect the

                 correction of a material misstatement.




                                         Page 68

=== PAGE 69 ===
                •   Identification by the auditor of a material misstatement of financial

                    statements in the current period under circumstances that indicate the

                    misstatement would not have been discovered by the company’s ICFR.

                •   For complex entities in highly regulated industries, an ineffective

                    regulatory compliance function.

          2. Comments on the Proposal and Revisions Made

          Definition of Material Weakness

          Commenters expressed concern about differences between our proposed

definition of material weakness and that proposed by the PCAOB in its Proposed

Auditing Standard and requested that the two definitions be aligned. 118 Commenters

provided feedback on the reasonably possible threshold for determining the likelihood of

a potential material misstatement as well as the reference to interim financial statements

for determining whether a potential misstatement could be material. Commenters also

suggested that a single definition of material weakness be established for use by both

auditors and management and that definition be established by the SEC in its rules. 119

Based on comments on the proposal, we are amending Exchange Act Rule 12b-2 and

Rule 1-02 of Regulation S-X to define the term material weakness. Further discussion

and analysis of the definition of material weakness and commenter feedback can be

found in that rule release. 120




118
      See, for example, letters from EEI, FEI CCR, FEI SPCTF, ICAEW, N. Stofberg, and SVLG.
119
      See, for example, letters from FEE and ICAEW.
120
      Release No. 34-55928.


                                            Page 69

=== PAGE 70 ===
           Strong Indicators of a Material Weakness

           Commenters noted there were differences in the list of strong indicators included

in the proposal and the list of strong indicators included in the Proposed Auditing

Standard, raising concern that the failure of the two proposals to provide similar guidance

would cause unnecessary confusion between management and auditors. 121 Commenters

also provided suggested changes, additions or deletions to circumstances that were

included on the list of strong indicators. For example, commenters raised questions about

the “identification of fraud of any magnitude on the part of senior management,”

questioning the appropriateness of the term “of any magnitude” or which individuals

were encompassed in the term “senior management.” 122 Commenters also felt the

Commission’s proposed list of indicators should be expanded to include the indicator

relating to an ineffective internal audit function or risk assessment function that was

included in the Proposed Auditing Standard. 123 One commenter felt that the list of strong

indicators needed to be made more specific, and should include more illustrative

examples. 124 Another commenter stated that the indicator of “significant deficiencies

that have been identified and remain unaddressed after some reasonable period of time”

should be clarified to mean unremediated deficiencies.125 Other commenters suggested

that the list of strong indicators be eliminated completely, stating that designating these

items as strong indicators creates a presumption that such items are, in fact, material

121
  See, for example, letters from BDO, BR, Center, Cleary, CSC, Deloitte, KPMG, M&P, and
Schneider Downs & Co., Inc. (Schneider).
122
      See, for example, letters from 100 Group, Eli Lilly, FEI CCR, and P&G.
123
 See, for example, letters from BR, Crowe Chizek & Company LLC (Crowe), Deloitte, and
M&P.
124
      See, for example, letter from Chamber.
125
      See, for example, letter from EEI.


                                               Page 70

=== PAGE 71 ===
weaknesses, and may impede the use of judgment to properly evaluate the identified

control deficiency in light of the individual facts and circumstances. 126 Commenters also

felt the Commission should clearly indicate that a company may determine that no

deficiency exists despite the fact that one of the identified strong indicators was

present. 127

           After consideration of the comments, we have decided to modify the proposed

guidance. We believe judgment is imperative in determining whether a deficiency is a

material weakness and that the guidance should encourage management to use that

judgment. As a result, we have modified the guidance to emphasize that the evaluation

of control deficiencies requires the consideration of all of the relevant facts and

circumstances. We agreed with the concerns that an overly detailed list may create a list

of de facto material weaknesses or inappropriately suggest that identified control

deficiencies not included in the list are of lesser importance. At the same time, however,

we continue to believe that highlighting certain circumstances that are indicative of a

material weakness provides practical information for management. As a result, rather

than referring to “strong indicators,” the final guidance refers simply to “indicators.”

This change should further emphasize that the presence of one of the indicators does not

mandate a conclusion that a material weakness exists. Rather management should apply

professional judgment in this area. These examples include indicators related to the

results of the financial statement audit, such as material audit adjustments and

restatements, and indicators related to the overall evaluation of the company’s oversight

of financial reporting, such as the effectiveness of the audit committee and incidences of

126
      See, for example, letters from Cleary, Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA), and NYC Bar.
127
      See, for example, letters from Chamber, Cleary, CSC, PPL, and Schneider.


                                                Page 71

=== PAGE 72 ===
fraud among senior management. These examples are by no means an exhaustive list.

For example, under COSO, risk assessment and monitoring are two of the five

components of an effective system of internal control. If management concludes that an

internal control component is not effective, or if required entity-level or pervasive

elements of ICFR are not effective, it is likely that internal control is not effective.

           Lastly, we agreed with commenters that it is appropriate for the Commission’s

guidance in this area to mirror the PCAOB’s auditing standard. As a result, we have

worked with the PCAOB in reaching conclusions regarding the guidance in this area, and

we anticipate the PCAOB’s auditing standard will align with our final management

guidance.

G. Management Reporting and Disclosure

           Comment letters expressed various viewpoints regarding the information

management provides as part of its report on the effectiveness of ICFR. For example,

commenters raised concerns regarding the “point in time” assessment and suggested

various alternative approaches. 128 Commenters also made suggestions regarding the

disclosures management provides when a material weakness has occurred. Certain

commenters felt the suggested disclosures indicated in the proposing release should be

mandatory, 129 while other commenters wanted the Commission to specify where in the

Form 10-K management must provide its disclosures. 130 Commenters also requested that




128
      See, for example, letters from BHP Billiton Limited, Eli Lilly, and IIA.
129
      See, for example, letters from HFS, IDW, and Tatum.
130
      See, for example, letters from Crowe and KPMG.


                                                Page 72

=== PAGE 73 ===
the Commission include in its release additional possible disclosures for consideration by

management to include in its report. 131

           In addition, commenters expressed concerns regarding the language in the

Proposing Release with respect to management’s ability to determine that ICFR is

ineffective due solely to, and only to the extent of, the identified material weakness(es).

Some commenters felt that this language was essentially the same as a qualified opinion,

which is prohibited by the guidance,132 while two others stated that the Commission

needed to provide additional guidance around the circumstances under which this

approach would be appropriate. 133

           Based on the feedback we received, we have eliminated this from the final

interpretive guidance and revised the proposed guidance to simply state that management

may not state that the company’s ICFR is effective. However, management may state

that controls are ineffective for specific reasons.

           Additionally, certain of the requests received seemed inconsistent with the

statutory obligation. For example, Section 404(a)(2) of Sarbanes-Oxley requires that

management perform the assessment as of the end of its most recent fiscal year. As a

result, we do not believe any further changes to the proposed guidance around

management’s expression of its assessment of the effectiveness of ICFR are necessary.




131
      See, for example, letters from PCG Worldwide Limited and PepsiCo, Inc. (Pepsi).
132
      See, for example, letters from BDO and CFA.
133
      See, for example, letters from Crowe and Deloitte.


                                               Page 73

=== PAGE 74 ===
H. Previous Staff Guidance and Staff Frequently Asked Questions

           Commenters raised questions regarding the status of guidance previously issued

by the Commission and its staff, on May 16, 2005, 134 as well as the Frequently Asked

Questions (“FAQs”). 135 Some commenters requested the FAQs be retained in their

entirety, 136 while others requested that some particular FAQs be retained. 137 As we

indicated in the proposed guidance, the May 2005 guidance remains relevant.

Additionally, we have instructed the staff to review the FAQs and, as a result of the final

issuance of this guidance, update them as appropriate.

I. Foreign Private Issuers

           The Commission received comments directed towards the information included in

the proposed guidance related to foreign private issuers. While three commenters noted

that no additional guidance for foreign private issuers was necessary,138 other

commenters suggested changes. Commenters raised concerns regarding potential

duplicative efforts and costs foreign registrants are subject to, as a result of similar

regulations in their local jurisdictions. 139 These commenters requested that the

Commission attempt to minimize or remove any duplicative requirements, with some

134
  Commission Statement on Implementation of Internal Control Reporting Requirements, Press
Release No. 2005-74 (May 16, 2005); Division of Corporation Finance and Office of the Chief
Accountant: Staff Statement on Management’s Report on Internal Control Financial Reporting
(May 16, 2005), available at http://www.sec.gov/spotlight/soxcom/.htm.
135
   Office of the Chief Accountant and Division of Corporation Finance: Management’s Report
on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and Certification of Disclosure in Exchange Act
Periodic Reports Frequently Asked Questions (revised Oct. 6, 2004), available at
http://www.sec.gov/info/accountants/controlfaq1004.htm.
136
      See, for example, letters from BP p.l.c. (BP), GT, IIA, ISACA, MSFT, and Tatum.
137
      See, for example, letters from BDO, EY, KPMG, and Stantec Inc.
138
      See, for example, letters from BP, Manulife, and Pepsi.
139
  See, for example, letters from 100 Group, Banco Itaú Holding Financeira SA, CCMR, Eric
Fandrich, and FEI CCR.


                                               Page 74

=== PAGE 75 ===
requesting the Commission exempt foreign registrants entirely from the ICFR reporting

requirements if the registrant was subject to similar regulations in their home country.

Other commenters raised concerns relating to the unique challenges that foreign

registrants face in evaluating their ICFR, including language and cultural differences and

international legal differences. 140

           Commenters also made suggestions regarding how the reconciliation to U.S.

GAAP should be handled in the evaluation of ICFR. Certain commenters expressed

support for the Commission’s position that foreign private issuers should scope their

evaluation effort based on the financial statements prepared in accordance with home

country GAAP, rather than based on the reconciliation to U.S. GAAP. 141 However, other

commenters requested that the Commission exempt the reconciliation to U.S. GAAP

from the scope of the evaluation altogether,142 while others sought further clarification as

to whether and how the reconciliation was included in the evaluation of ICFR, 143 with

one commenter suggesting the Commission staff publish additional Frequently Asked

Questions to address any implementation issues. 144 One commenter requested the

Commission exclude from the evaluation process those financial statement disclosures

that are required by home country GAAP but not under U.S. GAAP to minimize the

differences in the ICFR evaluation efforts between U.S. registrants and foreign filers as

much as possible. 145

140
      See, for example, letters from IIA and GT.
141
      See, for example, letters from 100 Group, BDO, and ICAEW.
142
      See, for example, letters from CCMR, Cleary, EALIC, and NYC Bar.
143
      See, for example, letters from Deloitte, EY, KPMG, and N. Stofberg.
144
      See, for example, letter from Ohio.
145
      See, for example, letter from ING.


                                               Page 75

=== PAGE 76 ===
        After considering the comments received, the Commission has determined not to

exempt foreign registrants from the ICFR reporting requirements, regardless of whether

they are subject to similar home country requirements. The Commission’s requirement

for all issuers to complete an evaluation of ICFR is not derived from the Commission’s

Interpretive Guidance for Management; this requirement has been established by

Congress. Further, the Commission does not believe it is appropriate to exclude the U.S.

GAAP reconciliation from the scope of the evaluation as long as it is a required element

of the financial statements. Currently, however, the Commission is evaluating, as part of

another project, the acceptance of International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”)

as published by the International Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”) without

reconciliation to U.S. GAAP. 146

        In light of the comment letters, the Commission realizes that there are certain

implementation concerns and issues that are unique to foreign private issuers. As a

result, the Commission has instructed the staff to consider whether these items should be

addressed in a Frequently Asked Questions document.




146
   In a press release on April 24, 2007, the Commission announced its next steps pertaining to
acceptance of IFRS without reconciliation to U.S. GAAP. In that press release, the Commission
stated that it anticipates issuing a Proposing Release in summer 2007 that will request comments
on proposed changes to the Commission’s rules which would allow the use of IFRS, as published
by the IASB, without reconciliation to U.S. GAAP in financial reports filed by foreign private
issuers that are registered with the Commission. The press release is available at
http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2007/2007-72.htm.


                                            Page 76

=== PAGE 77 ===
List of Subjects

17 CFR Part 241

        Securities.

TEXT OF AMENDMENTS

        For the reasons set out in the preamble, the Commission is amending Title 17,

chapter II, of the Code of Federal Regulations as follows:



PART 241 – INTERPRETATIVE RELEASES RELATING TO THE SECURITIES

EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 AND GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS

THEREUNDER

        Part 241 is amended by adding Release No. 34-55929 and the release date of June

20, 2007 to the list of interpretative releases.



        By the Commission.



                                                             Nancy M. Morris
                                                             Secretary

Dated: June 20, 2007




                                            Page 77
