
=== PAGE 1 ===
              Case 4:08-cv-00314     '   Document 1     Filed 01/28/2008        Page 1 of 16



                              UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                               SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF TEXAS
                                   HOUSTON DMSION



SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION, :
                        Plaintiff,
                                                             Civil Action No.

                                                             COMPLAINT
DAVID B.DUNCAN,

                        Defendant.


        Plaintiff Securities and Exchange Commission (L'Commission") for its Complaint alleges

as follows:

                                             SUMMARY

         1.      Enron Corp.'s ("Enron") senior executives engaged in and presided over a wide-

ranging scheme to defkaud the investing public by materially overstating tbc companyysearnings

and cash flows, and concealing debt in periodic reports filed with the Commission. The

fraudulent scheme was canied out through a variety of complex structured transactions, off-

balance sheet financings, related party transactions, misleading disclosures, and a widespread

abuse of generally accepted accounting principles CfGAAP"). .

        2.       Arthur Andersen LLP ("Andersen") served as Enron's auditor, and for each year

during the relevant time period, issued an auditor's report stating the opinion that Enron's

h n c i a l statem-   were presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with GAAP, and

that Andersen had conducted its audit of those financial statements in accordance with generally

accepted auditing standards ("GUS').        David B. Duncan ("Duncan") served as the global

=== PAGE 2 ===
                                                                             '    .      f   .




            Case 4:08-cv-OQ314 Document 1              Filed 01/28/2008          Page 2 of 16



engagement partner responsible for the Enron audits, As the global engagement partner for the

Enron audits, Duncan was ultimatelyresponsible for determiningwhether an unqualified opinion
should be issued within the auditor's report. For years ended December 31,1998 through 2000,

Duncan was reckless in not knowing that the unqualified auditor's reports he signed on behalf of

Andersen were materially false and misleading. These auditor's reports were part of Enron's

annual reports on Forms 10-K filed with the Comraission for yeas 1998,1999 and 2000. Based

on this, the Commission alleges that Duncan violated Section lo@) of the Securities Exchange

Act of 1934 ("Exchange Act") and Rule lob-5 promulgated thereunder. AccordingIy, the

Commission requests that this Court permanently enjoin Duncan fkom any future violation of

Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act and Rule lob-5 promulgated thereunder.

                                JURISDICTION AND VENUE

               The Court has jurisdiction over this action pursuant to Sections 21(d), 21(e), and

27 of the Exchange Act [I5 U.S.C.$8 78u(d) and (e) and 78aa].

       4.      Venue lies in this District pursuant to Section 27 of the Exchange Act [15 U.S.C.

5 78aaJbecause certain acts or transactions constituting the violations occurred in this District.
                                      DEFENDANT

       5.      David B. Duncan,age 48, resides in Houston, Texas. Duncan served as the global

engagement partner for Andersen's audits of Enrm fiom 1997 until December 2001. During the

relevant time period, Duncan was a certified public accountant licensed in the state of Texas. As

the global engagement partner, Duncan was the senior member of the Andersen engagement

team responsible for the Enron audits during each of the relevant periods.

=== PAGE 3 ===
             Case 4:08-cv-00314      Document 1       Filed 01/28/2008      Page 3 of 16




                                       OTHER ENTITIES

                 Enron was an Oregon corporation with its principal place of business in Houston,

Texas. lhuing the relevant time period, Enron's common stock was registered with the

Commission pursuant to Section 12@) of the Exchange Act and traded on the New York Stock

Exchange. Among other operations, E m was the nation's largest natural gas and electric

marketer, with reported annual revenue of more than $100 billion. In 2000, Enron rose to

number seven on the Fovhrne 500 list of public companies. By December 2,2001, when it filed

for bankruptcy, Enron's stock price had dropped over the course of a year h m more than $80

per share to less than $1.

        7.      Andenen once was one of the so-called "Big Five" so count in^ f m in the United

States and had its headquarters in Chicago, Illinois. Andasen personnel performed work for

Enron during the relevant time period in several cities, including Chicago, Houston,and ]London.

                                  F'ArnAL AILLEGATIONS

Enron IdenWied as a Maximum Risk Client

        8.      Duncan was aware that the risk of hudulent financial reporting at E m n was

high. In accordance with applicable professional standards, Andersen assessed the risk of fkaud

at Enron (AU9316, Cmideration of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit), and the engagement

team documented that E m n possessed many of the risk factorsthat should be considered in

making that assessment. For example, Fraud Risk Assessment questionnaires prepared by the

engagement team and reviewed by Duncan documented that Enron placed an "undue emphasis

on meeting earnings targets;" used "highly aggressive accounting .. .practices;" utilized

''unusual" &-end     transactions that posed difficult "substance over for: questions; possessed a

=== PAGE 4 ===
                                                                              r'   :

            Case 4:08-cv-00314        Document 1        Filed 01/28/2008     Page 4 of 16




"philosophy of significantly managing (maximizing or minimizing) earnings;" and had a "high

dependence on debt, difficulty in meeting debt payments or vulnerability to interest rate

changes." In addition, an internal Andersen document prepared each year by Duncan and others

on the engagement team consistently classified the E m n engagement as involving b'mmaxhum

risk" and noted that Enron's use of complex "form over substance" and related party transactions

created an "extreme" or '%very significant" financial reporting risk.

       9.        Because of the recognized risk and his position as global engagement partner,

Duncan was required by GAAS to design and implement auditing procedures adequate to address

the risks inherent in the E m n engagement, to perfom substantive tests or other procedures to

obtain &cient,     competent evidential matter, and to properly supervise the audits (AU $312,

Aualit Risk and Materiality in Conducting an Audit, AU 5326,Evidential Matter, and AU 93 11,

Planning and Supervision). Instead, in performing and supervising the Enron audits, Duncan

.failed to exercise due professional care and the necessary skepticism (AU $230, Due

Professional Care in the PerfUrmance of Work)to m u r e that Enron's financial. statements were

presented in conformity with GAAP (AU $410, Adherence to Generally Accepted Accounting

Principles) and that the audits were conducted in accordance with GAAS (AU $508, Reports on

Audited Financial Statements).

Enron's Prepay Transactions

       10.       Enron improperlyreported structured fmcing proceeds as operating cash flows

by means of ')repay" transdons with various financial institutions. Enron used prepay

transactions to improperly report the Cash it received from prepay transactions as cash flow from

operating activities, rather than cash flow h m financing activities. This allowed Enron to hide

the true extent of its borrowing fkom investors and the national credit rating agencies because
                                                 4

=== PAGE 5 ===
          Case 4:08-cv-00314        Document 1         Filed 01/28/2008       Page 5 of 16




sums borrowed in prepay transactions appeared as "price risk management liabilities" rather than

additional debt on Enron's balance sheet.

       11.     Enron's prepay transactions were in substance financhgs because Enron used a

t h e party structure involving a bank and a bank sponsored SPE that were not independent of

each other to remove all commodity price risk h n the transaction. The circular nature of

delivery and payments with respect to the commodities and the lack of independence between the

bank counterparties had the effect of eliminating any material risk or any potential gain with

respect to changes in the price of the underlying commodity. In effect, Enron's prepay

transactions involved an investment bank making a I q e payment to Enron in exchange for

Enron's promise to pay the bank sponsored entity an amount in excess of what Enron received in

the initial prepayment.

       12.     Amounts borrowed by Enron using the prepay structure were finely tuned each

quarter for maximum reporting benefit. E m n simply determined the amount of operating cash

flowsit wanted to report, projected any "shortfall" as the end of a reporting period approached,

and then used prepay transactions to fill the gap. From 1997 through September 30,2001,

Enron, using prepay transactions, received over $5 billion in funds in this manner.

       13.     Enron never separately disclosed in its public filings that it was entering into

prepay transactions. Such disclosure was necessary because of the large dollar amounts and

volume of prepay transactions entered into by Enron and the significant future obligated cash

commitments associated with the transactions. Rather, the prepay transactions were aggregated

into Enron's "price risk management liabilities." Enron provided a generic and inadequate

description of its price risk management activities in the notes to the financid statements and in

=== PAGE 6 ===
          Case 4:08-cv-00314         Document 1        Filed 01/28/2008       Page 6 of 16




the management's discussion and analysis section of its annual reports on Form 10-K and its

quarterly reports on Form 10-Q.

        14.    GAAS provides that "the presentation of financial statements in conformity with
[GAAP]
     includes adequate disclosure of material matters. These matters relate to the form,

arrangement, and content of the financial statements and their appended notes . .." (AU $431,

Adequacy of Disclosure'inFinancial Statements). GAAS also states that "[GAAP] recognize[s]

the importance of reporting transactions and events in accordance with their substance" and that

the "auditor should consider whether the substance of the transacti&nsor warts differs materially

from their form." (AU $411, The Meaning of Present Fairly in Conformity With General&

Accepted Accounting Principles in the Independent Auditor's Report). Enron's financial

statement presentation and disclosure of the prepay transactions waa not in conformity with

GAAP because it mischaractdzed the nature of the cash flows associated with the transactions,
obscured the true economic substance of these financing transactions, and did not address the

material impact they had on h n ' s financial statements.

        15.    Duncan failed to ensure that the engagement team audited Enron's prepay

transactions in accordance with GAAS and failed to ensure that E&       properly presented and

disclosed the prepay transactions in its financial statements. For example, Andmen advised

E m of certain basic criteria they believed were required for the prepay transactions to be
treated as price risk management liabilities rather than debt, as well as the requirements they

believed were necessary to account for the related cash infusion as cash flow fhm operations

rather than cash flow fkom financing. However, the testing work done and evidential matter

obtained and considered by the engagement team was not sufficient to establish whether Enron

followed those criteria. One of Andersm's key critenia required that the three parties to the
                                              6

=== PAGE 7 ===
          Case 4:08-cv-00314        Document 1        Filed 01/28/2008       Page 7 of 16




prepay transactions be independent fkom one another. Duncan and the engagement team placed

an undue reliance on unsupported and unverified representations h r n Enron's management that

the third-party special purpose entities ("SPEsy')involved in the prepay transactions were credit

worthy independent businesses (AU $333, Management's Representations). Andersen's limited

and untimely attempts to seek c d m t i o n s from these SPEs were insufficient to conclude that

each was an independent business. Accordingly, in violation of applicable professional

standards, Duncan failed to ensure that the engagement team designed and implemented adequate

audit procedkes (AU$312, Audit Risk and Materiality in Conducting an Audit) and obtained

sufficient, competent evidential matter regarding this vital aspect of the prepay tramactions (AU

5 326, Evidential Matter). In doing so, Duncan failed to properly supervise the audit (AU $311,
Planning and upe en is ion) and to exercise due professional care to ensure that adequate audit

procedures were perfmed to collfirm that Andersen's prepay advice was followed by Enron,

and that the unqualified audit reports he signed were not misleading (AU $230, Due Professional

Care in the Pe$omance of Work).

       16.     In exercising the appropriate level of due professional care, Duncan should have

recognized that Enron's disclosures regarding prepay transactions were materially inadequate.

Duncan did, on several occasions, recommend improved disclosuresto certain.senior

managemmt of E h . In conjunction with the 2000 audit, Duncan proposed to certain of

Enron's senior management specific language used by another Andersen audit client that would

have disclosed the fact that Enron used "prepaid commodity contracts" and also the dollar

amount of liabilities associated with the prepay transactions. Duncan's recommendations to

enhance the disclosure for prepay transactions were rejected. However, Duncan failed to inform

Enron's Audit Committee of his recommendations or that they had been rejected by
                                            7

=== PAGE 8 ===
          Case 4:08-cv-00314         Document 1        Filed 01/28/2008       Page 8 of 16




management. GAAS requires that any disagreements with management regarding financial

statement disclosures should be discussed with the audit committee (AU $380, Communication

With Audit Committees). "If management omits fkom the financial statements, including the

accompanying notes, infibmation that is required by gcn~ral~y
                                                           accepted accounting principles, the

auditor should express a qualified or an adverse opinion and should provide the information in

his report. . ." (AU 943 1, Adequacy of Disclosure in Financial Statements). Accordingly, under

these circumstances, Duncan should have insisted that Enron enhance its prepay transaction

disclosure, and, if Enron refused, raised the matter with Enron's Audit Committee. If the

disclosure was not fixed after that, Duncan should have issued qualified audit opinions. He

fded to undertake any of these actions.

Enronfs Project Nahanni

               After completing sn $800 million dollar prepay transaction in November 1999,

Enron was still approximately $500 million short of the funds flow target Emon had told the

credit rating agencies it intended to achieve for the year. To make up for this shortfall, Enron

entered into a transaction code-named Project NahaDni that, in its entirety, had no material

economic benefit to Enron. This transaction was in substance a year-end, one month, $500

million financing that Enron used to manipulate its financial statements by: (i) inflating reported

cash flow from operating activities; (ii) under-reporting cash flow from financing activities; and

(iii) under-reporting debt -- in each instance by $500 million.

               Project Nahanni was structured as a minority interest transaction in which

Citigroup, through an SPE called Nahanni, provided capital in return for a minority interest in a

consolidated subsidiary of Enron called Marengo. Marengo was a partnership between Emon

and Nahanni created specifically to effahlate the subject transaction. As a result, cash flow
                                                8

=== PAGE 9 ===
          Case 4:08-cv-00314         Document 1        Filed 01/28/2008      Page 9 of 16




associated with the activities of Marengo appeared as cash flow from operating activities on

Enron's financial statements, and Nahanni's financial contribution to Marengo appeared as a

minority interest on Enron's balance sheet, rather than debt.

        19.    On or about December 17,1999, Citigroup h d e d Nahanni with $485 million in

debt and $15 million in outside equity. Nahanxli immediately purchased $500 million of short-

term U.S.Treasury bills ("T-bills") and then contributed the T-bills to acquire a minority interest

in Marengo. On or about December 29,1999, two days before Enron's annual reporting period

ended, Enron directed Marengo to sell the $500 million in T-bills. The sale of the T-bills

appeared as cash flow from operating activities on Enron's consolidated statement of cash flow.

Enron then borrowed h m Marengo the cash proceeds fbm the sale of the T-bills to pay down

its reported debt by $500 million just before year-end 1999. Since E m n treated the transaction

with Marengo as an inter-company loan, it did not increase Enron's reported debt. By replacing

$500 million of debt with a minority interest in a consolidated subsidiary, Enron improved its

reported debt-to-equity ratio by 16 percent at year-end, December 31, 1999. In addition, the $500

million in operating cash flow fiom Project Nahanni accounted for 41 percent of Enron's total

cash flow reported for the year.

       20.     On or about January 14,2000, Enron repaid the $500 million loan h m Masengo

with interest. Marengo then paid Nahanni approximately $487.1 million, representing $485

million in principal, plus $2.1 million in inmest. While the initiation of the transaction was

reported as an increase in cash flow fkom operating activities, its wind-down just weeks later was

reported by E m n as a reduction in cash flow fbm investing activities.

       21.     In order for the Nahanni transaction to achieve Enron's god of increasing its cash

flow fiorn operating activities, it was necessary for Emon to take the position that holding     .
                                                 9

=== PAGE 10 ===
         Case 4:08-cv40314           Document 1        Filed 01/28/2008       Page 10 of 16




Treasury securities was part of its "merchant activities," so that it could then claim that the sale

of those secmYtiesgenerated cash flow h m operating activities. Accordingly, Enron changed

the merchant activities footnote in-itsfinancial statements to include government securities in the

definition of merchant investments. Duncan and others on the engagement team were reckless in

not knowing that such a change was materially misleading because T-bill investing was not a part

of Enron's merchant business, and because, contrary to the defhition of a merchant investment,

Enron never had any intent to hold the securities for the purpose of making a profit.

       22.     Enron's overall disclosure of the Nahanni transaction in its 1999 Form 10-K was

materially misleading because Emon did not disclose: (i) that the partnership was created in

December to fund a transaction that lasted just long enough to achieve a year-end fnancial

reporting objective; and (ii) that the Nahanni transaction was a one-time boost to cash flow,not a

continuous, sustainable cash flow h m operations. Thus, Emon's disclosure created the false
impression that the transaction related to Enron's regular-cow-of-business investments in

energy and technology companies. Duncan reviewed Enron's Project Nahanni disclosure and

was reckless in not knowing that it was materially misleading. Although various aspects of the

Nahanni tramaction were technically reported in accordance with GAAP, Duncan and the

engagement team failed to exercise due professional care and skepticism when approving

Enron's accomthg for the tramaction (AU8230,Due Professional Care in the Peifiormance of

Work), and failed to ensure Emn's financial statement presentation was not materially

misleading (AU 9431, Adequacy of Disclosu~ein Financial Statements, AU 5411, The Meaning

of Present Fairly in Conformity With GenerallyAccepted Accounting Principles in the

Independent Auditor's Report, and AU 8508, Reporkr on Audited Financial Statements).

=== PAGE 11 ===
          Case 4:08-cv40314          Document 1        Filed 01/28/2008      Page 11 of 16




Enron's Raptor Transactions

        23.      Beginning in the spring of 2000, E m n and WM2, a partnership formed and

managed by Enron's then-Chief Financial Officer Andrew Fastow, engaged in a series of

complex f w d transactions with four SPE structures called Raptor I, Raptor LI, Raptor IU,and

Raptor IV (collectively referred to as the "Raptors"). Enron's senior management used the

Raptors, in part, to manipulate Emn's financial statements.

        24.      By 1999, a large percentage of Enron's quarterly earnings were attributed to

unrealized gains in its merchant energy portfolio and in various technology investments. Many

of these assets were extremely volatile. The Raptors were used by Enron to "hedge" the value of

those inv-ents      with a purported independent thkd party SPE, so that Enron could offset

declines in the value of these assets with the Raptor hedges. ,Enroncapitalized Raptors I, II, and

IV with Enron stock. Raptor TII was capitalized with warrants of an Enron spin-off company.
&ron received an economic interest in the Raptors and $1.2 billion in notes receivable fiom the

Raptors in return for the Enron shares and warrants.

        25.      W M 2 contributed $30 million of equity to each Raptor. However, through

undisclosed side agreements between Fastow and others, the struc$wes were designed so that

amounts equal to WM2's equity was returned to lWM2 for each Raptor prior to any hedges being

put in place. As a result of the oral side agreements and related effective retum of capital, L,JM2
                                                                                                      '




had no equity at risk and Enron should have wnsolidated the Raptors into its financiai

statements. LJM2's equity was effectivelyretuned to it through three separate $41 million put

options in Enron stock in Raptors I, II, rmd IV,and through a distribution in Raptor IU. These

put options provided a return equal to WM2's initial $30 million capital contribution in each

Raptor, along with an agreed upon rate of rehun on such capital, before the Raptor SPEs entered
                                               11

=== PAGE 12 ===
         Case 4:08-cv40314          Document 1        Filed 01/28/2008       Page 12 of 16




into the hedging transactions. Effectively, Enron was entering into hedging contracts with

entities backed solely with its own stock.

       26.     Since the Enron engagement was classified as maximum risk, and related party

transactions created an "extreme" or "very significant" financial reporting risk, the existence of

the put options in the Raptor structures should have triggered increased professional skepticism.

The puts were priced at a premium that matched exactly LJM2's targeted retum and were

included as part of aggressive and complex related party transactions that had:a material effect on

Enron's reported earnings. Additionally, LJM2received its $41 million payout in each Raptor

shortly after signing the contracts - resulting in a short term rehun on investment in excess of

130% in each case. Moreover, the payout occurred in each Raptor after Enron settled the put

option early and before any hedges were put in place. The timing of settlement by E m n of these

out-of-the-money put options should have been an additional red flag and prompted Duncan and

the engagement team to increase their professional skepticism and question why Enron would

repeatedly make such economically irrational payments. These payments actually eliminated the

supposed protection h m a drop in its stock price that the company purportedly had purchased at

a premium. GAAS requires that more extensive or e f f d v e audit tests should be designed for

related party transactions when the auditor assessed risk at a higher level (AU $334, Related

Parties). Despite the need for greater scrutiny, Duncan did not exercise due professional care or

professional skepticism with regard to this aspect of the Raptor transactions (AU $230,Due

Prof&onaE    Care in the Performance of Work).

               Enron's footnote disclosure in its Fonn 10-K for year 2000 contains a paragraph

describing some-aspectsof the Raptor transactions. However, the disclosure was not in

accordance with GAAP (FAS57, Related Party Disclosures) since it did not include an adequate
                                          12

=== PAGE 13 ===
                                 +    F1

              Case 4:08-cv40314            Document 1       Filed 01/28/2008        Page 13 of 16




    description of the Raptor transactions and information necessary to understand the effects these

    transactions had on Emon's financial statements. Furthermore, in the footnote, Enron asserted,

    without any reasonable basis or substantiation, that "the terms of the transactions with the

    Related Party were reasonable compared to those which codd have been negotiated with

    unrelated third parties." FAS 57 states that financial statement representations "shall not imply

    that the related party transactionswere consummated on terms equivalent to those that prevail in

    arm's-length transactions unless such representations can be substantiated." Duncan reviewed

    Enron's related party disclosure and was reckless in not knowing that the terms of the Raptor

    transactions were not equivalent to an arm's-length transaction and that the disclosure was

    materially misleading.

    Audit Reports

            28.     On March 5,1999, Duncan, on behalf of Andersen, signed an unqualified

    auditors' report in which he stated that Andersen audited Enron's 1998 consolidated financial

:   statements "in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards" and expressed the opinion

    that the financial statements "present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of

    Enron Cop. and subsidiaries . . .and the results of their operations, cash flows and changes in

                           .
    shareholders' equity . . in conformitywith accounting principles generally accepted in the

    United States." This auditors' report was included in Enron's Form 10-K filed with the

    Commission on Ivlarch 3 1,1999.

            29.     On March 13,2000, Duncan, on behalf of Andersen, signed an unqualified

    auditors' report in which he stated that Andersen audited Enron's 1999 consolidated financial

    statements "in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States" and

    expressed the opinion that the financial statements "present fhirly, in ali mateiial respects, the
                                                       13

=== PAGE 14 ===
         Case 4:08-cv40314           Document 1         Filed 01/28/2008       Page 14 of 16




financial position of Enron Corp. and subsidiaries . . . and the results of their operations, cash

flows and changes in shareholders' equity. .. in conformity with accounting principles generally

accepted in the United States." This auditors' report was included in Enron's Form 10-K filed

with the Commission on Mmh 30,2000.

       30.     On February 23,2001, Duncan, on behalf of Andersen, signed an unqualified
auditors' report in which he stated that Andersen audited Emon's ZOO0 consolidated financial

statements '"in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States" and

expressed the opinion that the financial statements ''present fairly, in all material respects, the

financial position of E m n Corp. and subsidiaries . . .and the results of their operations, cash

flows and changes in shareholders' equity .. .in conformity with accounting principles g e n d l y

accepted in the United States." This auditors' report was inc1uded.b Enron's Form 10-Kfiled

with the Commission on April 2,2001.

        31.    For the reasons outlined above, Duncan was reckless in not knowing that

Andersen's audits of Enron's financial statements were not performed in accordance with GAAS

and that Enrpn's financial statements did not present Enron's financial position, the results of

their operations, cash flows, and changes     shareholders' equity in conformity with GAAP.

Duncan, as the global engagement partner for the Enron audits, was ultimately responsible for

determining whether an unqualified opinion should be issued within the auditors' report. As

such, when he certified that Andersen audited Enron's financial statements in accordance with

GAAS,and that Enron's financial statements were prepared in accordance with GAAP, he made
material misstatexbents or omissions in Andersen's auditors' reports filed with h n ' s 1998,

1999, and 2000 Forms 10-K.

=== PAGE 15 ===
                                                                i


         case 4:08-~"40314 Document 1                  Filed 01/28/2008       Page 15 of 16




                                      CLAIM FOR RELIEF

        Violations.of Section lo@) of the Exchange Act and Rule lob-5 Thereunder

       32.       Paragraphs 1 through 31 are realleged and incorporated by reference herein.

       33.       Duncan, as Andexsen's global engagement partner for the Enron audits, directly or

indirectly, by use of the means or instnunentalities of interstate commerce, or by the use of the

mails or of a facility of a national securities exchange, in connection with the purchase or sale of

securities: (a) employed devices, schemes, or artifices to d e h d , (b) made untrue statements of

material fact or omitted to state material facts necessary in order to make the statements made, in

the light of the circmstances under which they were made, not misleading; or (c) engaged in

acts, practices, or c o r n s of business which operated or would operate as a fraud or deceit upon

other persons.

       36.       In connection with the above discussed acts or omissions, Duncan acted

recklessly.

       37.       By reason of the foregoing, Duncan violated Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act

El5 U.S.C.$78j(b)J, and Rule lob-5 thereunder 117 C.F.R.8 240.10b-53.

=== PAGE 16 ===
         Case 4:08-cv40314        Document 1       Filed 01/28/2008      Page 16 of 16




                                   PRAYER FOR RELIEF

Wherefore, the Commission respectfully requests that this Court grant a permanent injunction

restraining and enjoining Defendant Duncan h m any future violations of Section 10(b) of the

Exchange Act and Rule lob-5 thereunder.

Dated: January 1 , 2 0 0 8

                                            Respectfully submitted,




                                            Securities and Exchange Commission
                                            100 F Street, N.E.
                                            Washington, DC 20549
                                            Phone: (202)551-4475 (Thomas)
                                            Fax: (202)772-9245(Thomas)
Of Counsel:
Fredric D.Firestone
Gregory G.Faragasso
John H.Loesch
Richard J. Kutchey
