
=== PAGE 1 ===
358                      OCTOBER TERM, 2009

                                 Syllabus


                SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
                  the fifth circuit
      No. 08–1394. Argued March 1, 2010—Decided June 24, 2010
Founded in 1985, Enron Corporation grew from its headquarters in Hous­
  ton, Texas, into the seventh highest-revenue-grossing company in Amer­
  ica. Petitioner Jeffrey Skilling, a longtime Enron ofﬁcer, was Enron’s
  chief executive ofﬁcer from February until August 2001, when he re­
  signed. Less than four months later, Enron crashed into bankruptcy,
  and its stock plummeted in value. After an investigation uncovered an
  elaborate conspiracy to prop up Enron’s stock prices by overstating the
  company’s ﬁnancial well-being, the Government prosecuted dozens of
  Enron employees who participated in the scheme. In time, the Govern­
  ment worked its way up the chain of command, indicting Skilling and
  two other top Enron executives. These three defendants, the indict­
  ment charged, engaged in a scheme to deceive investors about Enron’s
  true ﬁnancial performance by manipulating its publicly reported ﬁnan­
  cial results and making false and misleading statements. Count 1 of
  the indictment charged Skilling with, inter alia, conspiracy to commit
  “honest-services” wire fraud, 18 U. S. C. §§ 371, 1343, 1346, by depriving
  Enron and its shareholders of the intangible right of his honest services.
  Skilling was also charged with over 25 substantive counts of securities
  fraud, wire fraud, making false representations to Enron’s auditors, and
  insider trading.
     In November 2004, Skilling moved for a change of venue, contending
  that hostility toward him in Houston, coupled with extensive pretrial
  publicity, had poisoned potential jurors. He submitted hundreds of
  news reports detailing Enron’s downfall, as well as afﬁdavits from ex­
  perts he engaged portraying community attitudes in Houston in compar­
  ison to other potential venues. The District Court denied the motion,
  concluding that pretrial publicity did not warrant a presumption that
  Skilling would be unable to obtain a fair trial in Houston. Despite inci­
  dents of intemperate commentary, the court observed, media coverage,
  on the whole, had been objective and unemotional, and the facts of the
  case were neither heinous nor sensational. Moreover, the court as­
  serted, effective voir dire would detect juror bias.
     In the months before the trial, the court asked the parties for ques­
  tions it might use to screen prospective jurors. Rejecting the Govern­
  ment’s sparer inquiries in favor of Skilling’s more probing and speciﬁc

=== PAGE 2 ===
                     Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                   359

                               Syllabus

questions, the court converted Skilling’s submission, with slight modiﬁ­
cations, into a 77-question, 14-page document. The questionnaire asked
prospective jurors about their sources of news and exposure to Enron-
related publicity, beliefs concerning Enron and what caused its collapse,
opinions regarding the defendants and their possible guilt or inno­
cence, and relationships to the company and to anyone affected by
its demise. The court then mailed the questionnaire to 400 prospec­
tive jurors and received responses from nearly all of them. It granted
hardship exemptions to about 90 individuals, and the parties, with
the court’s approval, further winnowed the pool by excusing another
119 for cause, hardship, or physical disability. The parties agreed to
exclude, in particular, every prospective juror who said that a pre­
existing opinion about Enron or the defendants would prevent her from
being impartial.
   In December 2005, three weeks before the trial date, one of Skil­
ling’s codefendants, Richard Causey, pleaded guilty. Skilling renewed
his change-of-venue motion, arguing that the juror questionnaires re­
vealed pervasive bias and that news accounts of Causey’s guilty plea
further tainted the jury pool. The court again declined to move the
trial, ruling that the questionnaires and voir dire provided safeguards
adequate to ensure an impartial jury. The court also denied Skilling’s
request for attorney-led voir dire on the ground that potential jurors
were more forthcoming with judges than with lawyers. But the court
promised to give counsel an opportunity to ask followup questions,
agreed that venire members should be examined individually about pre­
trial publicity, and allotted the defendants jointly two extra peremp­
tory challenges.
   Voir dire began in January 2006. After questioning the venire as a
group, the court examined prospective jurors individually, asking each
about her exposure to Enron-related news, the content of any stories
that stood out in her mind, and any questionnaire answers that raised a
red ﬂag signaling possible bias. The court then permitted each side to
pose followup questions and ruled on the parties’ challenges for cause.
Ultimately, the court qualiﬁed 38 prospective jurors, a number sufﬁ­
cient, allowing for peremptory challenges, to empanel 12 jurors and 4
alternates. After a four-month trial, the jury found Skilling guilty of
19 counts, including the honest-services-fraud conspiracy charge, and
not guilty of 9 insider-trading counts.
   On appeal, Skilling raised two arguments relevant here. First, he
contended that pretrial publicity and community prejudice prevented
him from obtaining a fair trial. Second, he alleged that the jury im­
properly convicted him of conspiracy to commit honest-services wire
fraud. As to the former, the Fifth Circuit initially determined that the

=== PAGE 3 ===
360                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                                 Syllabus

  volume and negative tone of media coverage generated by Enron’s col­
  lapse created a presumption of juror prejudice. Stating, however, that
  the presumption is rebuttable, the court examined the voir dire, found
  it “proper and thorough,” and held that the District Court had empan­
  eled an impartial jury. The Court of Appeals also rejected Skilling’s
  claim that his conduct did not indicate any conspiracy to commit honest-
  services fraud. It did not address Skilling’s argument that the honest-
  services statute, if not interpreted to exclude his actions, should be in­
  validated as unconstitutionally vague.
Held:
    1. Pretrial publicity and community prejudice did not prevent Skilling
 from obtaining a fair trial. He did not establish that a presumption of
 juror prejudice arose or that actual bias infected the jury that tried him.
 Pp. 377–399.
       (a) The District Court did not err in denying Skilling’s requests for
 a venue transfer. Pp. 377–385.
          (1) Although the Sixth Amendment and Article III, § 2, cl. 3, pro­
 vide for criminal trials in the State and district where the crime was
 committed, these place-of-trial prescriptions do not impede transfer of
 a proceeding to a different district if extraordinary local prejudice will
 prevent a fair trial. Pp. 377–378.
          (2) The foundation precedent for the presumption of prejudice
 from which the Fifth Circuit’s analysis proceeded is Rideau v. Louisi­
 ana, 373 U. S. 723. Wilbert Rideau robbed a small-town bank, kid­
 naped three bank employees, and killed one of them. Police interro­
 gated Rideau in jail without counsel present and obtained his confession,
 which, without his knowledge, was ﬁlmed and televised three times to
 large local audiences shortly before trial. After the Louisiana trial
 court denied Rideau’s change-of-venue motion, he was convicted, and
 the conviction was upheld on direct appeal. This Court reversed.
 “[T]o the tens of thousands of people who saw and heard it,” the Court
 explained, the interrogation “in a very real sense was Rideau’s
 trial—at which he pleaded guilty.” Id., at 726. “[W]ithout pausing to
 examine . . . the voir dire,” the Court held that the “kangaroo court
 proceedings” trailing the televised confession violated due process. Id.,
 at 726–727. The Court followed Rideau in two other cases in which
 media coverage manifestly tainted criminal prosecutions. However, it
 later explained that those decisions “cannot be made to stand for the
 proposition that juror exposure to . . . news accounts of the crime . . .
 alone presumptively deprives the defendant of due process.” Murphy v.
 Florida, 421 U. S. 794, 798–799. Thus, prominence does not necessarily
 produce prejudice, and juror impartiality does not require ignorance.

=== PAGE 4 ===
                     Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    361

                               Syllabus

See, e. g., Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U. S. 717, 722. A presumption of prejudice
attends only the extreme case. Pp. 378–381.
        (3) Important differences separate Skilling’s prosecution from
those in which the Court has presumed juror prejudice. First, the
Court has emphasized the size and characteristics of the community in
which the crime occurred. In contrast to the small-town setting in Ri­
deau, for example, the record shows that Houston is the Nation’s fourth
most populous city. Given the large, diverse pool of residents eligible
for jury duty, any suggestion that 12 impartial individuals could not be
empaneled in Houston is hard to sustain. Second, although news sto­
ries about Skilling were not kind, they contained no blatantly prejudi­
cial information such as Rideau’s dramatically staged admission of guilt.
Third, unlike Rideau and other cases in which trial swiftly followed a
widely reported crime, over four years elapsed between Enron’s bank­
ruptcy and Skilling’s trial. Although reporters covered Enron-related
news throughout this period, the decibel level of media attention dimin­
ished somewhat in the years following Enron’s collapse. Finally, and of
prime signiﬁcance, Skilling’s jury acquitted him of nine insider-trading
counts. Similarly, earlier instituted Enron-related prosecutions yielded
no overwhelming victory for the Government. It would be odd for an
appellate court to presume prejudice in a case in which jurors’ actions
run counter to that presumption. Pp. 381–384.
        (4) The Fifth Circuit presumed juror prejudice based primarily
on the magnitude and negative tone of the media attention directed
at Enron. But “pretrial publicity—even pervasive, adverse publicity—
does not inevitably lead to an unfair trial.” Nebraska Press Assn. v.
Stuart, 427 U. S. 539, 554. Here, news stories about Enron did not pre­
sent the kind of vivid, unforgettable information the Court has recog­
nized as particularly likely to produce prejudice, and Houston’s size and
diversity diluted the media’s impact. Nor did Enron’s sheer number of
victims trigger a presumption. Although the widespread community
impact necessitated careful identiﬁcation and inspection of prospective
jurors’ connections to Enron, the extensive screening questionnaire and
followup voir dire yielded jurors whose links to Enron were either
nonexistent or attenuated. Finally, while Causey’s well-publicized deci­
sion to plead guilty shortly before trial created a danger of juror preju­
dice, the District Court took appropriate steps to mitigate that risk.
Pp. 384–385.
      (b) No actual prejudice contaminated Skilling’s jury. The Court
rejects Skilling’s assertions that voir dire did not adequately detect and
defuse juror prejudice and that several seated jurors were biased.
Pp. 385–399.

=== PAGE 5 ===
362                SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                                 Syllabus

        (1) No hard-and-fast formula dictates the necessary depth or
 breadth of voir dire. Jury selection is “particularly within the province
 of the trial judge.” Ristaino v. Ross, 424 U. S. 589, 594–595 (inter­
 nal quotation marks omitted). When pretrial publicity is at issue,
 moreover, “primary reliance on the judgment of the trial court makes
 [especially] good sense” because the judge “sits in the locale where
 the publicity is said to have had its effect” and may base her evaluation
 on her “own perception of the depth and extent of news stories that
 might inﬂuence a juror.” Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500 U. S. 415, 427. The
 Court considers the adequacy of jury selection in Skilling’s case atten­
 tive to the respect due to district-court determinations of juror im­
 partiality and of the measures necessary to ensure that impartiality.
 Pp. 385–387.
        (2) Skilling failed to show that his voir dire fell short of constitu­
 tional requirements. The jury-selection process was insufﬁcient, Skil­
 ling maintains, because voir dire lasted only ﬁve hours, most of the Dis­
 trict Court’s questions were conclusory and failed adequately to probe
 jurors’ true feelings, and the court consistently took prospective jurors
 at their word once they claimed they could be fair, no matter any other
 indications of bias. This Court’s review of the record, however, yields
 a different appraisal. The District Court initially screened venire
 members by eliciting their responses to a comprehensive questionnaire
 drafted in large part by Skilling. That survey helped to identify pro­
 spective jurors excusable for cause and served as a springboard for fur­
 ther questions; voir dire thus was the culmination of a lengthy process.
 Moreover, inspection of the questionnaires and voir dire of the seated
 jurors reveals that, notwithstanding the ﬂaws Skilling lists, the selec­
 tion process secured jurors largely uninterested in publicity about
 Enron and untouched by the corporation’s collapse. Whatever commu­
 nity prejudice existed in Houston generally, Skilling’s jurors were not
 under its sway. Relying on Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U. S., at 727–728, Skil­
 ling asserts the District Court should not have accepted jurors’ promises
 of fairness. But a number of factors show that the District Court had
 far less reason than the trial court in Irvin to discredit jurors’ assur­
 ances of impartiality: News stories about Enron contained nothing re­
 sembling the horrifying information rife in reports about Leslie Irvin’s
 rampage of robberies and murders; Houston shares little in common
 with the rural community in which Irvin’s trial proceeded; circulation
 ﬁgures for Houston media sources were far lower than the 95% satura­
 tion level recorded in Irvin; and Skilling’s seated jurors exhibited noth­
 ing like the display of bias shown in Irvin. In any event, the District
 Court did not simply take venire members at their word. It questioned
 each juror individually to uncover concealed bias. This face-to-face op­

=== PAGE 6 ===
                      Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                     363

                                Syllabus

portunity to gauge demeanor and credibility, coupled with information
from the questionnaires regarding jurors’ backgrounds, opinions, and
news sources, gave the court a sturdy foundation to assess ﬁtness for
jury service. Pp. 387–395.
         (3) Skilling’s allegation that several jurors were openly biased
also fails. In reviewing such claims, the deference due to district courts
is at its pinnacle: “A trial court’s ﬁndings of juror impartiality may be
overturned only for manifest error.” Mu’Min, 500 U. S., at 428 (inter­
nal quotation marks omitted). Skilling, moreover, unsuccessfully chal­
lenged only one of the seated jurors for cause, “strong evidence that he
was convinced the [other] jurors were not biased and had not formed
any opinions as to his guilt.” Beck v. Washington, 369 U. S. 541, 557–
558. A review of the record reveals no manifest error regarding the
empaneling of Jurors 11, 20, and 63, each of whom indicated, inter alia,
that he or she would be fair to Skilling and would require the Govern­
ment to prove its case. Four other jurors Skilling claims he would have
excluded with extra peremptory strikes, Jurors 38, 67, 78, and 84, exhib­
ited no signs of prejudice this Court can discern. Pp. 395–399.
   2. Section 1346, which proscribes fraudulent deprivations of “the in­
tangible right of honest services,” is properly conﬁned to cover only
bribery and kickback schemes. Because Skilling’s alleged misconduct
entailed no bribe or kickback, it does not fall within the Court’s con­
ﬁnement of § 1346’s proscription. Pp. 399–414.
      (a) To place Skilling’s claim that § 1346 is unconstitutionally vague
in context, the Court reviews the origin and subsequent application of
the honest-services doctrine. Pp. 399–402.
         (1) In a series of decisions beginning in the 1940’s, the Courts of
Appeals, one after another, interpreted the mail-fraud statute’s prohibi­
tion of “any scheme or artiﬁce to defraud” to include deprivations not
only of money or property, but also of intangible rights. See, e. g.,
Shushan v. United States, 117 F. 2d 110, which stimulated the develop­
ment of the “honest-services” doctrine. Unlike traditional fraud, in
which the victim’s loss of money or property supplied the defendant’s
gain, with one the mirror image of the other, the honest-services doc­
trine targeted corruption that lacked similar symmetry. While the of­
fender proﬁted, the betrayed party suffered no deprivation of money or
property; instead, a third party, who had not been deceived, provided
the enrichment. Even if the scheme occasioned a money or property
gain for the betrayed party, courts reasoned, actionable harm lay in the
denial of that party’s right to the offender’s “honest services.” Most
often these cases involved bribery of public ofﬁcials, but over time, the
courts increasingly recognized that the doctrine applied to a private
employee who breached his allegiance to his employer, often by accept­

=== PAGE 7 ===
364                SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                                 Syllabus

 ing bribes or kickbacks. By 1982, all Courts of Appeals had embraced
 the honest-services theory of fraud. Pp. 399–401.
         (2) In 1987, this Court halted the development of the intangible-
 rights doctrine in McNally v. United States, 483 U. S. 350, 360, which
 held that the mail-fraud statute was “limited in scope to the protection
 of property rights.” “If Congress desires to go further,” the Court
 stated, “it must speak more clearly.” Ibid. Pp. 401–402.
         (3) Congress responded the next year by enacting § 1346, which
 provides: “For the purposes of th[e] chapter [of the U. S. Code that
 prohibits, inter alia, mail fraud, § 1341, and wire fraud, § 1343], the term
 ‘scheme or artiﬁce to defraud’ includes a scheme or artiﬁce to deprive
 another of the intangible right of honest services.” P. 402.
      (b) Section 1346, properly conﬁned to core cases, is not unconstitu­
 tionally vague. Pp. 402–413.
         (1) To satisfy due process, “a penal statute [must] deﬁne the crim­
 inal offense [1] with sufﬁcient deﬁniteness that ordinary people can un­
 derstand what conduct is prohibited and [2] in a manner that does not
 encourage arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement.” Kolender v.
 Lawson, 461 U. S. 352, 357. The void-for-vagueness doctrine embraces
 these requirements. Skilling contends that § 1346 meets neither of the
 two due process essentials. But this Court must, if possible, construe,
 not condemn, Congress’ enactments. See, e. g., Civil Service Comm’n
 v. Letter Carriers, 413 U. S. 548, 571. Alert to § 1346’s potential
 breadth, the Courts of Appeals have divided on how best to interpret
 the statute. Uniformly, however, they have declined to throw out the
 statute as irremediably vague. This Court agrees that § 1346 should be
 construed rather than invalidated. Pp. 402–404.
         (2) The Court looks to the doctrine developed in pre-McNally
 cases in an endeavor to ascertain the meaning of the phrase “the intan­
 gible right of honest services.” There is no doubt that Congress in­
 tended § 1346 to refer to and incorporate the honest-services doctrine
 recognized in Courts of Appeals’ decisions before McNally derailed the
 intangible-rights theory of fraud. Congress, it bears emphasis, enacted
 § 1346 on the heels of McNally and drafted the statute using that deci­
 sion’s terminology. See 483 U. S., at 355, 362. Pp. 404–405.
         (3) To preserve what Congress certainly intended § 1346 to cover,
 the Court pares the pre-McNally body of precedent down to its core: In
 the main, the pre-McNally cases involved fraudulent schemes to deprive
 another of honest services through bribes or kickbacks supplied by a
 third party who had not been deceived. In parsing the various pre-
 McNally decisions, the Court acknowledges that Skilling’s vagueness
 challenge has force, for honest-services decisions were not models of
 clarity or consistency. It has long been the Court’s practice, however,

=== PAGE 8 ===
                     Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                   365

                               Syllabus

before striking a federal statute as impermissibly vague, to consider
whether the prescription is amenable to a limiting construction. See,
e. g., Hooper v. California, 155 U. S. 648, 657. Arguing against any lim­
iting construction, Skilling contends that it is impossible to identify a
salvageable honest-services core because the pre-McNally cases are in­
consistent and hopelessly unclear. This Court rejected an argument of
the same tenor in Letter Carriers, 413 U. S., at 571–572. Although
some applications of the pre-McNally honest-services doctrine occa­
sioned disagreement among the Courts of Appeals, these decisions do
not cloud the fact that the vast majority of cases involved offenders
who, in violation of a ﬁduciary duty, participated in bribery or kickback
schemes. Indeed, McNally itself presented a paradigmatic kickback
fact pattern. 483 U. S., at 352–353, 360. In view of this history, there
is no doubt that Congress intended § 1346 to reach at least bribes and
kickbacks. Because reading the statute to proscribe a wider range of
offensive conduct would raise vagueness concerns, the Court holds that
§ 1346 criminalizes only the bribe-and-kickback core of the pre-McNally
case law. Pp. 405–409.
        (4) The Government urges the Court to go further by reading
§ 1346 to proscribe another category of conduct: undisclosed self-dealing
by a public ofﬁcial or private employee. Neither of the Government’s
arguments in support of this position withstands close inspection. Con­
trary to the ﬁrst, McNally itself did not center on nondisclosure of a
conﬂicting ﬁnancial interest, but rather involved a classic kickback
scheme. See 483 U. S., at 352–353, 360. Reading § 1346 to proscribe
bribes and kickbacks—and nothing more—satisﬁes Congress’ undoubted
aim to reverse McNally on its facts. Nor is the Court persuaded by
the Government’s argument that the pre-McNally conﬂict-of-interest
cases constitute core applications of the honest-services doctrine. Al­
though the Courts of Appeals upheld honest-services convictions for
some conﬂict-of-interest schemes, they reached no consensus on which
schemes qualiﬁed. Given the relative infrequency of those prosecutions
and the intercircuit inconsistencies they produced, the Court concludes
that a reasonable limiting construction of § 1346 must exclude this amor­
phous category of cases. Further dispelling doubt on this point is the
principle that “ambiguity concerning the ambit of criminal statutes
should be resolved in favor of lenity.” Cleveland v. United States,
531 U. S. 12, 25 (internal quotation marks omitted). The Court there­
fore resists the Government’s less constrained construction of § 1346 ab­
sent Congress’ clear instruction otherwise. “If Congress desires to go
further,” the Court reiterates, “it must speak more clearly than it has.”
McNally, 483 U. S., at 360. Pp. 409–411.

=== PAGE 9 ===
366                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                                 Syllabus

          (5) Interpreted to encompass only bribery and kickback schemes,
  § 1346 is not unconstitutionally vague. A prohibition on fraudulently
  depriving another of one’s honest services by accepting bribes or kick­
  backs presents neither a fair-notice nor an arbitrary-prosecution prob­
  lem. See Kolender, 461 U. S., at 357. As to fair notice, it has always
  been clear that bribes and kickbacks constitute honest-services fraud,
  Williams v. United States, 341 U. S. 97, 101, and the statute’s mens rea
  requirement further blunts any notice concern, see, e. g., Screws v.
  United States, 325 U. S. 91, 101–104. As to arbitrary prosecutions, the
  Court perceives no signiﬁcant risk that the honest-services statute, as
  here interpreted, will be stretched out of shape. Its prohibition on
  bribes and kickbacks draws content not only from the pre-McNally case
  law, but also from federal statutes proscribing and deﬁning similar
  crimes. Pp. 412–413.
       (c) Skilling did not violate § 1346, as the Court interprets the stat­
  ute. The Government charged Skilling with conspiring to defraud En­
  ron’s shareholders by misrepresenting the company’s ﬁscal health to his
  own proﬁt, but the Government never alleged that he solicited or ac­
  cepted side payments from a third party in exchange for making these
  misrepresentations. Because the indictment alleged three objects of
  the conspiracy—honest-services wire fraud, money-or-property wire
  fraud, and securities fraud—Skilling’s conviction is ﬂawed. See Yates
  v. United States, 354 U. S. 298. This determination, however, does not
  necessarily require reversal of the conspiracy conviction, for errors of
  the Yates variety are subject to harmless-error analysis. The Court
  leaves the parties’ dispute about whether the error here was harmless
  for resolution on remand, along with the question whether reversal on
  the conspiracy count would touch any of Skilling’s other convictions.
  Pp. 413–414.
554 F. 3d 529, afﬁrmed in part, vacated in part, and remanded.

   Ginsburg, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, Part I of which was
joined by Roberts, C. J., and Stevens, Scalia, Kennedy, Thomas, and
Alito, JJ., Part II of which was joined by Roberts, C. J., and Scalia,
Kennedy, and Thomas, JJ., and Part III of which was joined by Roberts,
C. J., and Stevens, Breyer, Alito, and Sotomayor, JJ. Scalia, J., ﬁled
an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment, in which
Thomas, J., joined, and in which Kennedy, J., joined except as to Part
III, post, p. 415. Alito, J., ﬁled an opinion concurring in part and concur­
ring in the judgment, post, p. 425. Sotomayor, J., ﬁled an opinion concur­
ring in part and dissenting in part, in which Stevens and Breyer, JJ.,
joined, post, p. 427.

=== PAGE 10 ===
                      Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                 367

                         Opinion of the Court

  Sri Srinivasan argued the cause for petitioner. With him
on the briefs were Walter Dellinger, Jonathan D. Hacker,
Irving L. Gornstein, Daniel M. Petrocelli, M. Randall Op­
penheimer, Matthew T. Kline, and David J. Marroso.
  Deputy Solicitor General Dreeben argued the cause for
the United States. With him on the brief were Solici­
tor General Kagan, Acting Assistant Atttorney General
Raman, former Assistant Attorney General Breuer, Nina
Goodman, David A. O’Neil, Joel Gershowitz, and Kevin
Gingras.*

  Justice Ginsburg delivered the opinion of the Court.
  In 2001, Enron Corporation, then the seventh highest­
revenue-grossing company in America, crashed into bank­
ruptcy. We consider in this opinion two questions arising
from the prosecution of Jeffrey Skilling, a longtime Enron
executive, for crimes committed before the corporation’s col­
lapse. First, did pretrial publicity and community prejudice
prevent Skilling from obtaining a fair trial? Second, did the
jury improperly convict Skilling of conspiracy to commit
“honest-services” wire fraud, 18 U. S. C. §§ 371, 1343, 1346?
  Answering no to both questions, the Fifth Circuit afﬁrmed
Skilling’s convictions. We conclude, in common with the
Court of Appeals, that Skilling’s fair-trial argument fails;

   *Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were ﬁled for the Chamber of
Commerce of the United States of America by Lawrence S. Robbins, Dan­
iel R. Walﬁsh, Robin S. Conrad, and Amar D. Sarwal; for the National
Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers by John D. Cline, Barbara E.
Bergman, and Thomas A. Hagemann; and for the Texas Criminal Defense
Lawyers Association et al. by Jeffrey T. Green and Sarah O’Rourke
Schrup.
   Briefs of amici curiae were ﬁled for ABC, Inc., et al. by David A.
Schulz, Steven D. Zansberg, Richard A. Bernstein, Peter Scheer, Eve Bur­
ton, Jonathan Donnellan, Stephen J. Burns, Lucy A. Dalglish, Gregg P.
Leslie, and Eric N. Lieberman; for the Paciﬁc Legal Foundation et al. by
Deborah J. La Fetra, Timothy Sandefur, Timothy Lynch, and Ilya Sha­
piro; and for Thomas Rybicki by Edward L. Larsen.

=== PAGE 11 ===
368             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

Skilling, we hold, did not establish that a presumption of
juror prejudice arose or that actual bias infected the jury
that tried him. But we disagree with the Fifth Circuit’s
honest-services ruling. In proscribing fraudulent depriva­
tions of “the intangible right of honest services,” § 1346, Con­
gress intended at least to reach schemes to defraud involving
bribes and kickbacks. Construing the honest-services stat­
ute to extend beyond that core meaning, we conclude, would
encounter a vagueness shoal. We therefore hold that § 1346
covers only bribery and kickback schemes. Because Skil­
ling’s alleged misconduct entailed no bribe or kickback, it
does not fall within § 1346’s proscription. We therefore af­
ﬁrm in part and vacate in part.

                               I
   Founded in 1985, Enron Corporation grew from its head­
quarters in Houston, Texas, into one of the world’s leading
energy companies. Skilling launched his career there in
1990 when Kenneth Lay, the company’s founder, hired him
to head an Enron subsidiary. Skilling steadily rose through
the corporation’s ranks, serving as president and chief oper­
ating ofﬁcer, and then, beginning in February 2001, as chief
executive ofﬁcer. Six months later, on August 14, 2001,
Skilling resigned from Enron.
   Less than four months after Skilling’s departure, Enron
spiraled into bankruptcy. The company’s stock, which had
traded at $90 per share in August 2000, plummeted to pen­
nies per share in late 2001. Attempting to comprehend
what caused the corporation’s collapse, the U. S. Department
of Justice formed an Enron Task Force, comprising prosecu­
tors and Federal Bureau of Investigation agents from around
the Nation. The Government’s investigation uncovered an
elaborate conspiracy to prop up Enron’s short-run stock
prices by overstating the company’s ﬁnancial well-being. In
the years following Enron’s bankruptcy, the Government
prosecuted dozens of Enron employees who participated in
the scheme. In time, the Government worked its way up

=== PAGE 12 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    369

                           Opinion of the Court

the corporation’s chain of command: On July 7, 2004, a grand
jury indicted Skilling, Lay, and Richard Causey, Enron’s for­
mer chief accounting ofﬁcer.
  These three defendants, the indictment alleged,
      “engaged in a wide-ranging scheme to deceive the in­
      vesting public, including Enron’s shareholders, . . . about
      the true performance of Enron’s businesses by: (a) ma­
      nipulating Enron’s publicly reported ﬁnancial results;
      and (b) making public statements and representations
      about Enron’s ﬁnancial performance and results that
      were false and misleading.” App. ¶ 5, p. 277a.
Skilling and his co-conspirators, the indictment continued,
“enriched themselves as a result of the scheme through sal­
ary, bonuses, grants of stock and stock options, other proﬁts,
and prestige.” Id., ¶ 14, at 280a.
   Count 1 of the indictment charged Skilling with conspiracy
to commit securities and wire fraud; in particular, it alleged
that Skilling had sought to “depriv[e] Enron and its share­
holders of the intangible right of [his] honest services.” Id.,
¶ 87, at 318a.1 The indictment further charged Skilling with
more than 25 substantive counts of securities fraud, wire
fraud, making false representations to Enron’s auditors, and
insider trading.
   In November 2004, Skilling moved to transfer the trial to
another venue; he contended that hostility toward him in
Houston, coupled with extensive pretrial publicity, had poi­
soned potential jurors. To support this assertion, Skilling,
aided by media experts, submitted hundreds of news reports
detailing Enron’s downfall; he also presented afﬁdavits from

  1
    The mail- and wire-fraud statutes criminalize the use of the mails or
wires in furtherance of “any scheme or artiﬁce to defraud, or for obtaining
money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representa­
tions, or promises.” 18 U. S. C. § 1341 (mail fraud); § 1343 (wire fraud).
The honest-services statute, § 1346, deﬁnes “the term ‘scheme or artiﬁce
to defraud’ ” in these provisions to include “a scheme or artiﬁce to deprive
another of the intangible right of honest services.”

=== PAGE 13 ===
370                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of the Court

the experts he engaged portraying community attitudes in
Houston in comparison to other potential venues.
   The U. S. District Court for the Southern District of
Texas, in accord with rulings in two earlier instituted
Enron-related prosecutions,2 denied the venue-transfer mo­
tion. Despite “isolated incidents of intemperate commen­
tary,” the court observed, media coverage “ha[d] [mostly]
been objective and unemotional,” and the facts of the case
were “neither heinous nor sensational.” App. to Brief
for United States 10a–11a.3 Moreover, “courts ha[d] com­
monly” favored “effective voir dire . . . to ferret out any
[juror] bias.” Id., at 18a. Pretrial publicity about the case,
the court concluded, did not warrant a presumption that Skil­
ling would be unable to obtain a fair trial in Houston. Id.,
at 22a.
   In the months leading up to the trial, the District Court
solicited from the parties questions the court might use to
screen prospective jurors. Unable to agree on a question­

   2
     See United States v. Fastow, 292 F. Supp. 2d 914, 918 (SD Tex. 2003);
Order in United States v. Hirko, No. 4:03–cr–00093 (SD Tex., Nov. 24,
2004), Record, Doc. 484, p. 6. These rulings were made by two other
judges of the same District. Three judges residing in the area thus inde­
pendently found that defendants in Enron-related cases could obtain a fair
trial in Houston.
   3
     Painting a different picture of the media coverage surrounding Enron’s
collapse, Justice Sotomayor’s opinion relies heavily on afﬁdavits of
media experts and jury consultants submitted by Skilling in support of
his venue-transfer motion. E. g., post, at 428, 429–430, 431 (opinion con­
curring in part and dissenting in part) (hereinafter dissent); post, at 431,
n. 2, and 448, n. 10; post, at 451, and 459–460, n. 22. These Skilling-
employed experts selected and emphasized negative statements in various
news stories. But the District Court Judge did not ﬁnd the experts’ sam­
ples representative of the coverage at large; having “[m]eticulous[ly] re-
view[ed] all of the evidence” Skilling presented, the court concluded that
“incidents [of news reports using] less-than-objective language” were
dwarfed by “the largely fact-based tone of most of the articles.” App. to
Brief for United States 7a, 10a, 11a. See also post, at 429 (acknowledging
that “many of the stories were straightforward news items”).

=== PAGE 14 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                   371

                          Opinion of the Court

naire’s format and content, Skilling and the Government sub­
mitted dueling documents. On venire members’ sources of
Enron-related news, for example, the Government proposed
that they tick boxes from a checklist of generic labels such
as “[t]elevision,” “[n]ewspaper,” and “[r]adio,” Record 8415;
Skilling proposed more probing questions asking venire
members to list the speciﬁc names of their media sources and
to report on “what st[ood] out in [their] mind[s]” of “all the
things [they] ha[d] seen, heard or read about Enron,” id.,
at 8404–8405.
   The District Court rejected the Government’s sparer in­
quiries in favor of Skilling’s submission. Skilling’s ques­
tions “[we]re more helpful,” the court said, “because [they]
[we]re generally . . . open-ended and w[ould] allow the poten­
tial jurors to give us more meaningful information.” Id., at
9539. The court converted Skilling’s submission, with slight
modiﬁcations, into a 77-question, 14-page document that
asked prospective jurors about, inter alia, their sources of
news and exposure to Enron-related publicity, beliefs con­
cerning Enron and what caused its collapse, opinions regard­
ing the defendants and their possible guilt or innocence, and
relationships to the company and to anyone affected by its
demise.4

  4
    Questions included the following: “What are your opinions about the
compensation that executives of large corporations receive?”; “Have you,
any family members, or friends ever worked for or applied for work with,”
“done business with,” or “owned stock in Enron Corporation or any Enron
subsidiaries and partnership?”; “Do you know anyone . . . who has been
negatively affected or hurt in any way by what happened at Enron?”; “Do
you have an opinion about the cause of the collapse of Enron? If YES,
what is your opinion? On what do you base your opinion?”; “Have you
heard or read about any of the Enron cases? If YES, please tell us the
name of all sources from which you have heard or read about the Enron
cases.”; “Have you read any books or seen any movies about Enron? If
YES, please describe.”; “Are you angry about what happened with Enron?
If YES, please explain.”; “Do you have an opinion about . . . Jeffrey Skil­
ling . . . [?] If YES, what is your opinion? On what do you base your

=== PAGE 15 ===
372                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of the Court

   In November 2005, the District Court mailed the question­
naire to 400 prospective jurors and received responses from
nearly all the addressees. The court granted hardship ex­
emptions to approximately 90 individuals, id., at 11773–
11774, and the parties, with the court’s approval, further
winnowed the pool by excusing another 119 for cause, hard­
ship, or physical disability, id., at 11891, 13594. The parties
agreed to exclude, in particular, “each and every” prospec­
tive juror who said that a pre-existing opinion about Enron
or the defendants would prevent her from impartially consid­
ering the evidence at trial. Id., at 13668.
   On December 28, 2005, three weeks before the date sched­
uled for the commencement of trial, Causey pleaded guilty.
Skilling’s attorneys immediately requested a continuance,
and the District Court agreed to delay the proceedings until
the end of January 2006. Id., at 14277. In the interim,
Skilling renewed his change-of-venue motion, arguing that
the juror questionnaires revealed pervasive bias and that
news accounts of Causey’s guilty plea further tainted the
jury pool. If Houston remained the trial venue, Skilling
urged that “jurors need to be questioned individually by both
the Court and counsel” concerning their opinions of Enron
and “publicity issues.” Id., at 12074.
   The District Court again declined to move the trial. Skil­
ling, the court concluded, still had not “establish[ed] that
pretrial publicity and/or community prejudice raise[d] a pre­
sumption of inherent jury prejudice.” Id., at 14115. The
questionnaires and voir dire, the court observed, provided

opinion?”; “Based on anything you have heard, read, or been told[,] do you
have any opinion about the guilt or innocence of . . . Jeffrey Skilling[?] If
. . . YES . . . , please explain.”; “[W]ould any opinion you may have formed
regarding Enron or any of the defendants prevent you from impartially
considering the evidence presented during the trial of . . . Jeffrey Skil­
ling[?] If YES or UNSURE . . . , please explain.”; “Is there anything
else you feel is important for the court to know about you?” Record
13013–13026.

=== PAGE 16 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                   373

                          Opinion of the Court

safeguards adequate to ensure an impartial jury. Id., at
14115–14116.
  Denying Skilling’s request for attorney-led voir dire, the
court said that in 17 years on the bench:
      “I’ve found . . . I get more forthcoming responses from
      potential jurors than the lawyers on either side. I don’t
      know whether people are suspicious of lawyers—but I
      think if I ask a person a question, I will get a candid
      response much easier than if a lawyer asks the ques­
      tion.” Id., at 11805.
But the court promised to give counsel an opportunity to ask
followup questions, ibid., and it agreed that venire members
should be examined individually about pretrial publicity,
id., at 11051–11053. The court also allotted the defendants
jointly 14 peremptory challenges, 2 more than the standard
number prescribed by Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure
24(b)(2) and (c)(4)(B). Id., at 13673–13675.
   Voir dire began on January 30, 2006. The District Court
ﬁrst emphasized to the venire the importance of impartiality
and explained the presumption of innocence and the Govern­
ment’s burden of proof. The trial, the court next instructed,
was not a forum “to seek vengeance against Enron’s former
ofﬁcers,” or to “provide remedies for” its victims. App.
823a. “The bottom line,” the court stressed, “is that we
want . . . jurors who . . . will faithfully, conscientiously and
impartially serve if selected.” Id., at 823a–824a. In re­
sponse to the court’s query whether any prospective juror
questioned her ability to adhere to these instructions, two
individuals indicated that they could not be fair; they were
therefore excused for cause, id., at 816a, 819a–820a.
   After questioning the venire as a group,5 the District
Court brought prospective jurors one by one to the bench
  5
   Among other questions, the court asked whether sympathy toward the
victims of Enron’s collapse or a desire to see justice done would overpower
prospective jurors’ impartiality. App. 839a–840a.

=== PAGE 17 ===
374                SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                          Opinion of the Court

for individual examination. Although the questions varied,
the process generally tracked the following format: The
court asked about exposure to Enron-related news and the
content of any stories that stood out in the prospective ju­
ror’s mind. Next, the court homed in on questionnaire an­
swers that raised a red ﬂag signaling possible bias. The
court then permitted each side to pose followup questions.
Finally, after the venire member stepped away, the court
entertained and ruled on challenges for cause. In all, the
court granted one of the Government’s for-cause challenges
and denied four; it granted three of the defendants’ chal­
lenges and denied six. The parties agreed to excuse three
additional jurors for cause and one for hardship.
   By the end of the day, the court had qualiﬁed 38 prospec­
tive jurors, a number sufﬁcient, allowing for peremptory
challenges, to empanel 12 jurors and 4 alternates.6 Before
the jury was sworn in, Skilling objected to the seating of six
jurors. He did not contend that they were in fact biased;
instead, he urged that he would have used peremptories to
exclude them had he not exhausted his supply by striking

  6
    Selection procedures of similar style and duration took place in three
Enron-related criminal cases earlier prosecuted in Houston—United
States v. Arthur Andersen LLP, No. 4:02–cr–00121–1 (SD Tex.) (charges
against Enron’s outside accountants); United States v. Bayly, No. 4:03–
cr–00363 (SD Tex.) (charges against Merrill Lynch and Enron executives
for alleged sham sales of Nigerian barges); United States v. Hirko,
No. 4:03–cr–00093 (SD Tex.) (fraud and insider-trading charges against
ﬁve Enron Broadband Services executives). See Brief for United States
9 (In all three cases, the District Court “distributed a jury questionnaire
to a pool of several hundred potential jurors; dismissed individuals whose
responses to the questionnaire demonstrated bias or other disqualifying
characteristics; and, after further questioning by the court and counsel,
selected a jury from the remaining venire in one day.”); Government’s
Memorandum of Law in Response to Defendants’ Joint Motion to Transfer
Venue in United States v. Skilling, No. 4:04–cr–00025 (SD Tex., Dec. 3,
2004), Record, Doc. 231, pp. 21–28 (describing in depth the jury-selection
process in the Arthur Andersen and Bayly trials).

=== PAGE 18 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                   375

                          Opinion of the Court

several venire members after the court refused to excuse
them for cause. Supp. App. 3sa–4sa (Sealed).7 The court
overruled this objection.
   After the jurors took their oath, the District Court told
them they could not discuss the case with anyone or follow
media accounts of the proceedings. “[E]ach of you,” the
court explained, “needs to be absolutely sure that your deci­
sions concerning the facts will be based only on the evidence
that you hear and read in this courtroom.” App. 1026a.
   Following a four-month trial and nearly ﬁve days of delib­
eration, the jury found Skilling guilty of 19 counts, including
the honest-services-fraud conspiracy charge, and not guilty
of 9 insider-trading counts. The District Court sentenced
Skilling to 292 months’ imprisonment, 3 years’ supervised
release, and $45 million in restitution.
   On appeal, Skilling raised a host of challenges to his con­
victions, including the fair-trial and honest-services argu­
ments he presses here. Regarding the former, the Fifth
Circuit initially determined that the volume and negative
tone of media coverage generated by Enron’s collapse cre­
ated a presumption of juror prejudice. 554 F. 3d 529, 559
(2009).8 The court also noted potential prejudice stemming
from Causey’s guilty plea and from the large number of
victims in Houston—from the “[t]housands of Enron employ­

   7
     Skilling had requested an additional peremptory strike each time the
District Court rejected a for-cause objection. The court, which had al­
ready granted two extra peremptories, see supra, at 373, denied each
request.
   8
     The Fifth Circuit described the media coverage as follows:
   “Local newspapers ran many personal interest stories in which sympa­
thetic individuals expressed feelings of anger and betrayal toward
Enron. . . . Even the [Houston] Chronicle’s sports page wrote of Skilling’s
guilt as a foregone conclusion. Similarly, the Chronicle’s ‘Pethouse Pet
of the Week’ section mentioned that a pet had ‘enjoyed watching those
Enron jerks being led away in handcuffs.’ These are but a few examples
of the Chronicle’s coverage.” 554 F. 3d, at 559 (footnote omitted).

=== PAGE 19 ===
376               SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                        Opinion of the Court

ees . . . [who] lost their jobs, and . . . saw their 401(k) accounts
wiped out,” to Houstonians who suffered spillover economic
effects. Id., at 559–560.
   The Court of Appeals stated, however, that “the presump­
tion [of prejudice] is rebuttable,” and it therefore examined
the voir dire to determine whether “the District Court em­
paneled an impartial jury.” Id., at 561 (internal quotation
marks, italics, and some capitalization omitted). The voir
dire was, in the Fifth Circuit’s view, “proper and thorough.”
Id., at 562. Moreover, the court noted, Skilling had chal­
lenged only one seated juror—Juror 11—for cause. Al­
though Juror 11 made some troubling comments about corpo­
rate greed, the District Court “observed [his] demeanor,
listened to his answers, and believed he would make the gov­
ernment prove its case.” Id., at 564. In sum, the Fifth Cir­
cuit found that the Government had overcome the presump­
tion of prejudice and that Skilling had not “show[n] that any
juror who actually sat was prejudiced against him.” Ibid.
   The Court of Appeals also rejected Skilling’s claim that
his conduct did not indicate any conspiracy to commit
honest-services fraud. “[T]he jury was entitled to convict
Skilling,” the court stated, “on these elements”: “(1) a mate­
rial breach of a ﬁduciary duty . . . (2) that results in a det­
riment to the employer,” including one occasioned by an
employee’s decision to “withhold material information, i. e.,
information that he had reason to believe would lead a rea­
sonable employer to change its conduct.” Id., at 547. The
Fifth Circuit did not address Skilling’s argument that the
honest-services statute, if not interpreted to exclude his
actions, should be invalidated as unconstitutionally vague.
Brief for Defendant-Appellant Skilling in No. 06–20885
(CA5), p. 65, n. 21.
   Arguing that the Fifth Circuit erred in its consideration
of these claims, Skilling sought relief from this Court. We
granted certiorari, 558 U. S. 945 (2009), and now afﬁrm in

=== PAGE 20 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                   377

                          Opinion of the Court

part, vacate in part, and remand for further proceedings.9
We consider ﬁrst Skilling’s allegation of juror prejudice, and
next, his honest-services argument.

                                    II
  Pointing to “the community passion aroused by Enron’s
collapse and the vitriolic media treatment” aimed at him,
Skilling argues that his trial “never should have proceeded
in Houston.” Brief for Petitioner 20. And even if it had
been possible to select impartial jurors in Houston, “[t]he
truncated voir dire . . . did almost nothing to weed out preju­
dices,” he contends, so “[f]ar from rebutting the presumption
of prejudice, the record below afﬁrmatively conﬁrmed it.”
Id., at 21. Skilling’s fair-trial claim thus raises two distinct
questions. First, did the District Court err by failing to
move the trial to a different venue based on a presumption
of prejudice? Second, did actual prejudice contaminate
Skilling’s jury?10
                                 A
                                 1
  The Sixth Amendment secures to criminal defendants the
right to trial by an impartial jury. By constitutional design,
that trial occurs “in the State where the . . . Crimes . . .

  9
    We also granted certiorari and heard arguments this Term in two other
cases raising questions concerning the honest-services statute’s scope.
See Black v. United States, No. 08–876; Weyhrauch v. United States,
No. 08–1196. Today we vacate and remand those decisions in light of this
opinion. Black, post, p. 465; Weyhrauch, post, p. 476.
  10
     Assuming, as the Fifth Circuit found, that a presumption of prejudice
arose in Houston, the question presented in Skilling’s petition for certio­
rari casts his actual-prejudice argument as an inquiry into when, if ever,
that presumption may be rebutted. See Pet. for Cert. i. Although we
ﬁnd a presumption of prejudice unwarranted in this case, we consider the
actual-prejudice issue to be fairly subsumed within the question we agreed
to decide. See this Court’s Rule 14.1(a).

=== PAGE 21 ===
378                  SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                            Opinion of the Court

have been committed.” Art. III, § 2, cl. 3. See also Amdt.
6 (right to trial by “jury of the State and district wherein
the crime shall have been committed”). The Constitution’s
place-of-trial prescriptions, however, do not impede transfer
of the proceeding to a different district at the defendant’s
request if extraordinary local prejudice will prevent a fair
trial—a “basic requirement of due process,” In re Murchi­
son, 349 U. S. 133, 136 (1955).11
                                       2
  “The theory of our [trial] system is that the conclusions to
be reached in a case will be induced only by evidence and
argument in open court, and not by any outside inﬂuence,
whether of private talk or public print.” Patterson v. Colo­
rado ex rel. Attorney General of Colo., 205 U. S. 454, 462
(1907) (opinion for the Court by Holmes, J.). When does the
  11
     Venue transfer in federal court is governed by Federal Rule of Crimi­
nal Procedure 21, which instructs that a “court must transfer the proceed­
ing . . . to another district if the court is satisﬁed that so great a prejudice
against the defendant exists in the transferring district that the defend­
ant cannot obtain a fair and impartial trial there.” As the language of
the Rule suggests, district-court calls on the necessity of transfer are
granted a healthy measure of appellate-court respect. See Platt v. Min­
nesota Mining & Mfg. Co., 376 U. S. 240, 245 (1964). Federal courts have
invoked the Rule to move certain highly charged cases, for example, the
prosecution arising from the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal
Ofﬁce Building in Oklahoma City. See United States v. McVeigh, 918
F. Supp. 1467, 1474 (WD Okla. 1996). They have also exercised discretion
to deny venue-transfer requests in cases involving substantial pretrial
publicity and community impact, for example, the prosecutions resulting
from the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, see United States v. Salameh,
No. S5 93 Cr. 0180 (KTD) (SDNY, Sept. 15, 1993); United States v. Yousef,
No. S12 93 Cr. 180 (KTD) (SDNY, July 18, 1997), aff ’d 327 F. 3d 56, 155
(CA2 2003), and the prosecution of John Walker Lindh, referred to in the
press as the American Taliban, see United States v. Lindh, 212 F. Supp.
2d 541, 549–551 (ED Va. 2002). Skilling does not argue, distinct from his
due process challenge, that the District Court abused its discretion under
Rule 21 by declining to move his trial. We therefore review the District
Court’s venue-transfer decision only for compliance with the Constitution.

=== PAGE 22 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)             379

                      Opinion of the Court

publicity attending conduct charged as criminal dim pros­
pects that the trier can judge a case, as due process requires,
impartially, unswayed by outside inﬂuence? Because most
cases of consequence garner at least some pretrial publicity,
courts have considered this question in diverse settings.
We begin our discussion by addressing the presumption of
prejudice from which the Fifth Circuit’s analysis in Skilling’s
case proceeded. The foundation precedent is Rideau v.
Louisiana, 373 U. S. 723 (1963).
   Wilbert Rideau robbed a bank in a small Louisiana town,
kidnaped three bank employees, and killed one of them. Po­
lice interrogated Rideau in jail without counsel present and
obtained his confession. Without informing Rideau, no less
seeking his consent, the police ﬁlmed the interrogation. On
three separate occasions shortly before the trial, a local tele­
vision station broadcast the ﬁlm to audiences ranging from
24,000 to 53,000 individuals. Rideau moved for a change of
venue, arguing that he could not receive a fair trial in the
parish where the crime occurred, which had a population of
approximately 150,000 people. The trial court denied the
motion, and a jury eventually convicted Rideau. The Su­
preme Court of Louisiana upheld the conviction.
   We reversed. “What the people [in the community] saw
on their television sets,” we observed, “was Rideau, in jail,
ﬂanked by the sheriff and two state troopers, admitting in
detail the commission of the robbery, kidnapping, and mur­
der.” Id., at 725. “[T]o the tens of thousands of people who
saw and heard it,” we explained, the interrogation “in a very
real sense was Rideau’s trial—at which he pleaded guilty.”
Id., at 726. We therefore “d[id] not hesitate to hold, without
pausing to examine a particularized transcript of the voir
dire,” that “[t]he kangaroo court proceedings” trailing the
televised confession violated due process. Id., at 726–727.
   We followed Rideau’s lead in two later cases in which
media coverage manifestly tainted a criminal prosecution.
In Estes v. Texas, 381 U. S. 532, 538 (1965), extensive public­

=== PAGE 23 ===
380                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of the Court

ity before trial swelled into excessive exposure during pre­
liminary court proceedings as reporters and television crews
overran the courtroom and “bombard[ed] . . . the community
with the sights and sounds of ” the pretrial hearing. The
media’s overzealous reporting efforts, we observed, “led to
considerable disruption” and denied the “judicial serenity
and calm to which [Billie Sol Estes] was entitled.” Id.,
at 536.
   Similarly, in Sheppard v. Maxwell, 384 U. S. 333 (1966),
news reporters extensively covered the story of Sam Shep­
pard, who was accused of bludgeoning his pregnant wife to
death. “[B]edlam reigned at the courthouse during the trial
and newsmen took over practically the entire courtroom,”
thrusting jurors “into the role of celebrities.” Id., at 353,
355. Pretrial media coverage, which we characterized as
“months [of] virulent publicity about Sheppard and the mur­
der,” did not alone deny due process, we noted. Id., at 354.
But Sheppard’s case involved more than heated reporting
pretrial: We upset the murder conviction because a “carnival
atmosphere” pervaded the trial, id., at 358.
   In each of these cases, we overturned a “conviction ob­
tained in a trial atmosphere that [was] utterly corrupted by
press coverage”; our decisions, however, “cannot be made to
stand for the proposition that juror exposure to . . . news
accounts of the crime . . . alone presumptively deprives the
defendant of due process.” Murphy v. Florida, 421 U. S.
794, 798–799 (1975).12 See also, e. g., Patton v. Yount, 467
  12
    Murphy involved the robbery prosecution of the notorious Jack Mur­
phy, a convicted murderer who helped mastermind the 1964 heist of the
Star of India sapphire from New York’s American Museum of Natural
History. Pointing to “extensive press coverage” about him, Murphy
moved to transfer venue. 421 U. S., at 796. The trial court denied the
motion, and a jury convicted Murphy. We afﬁrmed. Murphy’s trial, we
explained, was markedly different from the proceedings at issue in Rideau
v. Louisiana, 373 U. S. 723 (1963), Estes v. Texas, 381 U. S. 532 (1965), and
Sheppard v. Maxwell, 384 U. S. 333 (1966), which “entirely lack[ed] . . . the
solemnity and sobriety to which a defendant is entitled in a system that

=== PAGE 24 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    381

                           Opinion of the Court

U. S. 1025 (1984).13 Prominence does not necessarily pro­
duce prejudice, and juror impartiality, we have reiterated,
does not require ignorance. Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U. S. 717,
722 (1961) (Jurors are not required to be “totally ignorant of
the facts and issues involved”; “scarcely any of those best
qualiﬁed to serve as jurors will not have formed some im­
pression or opinion as to the merits of the case.”); Reynolds
v. United States, 98 U. S. 145, 155–156 (1879) (“[E]very case
of public interest is almost, as a matter of necessity, brought
to the attention of all the intelligent people in the vicinity,
and scarcely any one can be found among those best ﬁtted
for jurors who has not read or heard of it, and who has not
some impression or some opinion in respect to its merits.”).
A presumption of prejudice, our decisions indicate, attends
only the extreme case.
                                3
  Relying on Rideau, Estes, and Sheppard, Skilling asserts
that we need not pause to examine the screening question­
naires or the voir dire before declaring his jury’s verdict
void. We are not persuaded. Important differences sepa­

subscribes to any notion of fairness and rejects the verdict of a mob.” 421
U. S., at 799. Voir dire revealed no great hostility toward Murphy;
“[s]ome of the jurors had a vague recollection of the robbery with which
[he] was charged and each had some knowledge of [his] past crimes, but
none betrayed any belief in the relevance of [his] past to the present case.”
Id., at 800 (footnote omitted).
   13
      In Yount, the media reported on Jon Yount’s confession to a brutal
murder and his prior conviction for the crime, which had been reversed
due to a violation of Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U. S. 436 (1966). During
voir dire, 77% of prospective jurors acknowledged they would carry an
opinion into the jury box, and 8 of the 14 seated jurors and alternates
admitted they had formed an opinion as to Yount’s guilt. 467 U. S., at
1029–1030. Nevertheless, we rejected Yount’s presumption-of-prejudice
claim. The adverse publicity and community outrage, we noted, were at
their height prior to Yount’s ﬁrst trial, four years before the second prose­
cution; time had helped “sooth[e] and eras[e]” community prejudice, id.,
at 1034.

=== PAGE 25 ===
382                SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                          Opinion of the Court

rate Skilling’s prosecution from those in which we have pre­
sumed juror prejudice.14
   First, we have emphasized in prior decisions the size and
characteristics of the community in which the crime oc­
curred. In Rideau, for example, we noted that the murder
was committed in a parish of only 150,000 residents. Hous­
ton, in contrast, is the fourth most populous city in the Na­
tion: At the time of Skilling’s trial, more than 4.5 million
individuals eligible for jury duty resided in the Houston area.
App. 627a. Given this large, diverse pool of potential jurors,
the suggestion that 12 impartial individuals could not be em­
paneled is hard to sustain. See Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500
U. S. 415, 429 (1991) (potential for prejudice mitigated by the
size of the “metropolitan Washington [D. C.] statistical area,
which has a population of over 3 million, and in which, unfor­
tunately, hundreds of murders are committed each year”);
Gentile v. State Bar of Nev., 501 U. S. 1030, 1044 (1991) (plu­
rality opinion) (reduced likelihood of prejudice where venire
was drawn from a pool of over 600,000 individuals).15
   Second, although news stories about Skilling were not
kind, they contained no confession or other blatantly prejudi­
cial information of the type readers or viewers could not rea­
sonably be expected to shut from sight. Rideau’s dramati­

  14
      Skilling’s reliance on Estes and Sheppard is particularly misplaced;
those cases involved media interference with courtroom proceedings dur­
ing trial. See supra, at 379–380. Skilling does not assert that news cov­
erage reached and inﬂuenced his jury after it was empaneled.
   15
      According to a survey commissioned by Skilling in conjunction with
his ﬁrst motion for a venue change, only 12.3% of Houstonians named him
when asked to list Enron executives they believed guilty of crimes. App.
375a–376a. In response to the followup question “[w]hat words come to
mind when you hear the name Jeff Skilling?”, two-thirds of respondents
failed to say a single negative word, id., at 376a: 43% either had never
heard of Skilling or stated that nothing came to mind when they heard
his name, and another 23% knew Skilling’s name was associated with
Enron but reported no opinion about him, Record 3210–3211; see App.
417a–492a.

=== PAGE 26 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    383

                           Opinion of the Court

cally staged admission of guilt, for instance, was likely
imprinted indelibly in the mind of anyone who watched it.
Cf. Parker v. Randolph, 442 U. S. 62, 72 (1979) (plurality
opinion) (“[T]he defendant’s own confession [is] probably the
most probative and damaging evidence that can be admitted
against him.” (internal quotation marks omitted)). Pretrial
publicity about Skilling was less memorable and prejudicial.
No evidence of the smoking-gun variety invited prejudg­
ment of his culpability. See United States v. Chagra, 669
F. 2d 241, 251–252, n. 11 (CA5 1982) (“A jury may have difﬁ­
culty in disbelieving or forgetting a defendant’s opinion of
his own guilt but have no difﬁculty in rejecting the opinions
of others because they may not be well-founded.”).
   Third, unlike cases in which trial swiftly followed a widely
reported crime, e. g., Rideau, 373 U. S., at 724, over four
years elapsed between Enron’s bankruptcy and Skilling’s
trial. Although reporters covered Enron-related news
throughout this period, the decibel level of media attention
diminished somewhat in the years following Enron’s collapse.
See App. 700a; id., at 785a; Yount, 467 U. S., at 1032, 1034.
   Finally, and of prime signiﬁcance, Skilling’s jury acquitted
him of nine insider-trading counts. Similarly, earlier insti­
tuted Enron-related prosecutions yielded no overwhelming
victory for the Government.16 In Rideau, Estes, and Shep­
pard, in marked contrast, the jury’s verdict did not under­
mine in any way the supposition of juror bias. It would be
odd for an appellate court to presume prejudice in a case in
which jurors’ actions run counter to that presumption. See,
e. g., United States v. Arzola-Amaya, 867 F. 2d 1504, 1514

  16
     As the United States summarizes, “[I]n Hirko, the jury deliberated
for several days and did not convict any Enron defendant; in Bayly, which
was routinely described as ‘the ﬁrst Enron criminal trial,’ the jury con­
victed ﬁve defendants, . . . but acquitted a former Enron executive. At
the sentencing phase of Bayly, the jury found a loss amount of slightly
over $13 million, even though the government had argued that the true
loss . . . was $40 million.” Brief for United States 9–10 (citation omitted).

=== PAGE 27 ===
384                SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                         Opinion of the Court

(CA5 1989) (“The jury’s ability to discern a failure of proof
of guilt of some of the alleged crimes indicates a fair minded
consideration of the issues and reinforces our belief and con­
clusion that the media coverage did not lead to the depriva­
tion of [the] right to an impartial trial.”).
                                  4
   Skilling’s trial, in short, shares little in common with those
in which we approved a presumption of juror prejudice.
The Fifth Circuit reached the opposite conclusion based pri­
marily on the magnitude and negative tone of media atten­
tion directed at Enron. But “pretrial publicity—even per­
vasive, adverse publicity—does not inevitably lead to an
unfair trial.” Nebraska Press Assn. v. Stuart, 427 U. S. 539,
554 (1976). In this case, as just noted, news stories about
Enron did not present the kind of vivid, unforgettable infor­
mation we have recognized as particularly likely to produce
prejudice, and Houston’s size and diversity diluted the me­
dia’s impact.17
   Nor did Enron’s “sheer number of victims,” 554 F. 3d, at
560, trigger a presumption of prejudice. Although the wide­
spread community impact necessitated careful identiﬁcation
and inspection of prospective jurors’ connections to Enron,
the extensive screening questionnaire and followup voir dire
were well suited to that task. And hindsight shows the ef­
ﬁcacy of these devices; as we discuss infra, at 389–390,
jurors’ links to Enron were either nonexistent or attenuated.
   Finally, although Causey’s “well-publicized decision to
plead guilty” shortly before trial created a danger of juror
  17
    The Fifth Circuit, moreover, did not separate media attention aimed
at Skilling from that devoted to Enron’s downfall more generally. Data
submitted by Skilling in support of his ﬁrst motion for a venue transfer
suggested that a slim percentage of Enron-related stories speciﬁcally
named him. App. 572a. “[W]hen publicity is about the event, rather
than directed at individual defendants, this may lessen any prejudicial
impact.” United States v. Hueftle, 687 F. 2d 1305, 1310 (CA10 1982).

=== PAGE 28 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    385

                           Opinion of the Court

prejudice, 554 F. 3d, at 559, the District Court took appro­
priate steps to reduce that risk. The court delayed the pro­
ceedings by two weeks, lessening the immediacy of that de­
velopment. And during voir dire, the court asked about
prospective jurors’ exposure to recent publicity, including
news regarding Causey. Only two venire members recalled
the plea; neither mentioned Causey by name, and neither
ultimately served on Skilling’s jury. App. 888a, 993a. Al­
though publicity about a codefendant’s guilty plea calls for
inquiry to guard against actual prejudice, it does not ordi­
narily—and, we are satisﬁed, it did not here—warrant an
automatic presumption of prejudice.
  Persuaded that no presumption arose,18 we conclude that
the District Court, in declining to order a venue change, did
not exceed constitutional limitations.19

                                    B
   We next consider whether actual prejudice infected Skil­
ling’s jury. Voir dire, Skilling asserts, did not adequately
detect and defuse juror bias. “[T]he record . . . afﬁrmatively
conﬁrm[s]” prejudice, he maintains, because several seated
jurors “prejudged his guilt.” Brief for Petitioner 21. We
disagree with Skilling’s characterization of the voir dire and
the jurors selected through it.

  18
      The parties disagree about whether a presumption of prejudice can be
rebutted, and, if it can, what standard of proof governs that issue. Com­
pare Brief for Petitioner 25–35 with Brief for United States 24–32, 35–36.
Because we hold that no presumption arose, we need not, and do not, reach
these questions.
   19
      The dissent acknowledges that “the prospect of seating an unbiased
jury in Houston was not so remote as to compel the conclusion that the
District Court acted unconstitutionally in denying Skilling’s motion to
change venue.” Post, at 445. The dissent’s conclusion that Skilling did
not receive a fair trial accordingly turns on its perception of the adequacy
of the jury-selection process.

=== PAGE 29 ===
386             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

                               1
   No hard-and-fast formula dictates the necessary depth or
breadth of voir dire. See United States v. Wood, 299 U. S.
123, 145–146 (1936) (“Impartiality is not a technical concep­
tion. It is a state of mind. For the ascertainment of this
mental attitude of appropriate indifference, the Constitution
lays down no particular tests and procedure is not chained
to any ancient and artiﬁcial formula.”). Jury selection, we
have repeatedly emphasized, is “particularly within the
province of the trial judge.” Ristaino v. Ross, 424 U. S.
589, 594–595 (1976) (internal quotation marks omitted); see,
e. g., Mu’Min, 500 U. S., at 424; Yount, 467 U. S., at 1038;
Rosales-Lopez v. United States, 451 U. S. 182, 188–189 (1981)
(plurality opinion); Connors v. United States, 158 U. S. 408,
408–413 (1895).
   When pretrial publicity is at issue, “primary reliance on
the judgment of the trial court makes [especially] good
sense” because the judge “sits in the locale where the public­
ity is said to have had its effect” and may base her evaluation
on her “own perception of the depth and extent of news sto­
ries that might inﬂuence a juror.” Mu’Min, 500 U. S., at
427. Appellate courts making after-the-fact assessments of
the media’s impact on jurors should be mindful that their
judgments lack the on-the-spot comprehension of the situa­
tion possessed by trial judges.
   Reviewing courts are properly resistant to second-
guessing the trial judge’s estimation of a juror’s impartiality,
for that judge’s appraisal is ordinarily inﬂuenced by a host
of factors impossible to capture fully in the record—among
them, the prospective juror’s inﬂection, sincerity, demeanor,
candor, body language, and apprehension of duty. See
Reynolds, 98 U. S., at 156–157. In contrast to the cold tran­
script received by the appellate court, the in-the-moment
voir dire affords the trial court a more intimate and immedi­
ate basis for assessing a venire member’s ﬁtness for jury

=== PAGE 30 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                      387

                            Opinion of the Court

service. We consider the adequacy of jury selection in Skil­
ling’s case, therefore, attentive to the respect due to
district-court determinations of juror impartiality and of the
measures necessary to ensure that impartiality.20

                                      2
   Skilling deems the voir dire insufﬁcient because, he ar­
gues, jury selection lasted “just ﬁve hours,” “[m]ost of the
court’s questions were conclusory[,] high-level, and failed ad­
equately to probe jurors’ true feelings,” and the court “con­
sistently took prospective jurors at their word once they
claimed they could be fair, no matter what other indications
of bias were present.” Brief for Petitioner 10–11 (emphasis
  20
     The dissent recognizes “the ‘wide discretion’ owed to trial courts when
it comes to jury-related issues,” post, at 447 (quoting Mu’Min v. Virginia,
500 U. S. 415, 427 (1991)), but its analysis of the District Court’s voir dire
sometimes fails to demonstrate that awareness. For example, the dissent
faults the District Court for not questioning prospective jurors regarding
their “knowledge of or feelings about” Causey’s guilty plea. Post, at 453.
But the court could reasonably decline to ask direct questions involving
Causey’s plea to avoid tipping off until-that-moment uninformed venire
members that the plea had occurred. Cf. App. 822a (counsel for Skilling
urged District Court to ﬁnd a way to question venire members about Cau­
sey “without mentioning anything”). Nothing inhibited defense counsel
from inquiring about venire members’ knowledge of the plea; indeed, coun­
sel posed such a question, id., at 993a; cf. post, at 453, n. 14 (acknowledging
that counsel “squeeze[d] in” an inquiry whether a venire member had
“read about any guilty pleas in this case over the last month or two”
(internal quotation marks omitted)). From this Court’s lofty and “pan­
oramic” vantage point, post, at 447, lines of voir dire inquiry that “might
be helpful in assessing whether a juror is impartial” are not hard to con­
ceive. Mu’Min, 500 U. S., at 425. “To be constitutionally compelled,
however, it is not enough that such questions might be helpful. Rather,
the trial court’s failure to ask these questions must render the defendant’s
trial fundamentally unfair.” Id., at 425–426. According appropriate def­
erence to the District Court, we cannot characterize jury selection in this
case as fundamentally unfair. Cf. supra, at 374, n. 6 (same selection proc­
ess was used in other Enron-related prosecutions).

=== PAGE 31 ===
388                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                            Opinion of the Court

deleted). Our review of the record, however, yields a differ­
ent appraisal.21
   As noted, supra, at 370–372, and n. 4, the District Court
initially screened venire members by eliciting their re­
sponses to a comprehensive questionnaire drafted in large
part by Skilling. That survey helped to identify prospective
jurors excusable for cause and served as a springboard for
further questions put to remaining members of the array.
Voir dire thus was, in the court’s words, the “culmination of
a lengthy process.” App. 841a; see 554 F. 3d, at 562, n. 51
(“We consider the . . . questionnaire in assessing the quality
of voir dire as a whole.”).22 In other Enron-related prose­

   21
      In addition to focusing on the adequacy of voir dire, our decisions have
also “take[n] into account . . . other measures [that] were used to mitigate
the adverse effects of publicity.” Nebraska Press Assn. v. Stuart, 427
U. S. 539, 565 (1976). We have noted, for example, the prophylactic effect
of “emphatic and clear instructions on the sworn duty of each juror to
decide the issues only on evidence presented in open court.” Id., at 564.
Here, the District Court’s instructions were unequivocal; the jurors, the
court emphasized, were dutybound “to reach a fair and impartial verdict
in this case based solely on the evidence [they] hear[d] and read in th[e]
courtroom.” App. 1026a. Peremptory challenges, too, “provid[e] protec­
tion against [prejudice],” United States ex rel. Darcy v. Handy, 351 U. S.
454, 462 (1956); the District Court, as earlier noted, exercised its discretion
to grant the defendants two extra peremptories, App. 1020a; see supra,
at 373.
   22
      The dissent’s analysis undervalues the 77-item questionnaire, a part of
the selection process difﬁcult to portray as “cursory,” post, at 455, or “ane­
mic,” post, at 460. Notably, the “open-ended questions about [prospective
jurors’] impressions of Enron or Skilling” that the dissent contends should
have been asked, post, at 455, were asked—on the questionnaire, see
supra, at 371–372, n. 4. Moreover, the District Court gave Skilling’s
counsel relatively free rein to ask venire members about their responses
on the questionnaire. See, e. g., App. 869a–870a; id., at 878a, 911a, 953a.
The questionnaire plus followup opportunity to interrogate potential ju­
rors surely gave Skilling’s counsel “clear avenue[s] for . . . permissible
inquiry.” But see post, at 456, n. 17. See also App. 967a (counsel for
Skilling) (“Judge, for the record, if I don’t ask any questions, it’s because
the Court and other counsel have covered it.”).

=== PAGE 32 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    389

                           Opinion of the Court

cutions, we note, District Courts, after inspecting venire
members’ responses to questionnaires, completed the jury-
selection process within one day. See supra, at 374, n. 6.23
  The District Court conducted voir dire, moreover, aware
of the greater-than-normal need, due to pretrial publicity,
to ensure against jury bias. At Skilling’s urging, the court
examined each prospective juror individually, thus prevent­
ing the spread of any prejudicial information to other venire
members. See Mu’Min, 500 U. S., at 425. To encourage
candor, the court repeatedly admonished that there were “no
right and wrong answers to th[e] questions.” E. g., App.
843a. The court denied Skilling’s request for attorney-led
voir dire because, in its experience, potential jurors were
“more forthcoming” when the court, rather than counsel,
asked the question. Record 11805. The parties, however,
were accorded an opportunity to ask followup questions of
every prospective juror brought to the bench for colloquy.
Skilling’s counsel declined to ask anything of more than half
of the venire members questioned individually, including
eight eventually selected for the jury, because, he explained,
“the Court and other counsel have covered” everything he
wanted to know. App. 967a.
  Inspection of the questionnaires and voir dire of the indi­
viduals who actually served as jurors satisﬁes us that, not­
withstanding the ﬂaws Skilling lists, the selection process
successfully secured jurors who were largely untouched by
Enron’s collapse.24 Eleven of the seated jurors and alter­
  23
     One of the earlier prosecutions targeted the “Big Five” public account­
ing ﬁrm Arthur Andersen. See supra, at 374, n. 6. Among media read­
ers and auditors, the name and reputation of Arthur Andersen likely
sparked no less attention than the name and reputation of Jeffrey Skilling.
Cf. supra, at 382, n. 15.
  24
     In considering whether Skilling was tried before an impartial jury, the
dissent relies extensively on venire members not selected for that jury.
See, e. g., post, at 432, n. 4 (quoting the questionnaires of 10 venire mem­
bers; all were excused for cause before voir dire commenced, see Record
11891); post, at 433, n. 6 (quoting the questionnaires of 15 venire members;

=== PAGE 33 ===
390                  SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                            Opinion of the Court

nates reported no connection at all to Enron, while all other
jurors reported at most an insubstantial link. See, e. g.,
Supp. App. 101sa (Juror 63) (“I once met a guy who worked
for Enron. I cannot remember his name.”).25 As for pre­
trial publicity, 14 jurors and alternates speciﬁcally stated
that they had paid scant attention to Enron-related news.
See, e. g., App. 859a–860a (Juror 13) (would “[b]asically” start
out knowing nothing about the case because “I just . . . didn’t
follow [it] a whole lot”); id., at 969a (Juror 78) (“[Enron]
wasn’t anything that I was interested in reading [about] in
detail. . . . I don’t really know much about it.”).26 The re-

none sat on Skilling’s jury); post, at 436, n. 7 (quoting voir dire testimony
of 6 venire members; none sat on Skilling’s jury); post, at 453–458 (report­
ing at length voir dire testimony of Venire Members 17, 29, 61, 74, 75,
and 101; none sat on Skilling’s jury). Statements by nonjurors do not
themselves call into question the adequacy of the jury-selection process;
elimination of these venire members is indeed one indicator that the proc­
ess fulﬁlled its function. Critically, as discussed infra, at 391–392, the
seated jurors showed little knowledge of or interest in, and were person­
ally unaffected by, Enron’s downfall.
   25
      See also Supp. App. 11sa (Juror 10) (“knew some casual co-workers
that owned Enron stock”); id., at 26sa (Juror 11) (“work[s] with someone
who worked at Enron”); id., at 117sa; App. 940a (Juror 64) (two acquaint­
ances lost money due to Enron’s collapse); Supp. App. 236sa (Juror 116)
(work colleague lost money as a result of Enron’s bankruptcy).
   26
      See also App. 850a (Juror 10) (“I haven’t followed [Enron-related
news] in detail or to any extreme at all.”); id., at 856a (Juror 11) (did not
“get into the details of [the Enron case]” and “just kind of tune[d] [it] out”);
id., at 873a (Juror 20) (“I was out of [the] state when [Enron collapsed], and
then personal circumstances kept me from paying much attention.”); id.,
at 892a (Juror 38) (recalled “nothing in particular” about media coverage);
id., at 913a (Juror 50) (“I would hear it on the news and just let it ﬁlter in
and out.”); id., at 935a (Juror 63) (“I don’t really pay attention.”); id., at
940a–941a (Juror 64) (had “[n]ot really” been keeping up with and did not
recall any news about Enron); id., at 971a (Juror 84) (had not read “any­
thing at all about Enron” because he did not “want to read that stuff ”
(internal quotation marks omitted)); id., at 983a (Juror 90) (“seldom” read
the Houston Chronicle and did not watch news programs); id., at 995a–996a
(Juror 99) (did not read newspapers or watch the news; “I don’t know the
details on what [this case] is or what made it what it is”); id., at 1010a

=== PAGE 34 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                     391

                           Opinion of the Court

maining two jurors indicated that nothing in the news inﬂu­
enced their opinions about Skilling.27
   The questionnaires conﬁrmed that, whatever community
prejudice existed in Houston generally, Skilling’s jurors
were not under its sway.28 Although many expressed sym­
pathy for victims of Enron’s bankruptcy and speculated that
greed contributed to the corporation’s collapse, these senti­
ments did not translate into animus toward Skilling. When
asked whether they “ha[d] an opinion about . . . Jeffrey Skil­
ling,” none of the seated jurors and alternates checked the
“yes” box.29 And in response to the question whether “any
opinion [they] may have formed regarding Enron or [Skil­

(Juror 113) (“never really paid that much attention [to] it”); id., at 1013a
(Juror 116) (had “rea[d] a number of different articles,” but “since it hasn’t
affected me personally,” could not “speciﬁcally recall” any of them).
   27
      Id., at 944a (Juror 67) (had not read the Houston Chronicle in the three
months preceding the trial and volunteered: “I don’t form an opinion based
on what . . . I hear on the news”); id., at 974a–975a (Juror 87) (had not
“formed any opinions” about Skilling’s guilt from news stories).
   28
      As the D. C. Circuit observed, reviewing the impact on jurors of media
coverage of the Watergate scandal, “[t]his may come as a surprise to law­
yers and judges, but it is simply a fact of life that matters which interest
them may be less fascinating to the public generally.” United States v.
Haldeman, 559 F. 2d 31, 62–63, n. 37 (1976). See also In re Charlotte
Observer, 882 F. 2d 850, 855–856 (CA4 1989) (“[R]emarkably in the eyes of
many,” “[c]ases such as those involving the Watergate defendants, the Ab-
scam defendants, and . . . John DeLorean, all characterized by massive
pretrial media reportage and commentary, nevertheless proceeded to trial
with juries which . . . were satisfactorily disclosed to have been unaffected
(indeed, in some instances blissfully unaware of or untouched) by that
publicity.”); Brief for ABC, Inc., et al. as Amici Curiae 25–31 (describing
other examples).
   29
      One juror did not check any box, explaining that she lived in another
State when Enron went bankrupt and therefore “was not fully aware of
all the facts regarding Enron’s fall [and] the media coverage.” Supp. App.
62sa (Juror 20). Two other jurors, Juror 10 and Juror 63, indicated in
answer to a different question that they had an opinion about Skilling’s
guilt, but voir dire established they could be impartial. See infra, at
397–398, and 398, n. 33.

=== PAGE 35 ===
392               SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                        Opinion of the Court

ling] [would] prevent” their impartial consideration of the
evidence at trial, every juror—despite options to mark “yes”
or “unsure”—instead checked “no.”
   The District Court, Skilling asserts, should not have “ac­
cept[ed] at face value jurors’ promises of fairness.” Brief
for Petitioner 37. In Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U. S., at 727–728,
Skilling points out, we found actual prejudice despite jurors’
assurances that they could be impartial. Brief for Peti­
tioner 26. Justice Sotomayor, in turn, repeatedly relies
on Irvin, which she regards as closely analogous to this case.
See post, at 448 (dissent). See also, e. g., post, at 441–442, 458,
460, 464. We disagree with that characterization of Irvin.
   The facts of Irvin are worlds apart from those presented
here. Leslie Irvin stood accused of a brutal murder and
robbery spree in a small rural community. 366 U. S., at 719.
In the months before Irvin’s trial, “a barrage” of publicity
was “unleashed against him,” including reports of his confes­
sions to the slayings and robberies. Id., at 725–726. This
Court’s description of the media coverage in Irvin reveals
why the dissent’s “best case” is not an apt comparison:
      “[S]tories revealed the details of [Irvin’s] background,
      including a reference to crimes committed when a juve­
      nile, his convictions for arson almost 20 years previously,
      for burglary and by a court-martial on AWOL charges
      during the war. He was accused of being a parole viola­
      tor. The headlines announced his police line-up identi­
      ﬁcation, that he faced a lie detector test, had been placed
      at the scene of the crime and that the six murders were
      solved but [he] refused to confess. Finally, they an­
      nounced [Irvin’s] confession to the six murders and the
      fact of his indictment for four of them in Indiana. They
      reported [Irvin’s] offer to plead guilty if promised a 99­
      year sentence, but also the determination, on the other
      hand, of the prosecutor to secure the death penalty, and
      that [Irvin] had confessed to 24 burglaries (the modus
      operandi of these robberies was compared to that of the

=== PAGE 36 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)             393

                       Opinion of the Court

    murders and the similarity noted). One story dramati­
    cally relayed the promise of a sheriff to devote his life to
    securing [Irvin’s] execution . . . . Another characterized
    [Irvin] as remorseless and without conscience but also
    as having been found sane by a court-appointed panel of
    doctors. In many of the stories [Irvin] was described
    as the ‘confessed slayer of six,’ a parole violator and
    fraudulent-check artist. [Irvin’s] court-appointed coun­
    sel was quoted as having received ‘much criticism over
    being Irvin’s counsel’ and it was pointed out, by way
    of excusing the attorney, that he would be subject to
    disbarment should he refuse to represent Irvin. On the
    day before the trial the newspapers carried the story
    that Irvin had orally admitted [to] the murder of [one
    victim] as well as ‘the robbery-murder of [a second indi­
    vidual]; the murder of [a third individual], and the
    slaughter of three members of [a different family].’ ”
    Ibid.

“[N]ewspapers in which the[se] stories appeared were deliv­
ered regularly to approximately 95% of the dwellings in” the
county where the trial occurred, which had a population of
only 30,000; “radio and TV stations, which likewise blanketed
that county, also carried extensive newscasts covering the
same incidents.” Id., at 725.
   Reviewing Irvin’s fair-trial claim, this Court noted that
“the pattern of deep and bitter prejudice” in the community
“was clearly reﬂected in the sum total of the voir dire”: “370
prospective jurors or almost 90% of those examined on the
point . . . entertained some opinion as to guilt,” and “[8] out
of the 12 [jurors] thought [Irvin] was guilty.” Id., at 727
(internal quotation marks omitted). Although these jurors
declared they could be impartial, we held that, “[w]ith his
life at stake, it is not requiring too much that [Irvin] be tried
in an atmosphere undisturbed by so huge a wave of public
passion and by a jury other than one in which two-thirds of

=== PAGE 37 ===
394                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of the Court

the members admit, before hearing any testimony, to pos­
sessing a belief in his guilt.” Id., at 728.
  In this case, as noted supra, at 382–383, news stories
about Enron contained nothing resembling the horrifying in­
formation rife in reports about Irvin’s rampage of robberies
and murders. Of key importance, Houston shares little in
common with the rural community in which Irvin’s trial pro­
ceeded, and circulation ﬁgures for Houston media sources
were far lower than the 95% saturation level recorded in
Irvin, see App. to Brief for United States 15a (“The Houston
Chronicle . . . reaches less than one-third of occupied house­
holds in Houston.” (internal quotation marks omitted)).
Skilling’s seated jurors, moreover, exhibited nothing like the
display of bias shown in Irvin. See supra, at 389–392 (not­
ing, inter alia, that none of Skilling’s jurors answered “yes”
when asked if they “ha[d] an opinion about . . . Skilling”).
See also post, at 444 (dissent) (distinguishing Mu’Min from
Irvin on similar bases: the “offense occurred in [a large] met­
ropolitan . . . area,” media “coverage was not as pervasive
as in Irvin and did not contain the same sort of damaging
information,” and “the seated jurors uniformly disclaimed
having ever formed an opinion about the case” (internal quo­
tation marks omitted)). In light of these large differences,
the District Court had far less reason than did the trial court
in Irvin to discredit jurors’ promises of fairness.
  The District Court, moreover, did not simply take venire
members who proclaimed their impartiality at their word.30
As noted, all of Skilling’s jurors had already afﬁrmed on
their questionnaires that they would have no trouble basing

  30
     The court viewed with skepticism, for example, Venire Member 104’s
promises that she could “abide by law,” follow the court’s instructions, and
ﬁnd Skilling not guilty if the Government did not prove its case, App.
1004a; “I have to gauge . . . demeanor, all the answers she gave me,” the
court stated, and “[s]he persuaded me that she could not be fair and impar­
tial, so she’s excused,” id., at 1006a.

=== PAGE 38 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                      395

                            Opinion of the Court

a verdict only on the evidence at trial. Nevertheless, the
court followed up with each individually to uncover con­
cealed bias. This face-to-face opportunity to gauge de­
meanor and credibility, coupled with information from the
questionnaires regarding jurors’ backgrounds, opinions, and
sources of news, gave the court a sturdy foundation to assess
ﬁtness for jury service. See 554 F. 3d, at 562 (The District
Court made “thorough” credibility determinations that “re­
quir[ed] more than just the [venire members’] statements
that [they] could be fair.”). The jury’s not-guilty verdict on
nine insider-trading counts after nearly ﬁve days of delibera­
tion, meanwhile, suggests the court’s assessments were accu­
rate. See United States v. Haldeman, 559 F. 2d 31, 60, n. 28
(CADC 1976). Skilling, we conclude, failed to show that his
voir dire fell short of constitutional requirements.31

                                      3
  Skilling also singles out several jurors in particular and
contends they were openly biased. See United States v.
Martinez-Salazar, 528 U. S. 304, 316 (2000) (“[T]he seating
of any juror who should have been dismissed for cause . . .

  31
     Skilling emphasizes that voir dire did not weed out every juror who
suffered from Enron’s collapse because the District Court failed to grant
his for-cause challenge to Venire Member 29, whose retirement fund lost
$50,000 due to ripple effects from the decline in the value of Enron stock.
App. 880a. Critically, however, Venire Member 29 did not sit on Skil­
ling’s jury: Instead, Skilling struck her using a peremptory challenge.
“[I]f [a] defendant elects to cure [a trial judge’s erroneous for-cause ruling]
by exercising a peremptory challenge, and is subsequently convicted by
a jury on which no biased juror sat,” we have held, “he has not been
deprived of any . . . constitutional right.” United States v. Martinez-
Salazar, 528 U. S. 304, 307 (2000). Indeed, the “use [of] a peremptory
challenge to effect an instantaneous cure of the error” exempliﬁes
“a principal reason for peremptories: to help secure the constitutional
guarantee of trial by an impartial jury.” Id., at 316.

=== PAGE 39 ===
396               SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                       Opinion of the Court

require[s] reversal.”). In reviewing claims of this type, the
deference due to district courts is at its pinnacle: “A trial
court’s ﬁndings of juror impartiality may be overturned only
for manifest error.” Mu’Min, 500 U. S., at 428 (internal quo­
tation marks omitted). Skilling, moreover, unsuccessfully
challenged only one of the seated jurors for cause, “strong
evidence that he was convinced the [other] jurors were not
biased and had not formed any opinions as to his guilt.”
Beck v. Washington, 369 U. S. 541, 557–558 (1962). With
these considerations in mind, we turn to Skilling’s speciﬁc
allegations of juror partiality.
   Skilling contends that Juror 11—the only seated juror he
challenged for cause—“expressed the most obvious bias.”
Brief for Petitioner 35. See also post, at 460–461 (dissent).
Juror 11 stated that “greed on Enron’s part” triggered the
company’s bankruptcy and that corporate executives, driven
by avarice, “walk a line that stretches sometimes the legality
of something.” App. 854a–855a. But, as the Fifth Circuit
accurately summarized, Juror 11
      “had ‘no idea’ whether Skilling had ‘crossed that line,’
      and he ‘didn’t say that’ every CEO is probably a crook.
      He also asserted that he could be fair and require the
      government to prove its case, that he did not believe
      everything he read in the paper, that he did not ‘get into
      the details’ of the Enron coverage, that he did not watch
      television, and that Enron was ‘old news.’ ” 554 F. 3d,
      at 563–564.

Despite his criticism of greed, Juror 11 remarked that Skil­
ling “earned [his] salar[y],” App. 857a, and said he would
have “no problem” telling his co-worker, who had lost 401(k)
funds due to Enron’s collapse, that the jury voted to acquit, if
that scenario came to pass, id., at 854a. The District Court,
noting that it had “looked [Juror 11] in the eye and . . . heard
all his [answers],” found his assertions of impartiality credi­
ble. Id., at 858a; cf. supra, at 394, n. 30. We agree with the

=== PAGE 40 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    397

                           Opinion of the Court

Court of Appeals that “[t]he express ﬁnding that Juror 11
was fair is not reversible error.” 554 F. 3d, at 564.32
   Skilling also objected at trial to the seating of six speciﬁc
jurors whom, he said, he would have excluded had he not
already exhausted his peremptory challenges. See supra,
at 374–375. Juror 20, he observes, “said she was ‘angry’
about Enron’s collapse and that she, too, had been ‘forced to
forfeit [her] own 401(k) funds to survive layoffs.’ ” Reply
Brief 13. But Juror 20 made clear during voir dire that she
did not “personally blame” Skilling for the loss of her retire­
ment account. App. 875a. Having not “pa[id] much atten­
tion” to Enron-related news, she “quite honestly” did not
“have enough information to know” whether Skilling was
probably guilty, id., at 873a, and she “th[ought] [she] could
be” fair and impartial, id., at 875a. In light of these an­
swers, the District Court did not commit manifest error in
ﬁnding Juror 20 ﬁt for jury service.
   The same is true of Juror 63, who, Skilling points out,
wrote on her questionnaire “that [Skilling] ‘probably knew
[he] w[as] breaking the law.’ ” Reply Brief 13. During voir
dire, however, Juror 63 insisted that she did not “really have
an opinion [about Skilling’s guilt] either way,” App. 936a; she
did not “know what [she] was thinking” when she completed
the questionnaire, but she “absolutely” presumed Skilling in­
nocent and conﬁrmed her understanding that the Govern­
ment would “have to prove” his guilt, id., at 937a. In re­
sponse to followup questions from Skilling’s counsel, she
again stated she would not presume that Skilling violated
any laws and could “[a]bsolutely” give her word that she
could be fair. Id., at 937a–938a. “Jurors,” we have recog­
nized, “cannot be expected invariably to express themselves
carefully or even consistently.” Yount, 467 U. S., at 1039.
See also id., at 1040 (“It is here that the federal [appellate]
  32
    Skilling’s trial counsel and jury consultants apparently did not regard
Juror 11 as so “obvious[ly] bias[ed],” Brief for Petitioner 35, as to warrant
exercise of a peremptory challenge.

=== PAGE 41 ===
398                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of the Court

court’s deference must operate, for while the cold record
arouses some concern, only the trial judge could tell which
of these answers was said with the greatest comprehension
and certainty.”). From where we sit, we cannot conclude
that Juror 63 was biased.
   The four remaining jurors Skilling said he would have ex­
cluded with extra peremptory strikes exhibited no sign of
prejudice we can discern. See App. 891a–892a (Juror 38)
(remembered no media coverage about Enron and said noth­
ing in her experience would prevent her from being fair and
impartial); Supp. App. 131sa–133sa, 136sa (Juror 67) (had no
connection to Enron and no anger about its collapse); App.
969a (Juror 78) (did not “know much about” Enron); Supp.
App. 165sa; App. 971a (Juror 84) (had not heard or read any­
thing about Enron and said she did not “know enough to
answer” the question whether she was angry about the com­
pany’s demise). Skilling’s counsel declined to ask followup
questions of any of these jurors and, indeed, told Juror 84 he
had nothing to ask because she “gave all the right answers.”
Id., at 972a. Whatever Skilling’s reasons for wanting to
strike these four individuals from his jury, he cannot credibly
assert they displayed a disqualifying bias.33
   In sum, Skilling failed to establish that a presumption of
prejudice arose or that actual bias infected the jury that
tried him. Jurors, the trial court correctly comprehended,
need not enter the box with empty heads in order to deter­
mine the facts impartially. “It is sufﬁcient if the juror[s] can
lay aside [their] impression[s] or opinion[s] and render a ver­
  33
    Although Skilling raised no objection to Juror 10 and Juror 87 at trial,
his briefs in this Court impugn their impartiality. Brief for Petitioner
14–15; Reply Brief 13. Even if we allowed these tardy pleas, the voir
dire testimony of the two jurors gives sufﬁcient assurance that they were
unbiased. See, e. g., App. 850a–853a (Juror 10) (did not prejudge Skil­
ling’s guilt, indicated he could follow the court’s instructions and make the
Government prove its case, stated he could be fair to Skilling, and said he
would “judge on the facts”); id., at 974a (Juror 87) (had “not formed an
opinion” on whether Skilling was guilty and afﬁrmed she could adhere to
the presumption of innocence).

=== PAGE 42 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                     399

                           Opinion of the Court

dict based on the evidence presented in court.” Irvin, 366
U. S., at 723. Taking account of the full record, rather than
incomplete exchanges selectively culled from it, we ﬁnd no
cause to upset the lower courts’ judgment that Skilling’s
jury met that measure. We therefore afﬁrm the Fifth Cir­
cuit’s ruling that Skilling received a fair trial.34

                                     III
   We next consider whether Skilling’s conspiracy convic­
tion was premised on an improper theory of honest-services
wire fraud. The honest-services statute, § 1346, Skilling
maintains, is unconstitutionally vague. Alternatively, he
contends that his conduct does not fall within the statute’s
compass.
                            A
  To place Skilling’s constitutional challenge in context, we
ﬁrst review the origin and subsequent application of the
honest-services doctrine.
                              1
   Enacted in 1872, the original mail-fraud provision, the
predecessor of the modern-day mail- and wire-fraud laws,
proscribed, without further elaboration, use of the mails to
advance “any scheme or artiﬁce to defraud.” See McNally
v. United States, 483 U. S. 350, 356 (1987) (internal quotation
marks omitted). In 1909, Congress amended the statute to
prohibit, as it does today, “any scheme or artiﬁce to defraud,
or for obtaining money or property by means of false or
fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises.” § 1341
  34
     Our decisions have rightly set a high bar for allegations of juror preju­
dice due to pretrial publicity. See, e. g., Mu’Min, 500 U. S. 415; Patton v.
Yount, 467 U. S. 1025 (1984); Murphy v. Florida, 421 U. S. 794 (1975).
News coverage of civil and criminal trials of public interest conveys to
society at large how our justice system operates. And it is a premise of
that system that jurors will set aside their preconceptions when they enter
the courtroom and decide cases based on the evidence presented. Trial
judges generally take care so to instruct jurors, and the District Court
did just that in this case. App. 1026a.

=== PAGE 43 ===
400              SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                       Opinion of the Court

(emphasis added); see id., at 357–358. Emphasizing Con­
gress’ disjunctive phrasing, the Courts of Appeals, one after
the other, interpreted the term “scheme or artiﬁce to de­
fraud” to include deprivations not only of money or property,
but also of intangible rights.
  In an opi ni on credited w ith first presenti ng the
intangible-rights theory, Shushan v. United States, 117 F. 2d
110 (1941), the Fifth Circuit reviewed the mail-fraud prose­
cution of a public ofﬁcial who allegedly accepted bribes from
entrepreneurs in exchange for urging city action beneﬁcial
to the bribe payers. “It is not true that because the [city]
was to make and did make a saving by the operations there
could not have been an intent to defraud,” the Court of Ap­
peals maintained. Id., at 119. “A scheme to get a public
contract on more favorable terms than would likely be got
otherwise by bribing a public ofﬁcial,” the court observed,
“would not only be a plan to commit the crime of bribery, but
would also be a scheme to defraud the public.” Id., at 115.
  The Fifth Circuit’s opinion in Shushan stimulated the de­
velopment of an “honest-services” doctrine. Unlike fraud in
which the victim’s loss of money or property supplied the
defendant’s gain, with one the mirror image of the other,
see, e. g., United States v. Starr, 816 F. 2d 94, 101 (CA2 1987),
the honest-services theory targeted corruption that lacked
similar symmetry. While the offender proﬁted, the be­
trayed party suffered no deprivation of money or property;
instead, a third party, who had not been deceived, provided
the enrichment. For example, if a city mayor (the offender)
accepted a bribe from a third party in exchange for awarding
that party a city contract, yet the contract terms were the
same as any that could have been negotiated at arm’s length,
the city (the betrayed party) would suffer no tangible loss.
Cf. McNally, 483 U. S., at 360. Even if the scheme occa­
sioned a money or property gain for the betrayed party,
courts reasoned, actionable harm lay in the denial of that
party’s right to the offender’s “honest services.” See, e. g.,
United States v. Dixon, 536 F. 2d 1388, 1400 (CA2 1976).

=== PAGE 44 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    401

                           Opinion of the Court

   “Most often these cases . . . involved bribery of public ofﬁ­
cials,” United States v. Bohonus, 628 F. 2d 1167, 1171 (CA9
1980), but courts also recognized private-sector honest-
services fraud. In perhaps the earliest application of the
theory to private actors, a District Court, reviewing a brib­
ery scheme, explained:
       “When one tampers with [the employer-employee] rela­
       tionship for the purpose of causing the employee to
       breach his duty [to his employer,] he in effect is defraud­
       ing the employer of a lawful right. The actual decep­
       tion that is practised is in the continued representation
       of the employee to the employer that he is honest and
       loyal to the employer’s interests.” United States v.
       Procter & Gamble Co., 47 F. Supp. 676, 678 (Mass. 1942).
   Over time, “[a]n increasing number of courts” recognized
that “a recreant employee”—public or private—“c[ould] be
prosecuted under [the mail-fraud statute] if he breache[d] his
allegiance to his employer by accepting bribes or kickbacks
in the course of his employment,” United States v. McNeive,
536 F. 2d 1245, 1249 (CA8 1976); by 1982, all Courts of Ap­
peals had embraced the honest-services theory of fraud, Hur­
son, Limiting the Federal Mail Fraud Statute—A Legislative
Approach, 20 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 423, 456 (1983).35

                                     2
  In 1987, this Court, in McNally v. United States, stopped
the development of the intangible-rights doctrine in its
tracks. McNally involved a state ofﬁcer who, in selecting
Kentucky’s insurance agent, arranged to procure a share of
the agent’s commissions via kickbacks paid to companies the
  35
    In addition to upholding honest-services prosecutions, courts also in­
creasingly approved use of the mail-fraud statute to attack corruption that
deprived victims of other kinds of intangible rights, including election
fraud and privacy violations. See, e. g., Cleveland v. United States, 531
U. S. 12, 18, n. 2 (2000); McNally v. United States, 483 U. S. 350, 362–364,
and nn. 1–4 (1987) (Stevens, J., dissenting).

=== PAGE 45 ===
402             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

ofﬁcial partially controlled. 483 U. S., at 360. The prosecu­
tor did not charge that, “in the absence of the alleged
scheme[,] the Commonwealth would have paid a lower
premium or secured better insurance.” Ibid. Instead,
the prosecutor maintained that the kickback scheme “de­
fraud[ed] the citizens and government of Kentucky of their
right to have the Commonwealth’s affairs conducted hon­
estly.” Id., at 353.
   We held that the scheme did not qualify as mail fraud.
“Rather than constru[ing] the statute in a manner that
leaves its outer boundaries ambiguous and involves the Fed­
eral Government in setting standards of disclosure and good
government for local and state ofﬁcials,” we read the statute
“as limited in scope to the protection of property rights.”
Id., at 360. “If Congress desires to go further,” we stated,
“it must speak more clearly.” Ibid.
                               3
  Congress responded swiftly. The following year, it en­
acted a new statute “speciﬁcally to cover one of the ‘intan­
gible rights’ that lower courts had protected . . . prior to
McNally: ‘the intangible right of honest services.’ ” Cleve­
land v. United States, 531 U. S. 12, 19–20 (2000). In full, the
honest-services statute stated:
       “For the purposes of th[e] chapter [of the United
     States Code that prohibits, inter alia, mail fraud, § 1341,
     and wire fraud, § 1343], the term ‘scheme or artiﬁce to
     defraud’ includes a scheme or artiﬁce to deprive another
     of the intangible right of honest services.” § 1346.
                               B
   Congress, Skilling charges, reacted quickly but not clearly:
He asserts that § 1346 is unconstitutionally vague. To sat­
isfy due process, “a penal statute [must] deﬁne the criminal
offense [1] with sufﬁcient deﬁniteness that ordinary people
can understand what conduct is prohibited and [2] in a
manner that does not encourage arbitrary and discrimina­

=== PAGE 46 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    403

                           Opinion of the Court

tory enforcement.” Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U. S. 352, 357
(1983). The void-for-vagueness doctrine embraces these
requirements.
   According to Skilling, § 1346 meets neither of the two due
process essentials. First, the phrase “the intangible right
of honest services,” he contends, does not adequately deﬁne
what behavior it bars. Brief for Petitioner 38–39. Second,
he alleges, § 1346’s “standardless sweep . . . allows policemen,
prosecutors, and juries to pursue their personal predilec­
tions,” thereby “facilitat[ing] opportunistic and arbitrary
prosecutions.” Id., at 44 (quoting Kolender, 461 U. S., at
358).
   In urging invalidation of § 1346, Skilling swims against our
case law’s current, which requires us, if we can, to construe,
not condemn, Congress’ enactments. See, e. g., Civil Serv­
ice Comm’n v. Letter Carriers, 413 U. S. 548, 571 (1973).
See also United States v. National Dairy Products Corp.,
372 U. S. 29, 32 (1963) (stressing, in response to a vagueness
challenge, “[t]he strong presumptive validity that attaches to
an Act of Congress”). Alert to § 1346’s potential breadth,
the Courts of Appeals have divided on how best to interpret
the statute.36 Uniformly, however, they have declined to
throw out the statute as irremediably vague.37
  36
     Courts have disagreed about whether § 1346 prosecutions must be
based on a violation of state law, compare, e. g., United States v. Brumley,
116 F. 3d 728, 734–735 (CA5 1997) (en banc), with, e. g., United States v.
Weyhrauch, 548 F. 3d 1237, 1245–1246 (CA9 2008), vacated and remanded,
post, p. 476; whether a defendant must contemplate that the victim suffer
economic harm, compare, e. g., United States v. Sun-Diamond Growers of
Cal., 138 F. 3d 961, 973 (CADC 1998), with, e. g., United States v. Black,
530 F. 3d 596, 600–602 (CA7 2008), vacated and remanded, post, p. 465; and
whether the defendant must act in pursuit of private gain, compare, e. g.,
United States v. Bloom, 149 F. 3d 649, 655 (CA7 1998), with, e. g., United
States v. Panarella, 277 F. 3d 678, 692 (CA3 2002).
  37
     See, e. g., United States v. Rybicki, 354 F. 3d 124, 132 (CA2 2003) (en
banc); United States v. Hausmann, 345 F. 3d 952, 958 (CA7 2003); United
States v. Welch, 327 F. 3d 1081, 1109, n. 29 (CA10 2003); United States v.
Frega, 179 F. 3d 793, 803 (CA9 1999); Brumley, 116 F. 3d, at 732–733;

=== PAGE 47 ===
404                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of the Court

   We agree that § 1346 should be construed rather than in­
validated. First, we look to the doctrine developed in pre-
McNally cases in an endeavor to ascertain the meaning of
the phrase “the intangible right of honest services.” Sec­
ond, to preserve what Congress certainly intended the stat­
ute to cover, we pare that body of precedent down to its
core: In the main, the pre-McNally cases involved fraudu­
lent schemes to deprive another of honest services through
bribes or kickbacks supplied by a third party who had not
been deceived. Conﬁned to these paramount applications,
§ 1346 presents no vagueness problem.
                                 1
   There is no doubt that Congress intended § 1346 to refer
to and incorporate the honest-services doctrine recognized
in Courts of Appeals’ decisions before McNally derailed the
intangible-rights theory of fraud. See Brief for Petitioner
39; Brief for United States 37–38; post, at 416, 422 (Scalia,
J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment). Con­
gress enacted § 1346 on the heels of McNally and drafted the
statute using that decision’s terminology. See 483 U. S., at
355 (“intangible righ[t]”); id., at 362 (Stevens, J., dissenting)
(“right to . . . honest services”).38 As the Second Circuit
observed in its leading analysis of § 1346:
     “The deﬁnite article ‘the’ suggests that ‘intangible right
     of honest services’ had a speciﬁc meaning to Congress
     when it enacted the statute—Congress was recrimi­
     nalizing mail- and wire-fraud schemes to deprive others
United States v. Frost, 125 F. 3d 346, 370–372 (CA6 1997); United States
v. Waymer, 55 F. 3d 564, 568–569 (CA11 1995); United States v. Bryan, 58
F. 3d 933, 941 (CA4 1995).
   38
      Although verbal formulations varied slightly, the words employed by
the Courts of Appeals prior to McNally described the same concept: “hon­
est services,” e. g., United States v. Bruno, 809 F. 2d 1097, 1105 (CA5 1987);
“honest and faithful services,” e. g., United States v. Brown, 540 F. 2d 364,
374 (CA8 1976); and “faithful and honest services,” e. g., United States v.
Diggs, 613 F. 2d 988, 998 (CADC 1979).

=== PAGE 48 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    405

                           Opinion of the Court

       of that ‘intangible right of honest services,’ which had
       been protected before McNally, not all intangible rights
       of honest services whatever they might be thought to
       be.” United States v. Rybicki, 354 F. 3d 124, 137–138
       (2003) (en banc).39
                                 2
   Satisﬁed that Congress, by enacting § 1346, “meant to rein­
state the body of pre-McNally honest-services law,” post, at
422 (opinion of Scalia, J.), we have surveyed that case law.
See infra, at 407–408, 410. In parsing the Courts of Appeals
decisions, we acknowledge that Skilling’s vagueness chal­
lenge has force, for honest-services decisions preceding Mc-
Nally were not models of clarity or consistency. See Brief
for Petitioner 39–42 (describing divisions of opinions). See
also post, at 417–420 (opinion of Scalia, J.). While the
honest-services cases preceding McNally dominantly and
consistently applied the fraud statute to bribery and kick­
back schemes—schemes that were the basis of most honest-
services prosecutions—there was considerable disarray over
the statute’s application to conduct outside that core cate­
gory. In light of this disarray, Skilling urges us, as he urged
the Fifth Circuit, to invalidate the statute in toto. Brief for
Petitioner 48 (Section 1346 “is intolerably and unconstitu­
tionally vague.”); Brief for Defendant-Appellant Skilling in
No. 06–20885 (CA5), p. 65, n. 21 (“[S]ection 1346 should be
invalidated as unlawfully vague on its face.”).
   It has long been our practice, however, before striking a
federal statute as impermissibly vague, to consider whether
the prescription is amenable to a limiting construction. See,

  39
    We considered a similar Court-Congress interplay in McDermott Int’l,
Inc. v. Wilander, 498 U. S. 337 (1991), which involved the interpretation of
the term “seaman” in the Jones Act, 46 U. S. C. App. § 688 (2000 ed.). The
Act, we recognized, “respond[ed] directly to” our decision in The Osceola,
189 U. S. 158 (1903), and “adopt[ed] without further elaboration the term
used in” that case, so we “assume[d] that the Jones Act use[d] ‘seaman’ in
the same way.” 498 U. S., at 342.

=== PAGE 49 ===
406                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of the Court

e. g., Hooper v. California, 155 U. S. 648, 657 (1895) (“The
elementary rule is that every reasonable construction must
be resorted to, in order to save a statute from unconstitu­
tionality.” (emphasis added)). See also Boos v. Barry, 485
U. S. 312, 330–331 (1988); Schneider v. Smith, 390 U. S. 17,
26 (1968).40 We have accordingly instructed “the federal
courts . . . to avoid constitutional difﬁculties by [adopting a
limiting interpretation] if such a construction is fairly possi­
ble.” Boos, 485 U. S., at 331; see United States v. Harriss,
347 U. S. 612, 618 (1954) (“[I]f the general class of offenses
to which the statute is directed is plainly within its terms,
the statute will not be struck down as vague . . . . And if
this general class of offenses can be made constitutionally
deﬁnite by a reasonable construction of the statute, this
Court is under a duty to give the statute that construction.”).
   Arguing against any limiting construction, Skilling con­
tends that it is impossible to identify a salvageable honest-
services core; “the pre-McNally caselaw,” he asserts, “is a

  40
    “This cardinal principle has its roots in Chief Justice Marshall’s opin­
ion for the Court in Murray v. The Charming Betsy, 2 Cranch 64, 118
(1804), and has for so long been applied by this Court that it is beyond
debate.” Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Building &
Constr. Trades Council, 485 U. S. 568, 575 (1988). See, e. g., New York v.
Ferber, 458 U. S. 747, 769, n. 24 (1982); NLRB v. Catholic Bishop of Chi­
cago, 440 U. S. 490, 500–501 (1979); United States v. Thirty-seven Photo­
graphs, 402 U. S. 363, 368–370 (1971); Machinists v. Street, 367 U. S. 740,
749–750 (1961); United States v. Rumely, 345 U. S. 41, 45 (1953); Winters
v. New York, 333 U. S. 507, 517 (1948); Crowell v. Benson, 285 U. S. 22, 62
(1932); Lucas v. Alexander, 279 U. S. 573, 577 (1929); Richmond Screw
Anchor Co. v. United States, 275 U. S. 331, 346 (1928); Panama R. Co. v.
Johnson, 264 U. S. 375, 390 (1924); United States ex rel. Attorney General
v. Delaware & Hudson Co., 213 U. S. 366, 407–408 (1909); United States v.
Coombs, 12 Pet. 72, 76 (1838) (Story, J.); Parsons v. Bedford, 3 Pet. 433,
448–449 (1830) (Story, J.). Cf. Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U. S.
568, 569, 573 (1942) (statute made it criminal to address “any offensive,
derisive or annoying word” to any person in a public place; vagueness
obviated by state-court construction of the statute to cover only words
having “a direct tendency to cause acts of violence” by the addressee (in­
ternal quotation marks omitted)).

=== PAGE 50 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    407

                           Opinion of the Court

hodgepodge of oft-conﬂicting holdings” that are “hopelessly
unclear.” Brief for Petitioner 39 (some capitalization and
italics omitted). We have rejected an argument of the same
tenor before. In Civil Service Comm’n v. Letter Carriers,
federal employees challenged a provision of the Hatch Act
that incorporated earlier decisions of the United States Civil
Service Commission enforcing a similar law. “[T]he several
thousand adjudications of the Civil Service Commission,” the
employees maintained, were “an impenetrable jungle”—“un­
discoverable, inconsistent, [and] incapable of yielding any
meaningful rules to govern present or future conduct.” 413
U. S., at 571. Mindful that “our task [wa]s not to destroy
the Act if we c[ould], but to construe it,” we held that “the
rules that had evolved over the years from repeated adjudi­
cations were subject to sufﬁciently clear and summary state­
ment.” Id., at 571–572.
   A similar observation may be made here. Although some
applications of the pre-McNally honest-services doctrine oc­
casioned disagreement among the Courts of Appeals, these
cases do not cloud the doctrine’s solid core: The “vast major­
ity” of the honest-services cases involved offenders who, in
violation of a ﬁduciary duty, participated in bribery or kick­
back schemes. United States v. Runnels, 833 F. 2d 1183,
1187 (CA6 1987); see Brief for United States 42, and n. 4
(citing dozens of examples).41 Indeed, the McNally case it­
self, which spurred Congress to enact § 1346, presented a
paradigmatic kickback fact pattern. 483 U. S., at 352–353,

  41
    Justice Scalia emphasizes divisions in the Courts of Appeals regard­
ing the source and scope of ﬁduciary duties. Post, at 417–419. But these
debates were rare in bribe and kickback cases. The existence of a ﬁdu­
ciary relationship, under any deﬁnition of that term, was usually beyond
dispute; examples include public ofﬁcial-public, see, e. g., United States v.
Mandel, 591 F. 2d 1347 (CA4 1979); employee-employer, see, e. g., United
States v. Bohonus, 628 F. 2d 1167 (CA9 1980); and union ofﬁcial-union
members, see, e. g., United States v. Price, 788 F. 2d 234 (CA4 1986). See
generally Chiarella v. United States, 445 U. S. 222, 233 (1980) (noting the
“established doctrine that [a ﬁduciary] duty arises from a speciﬁc relation­
ship between two parties”).

=== PAGE 51 ===
408               SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                         Opinion of the Court

360. Congress’ reversal of McNally and reinstatement of
the honest-services doctrine, we conclude, can and should
be salvaged by conﬁning its scope to the core pre-McNally
applications.
   As already noted, supra, at 400–401, the honest-services
doctrine had its genesis in prosecutions involving bribery al­
legations. See Shushan, 117 F. 2d, at 115 (public sector);
Procter & Gamble Co., 47 F. Supp., at 678 (private sector).
See also United States v. Orsburn, 525 F. 3d 543, 546 (CA7
2008). Both before McNally and after § 1346’s enactment,
Courts of Appeals described schemes involving bribes or
kickbacks as “core . . . honest services fraud precedents,”
United States v. Czubinski, 106 F. 3d 1069, 1077 (CA1 1997);
“paradigm case[s],” United States v. deVegter, 198 F. 3d 1324,
1327–1328 (CA11 1999); “[t]he most obvious form of hon­
est services fraud,” United States v. Carbo, 572 F. 3d 112,
115 (CA3 2009); “core misconduct covered by the statute,”
United States v. Urciuoli, 513 F. 3d 290, 294 (CA1 2008);
“most [of the] honest services cases,” United States v. Sorich,
523 F. 3d 702, 707 (CA7 2008); “typical,” United States v.
Brown, 540 F. 2d 364, 374 (CA8 1976); “clear-cut,” United
States v. Mandel, 591 F. 2d 1347, 1363 (CA4 1979); and “uni­
formly . . . cover[ed],” United States v. Paradies, 98 F. 3d
1266, 1283, n. 30 (CA11 1996). See also Tr. of Oral Arg. 43
(counsel for the Government) (“[T]he bulk of pre-McNally
honest services cases” entailed bribes or kickbacks); Brief
for Petitioner 49 (“Bribes and kickbacks were the paradigm
[pre-McNally] cases,” constituting “[t]he overwhelming ma­
jority of prosecutions for honest-services fraud.”).
   In view of this history, there is no doubt that Congress
intended § 1346 to reach at least bribes and kickbacks.
Reading the statute to proscribe a wider range of offensive
conduct, we acknowledge, would raise the due process con­
cerns underlying the vagueness doctrine.42 To preserve the
  42
    Apprised that a broader reading of § 1346 could render the statute
impermissibly vague, Congress, we believe, would have drawn the honest-
services line, as we do now, at bribery and kickback schemes. Cf. Levin

=== PAGE 52 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    409

                           Opinion of the Court

statute without transgressing constitutional limitations,
we now hold that § 1346 criminalizes only the bribe-and­
kickback core of the pre-McNally case law.43

                                     3
   The Government urges us to go further by locating within
§ 1346’s compass another category of proscribed conduct:
“undisclosed self-dealing by a public ofﬁcial or private em­
ployee—i. e., the taking of ofﬁcial action by the employee
that furthers his own undisclosed ﬁnancial interests while
purporting to act in the interests of those to whom he owes
a ﬁduciary duty.” Brief for United States 43–44. “[T]he

v. Commerce Energy, Inc., 560 U. S. 413, 427 (2010) (“[C]ourts may at­
tempt . . . to implement what the legislature would have willed had it been
apprised of the constitutional inﬁrmity.”); United States v. Booker, 543
U. S. 220, 246 (2005) (“We seek to determine what ‘Congress would have
intended’ in light of the Court’s constitutional holding.”).
   43
      Justice Scalia charges that our construction of § 1346 is “not inter­
pretation but invention.” Post, at 422. Stating that he “know[s] of no
precedent for . . . ‘paring down’ ” the pre-McNally case law to its core,
post, at 422, he contends that the Court today “wield[s] a power we long
ago abjured: the power to deﬁne new federal crimes,” post, at 415. See
also, e. g., post, at 422, 423, 424. As noted supra, at 405–406, and n. 40,
cases “paring down” federal statutes to avoid constitutional shoals are
legion. These cases recognize that the Court does not legislate, but in­
stead respects the legislature, by preserving a statute through a limiting
interpretation. See United States v. Lanier, 520 U. S. 259, 267–268, n. 6
(1997) (This Court does not “create a common law crime” by adopting a
“narrow[ing] constru[ction].” (internal quotation marks omitted)); supra,
at 408 and this page, n. 42. Given that the Courts of Appeals uniformly
recognized bribery and kickback schemes as honest-services fraud before
McNally, 483 U. S. 350, and that these schemes composed the lion’s share
of honest-services cases, limiting § 1346 to these heartland applications is
surely “fairly possible.” Boos v. Barry, 485 U. S. 312, 331 (1988); cf. Clark
v. Martinez, 543 U. S. 371, 380 (2005) (opinion for the Court by Scalia, J.)
(when adopting a limiting construction, “[t]he lowest common denominator,
as it were, must govern”). So construed, the statute is not unconstitution­
ally vague. See infra, at 412–413; post, at 421. Only by taking a wreck­
ing ball to a statute that can be salvaged through a reasonable narrowing
interpretation would we act out of step with precedent.

=== PAGE 53 ===
410             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

theory of liability in McNally itself was nondisclosure of a
conﬂicting ﬁnancial interest,” the Government observes, and
“Congress clearly intended to revive th[at] nondisclosure the­
ory.” Id., at 44. Moreover, “[a]lthough not as numerous as
the bribery and kickback cases,” the Government asserts,
“the pre-McNally cases involving undisclosed self-dealing
were abundant.” Ibid.
   Neither of these contentions withstands close inspection.
McNally, as we have already observed, supra, at 401–402,
407, involved a classic kickback scheme: A public ofﬁcial, in
exchange for routing Kentucky’s insurance business through
a middleman company, arranged for that company to share
its commissions with entities in which the ofﬁcial held an
interest. 483 U. S., at 352–353, 360. This was no mere fail­
ure to disclose a conﬂict of interest; rather, the ofﬁcial con­
spired with a third party so that both would proﬁt from
wealth generated by public contracts. See id., at 352–353.
Reading § 1346 to proscribe bribes and kickbacks—and noth­
ing more—satisfies Congress’ undoubted aim to reverse
McNally on its facts.
   Nor are we persuaded that the pre-McNally conﬂict-of­
interest cases constitute core applications of the honest-
services doctrine. Although the Courts of Appeals upheld
honest-services convictions for “some schemes of nondis­
closure and concealment of material information,” Man­
del, 591 F. 2d, at 1361, they reached no consensus on which
schemes qualiﬁed. In light of the relative infrequency of
conﬂict-of-interest prosecutions in comparison to bribery and
kickback charges, and the intercircuit inconsistencies they
produced, we conclude that a reasonable limiting construc­
tion of § 1346 must exclude this amorphous category of cases.
   Further dispelling doubt on this point is the familiar prin­
ciple that “ambiguity concerning the ambit of criminal stat­
utes should be resolved in favor of lenity.” Cleveland, 531
U. S., at 25 (quoting Rewis v. United States, 401 U. S. 808,

=== PAGE 54 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                   411

                          Opinion of the Court

812 (1971)). “This interpretive guide is especially appro­
priate in construing [§ 1346] because . . . mail [and wire] fraud
[are] predicate offense[s] under [the Racketeer Inﬂuenced
and Corrupt Organizations Act], 18 U. S. C. § 1961(1) (1994
ed., Supp. IV), and the money laundering statute, § 1956(c)
(7)(A).” Cleveland, 531 U. S., at 25. Holding that honest-
services fraud does not encompass conduct more wide rang­
ing than the paradigmatic cases of bribes and kickbacks, we
resist the Government’s less constrained construction absent
Congress’ clear instruction otherwise. E. g., United States
v. Universal C. I. T. Credit Corp., 344 U. S. 218, 221–222
(1952).
   In sum, our construction of § 1346 “establish[es] a uniform
national standard, deﬁne[s] honest services with clarity,
reach[es] only seriously culpable conduct, and accomplish[es]
Congress’s goal of ‘overruling’ McNally.” Brief for Albert
W. Alschuler as Amicus Curiae in Weyhrauch v. United
States, O. T. 2009, No. 08–1196, pp. 28–29. “If Congress de­
sires to go further,” we reiterate, “it must speak more clearly
than it has.” McNally, 483 U. S., at 360.44

   44
      If Congress were to take up the enterprise of criminalizing “undis­
closed self-dealing by a public ofﬁcial or private employee,” Brief for
United States 43, it would have to employ standards of sufﬁcient deﬁnite­
ness and speciﬁcity to overcome due process concerns. The Government
proposes a standard that prohibits the “taking of ofﬁcial action by the
employee that furthers his own undisclosed ﬁnancial interests while pur­
porting to act in the interests of those to whom he owes a ﬁduciary duty,”
so long as the employee acts with a speciﬁc intent to deceive and the
undisclosed conduct could inﬂuence the victim to change its behavior. Id.,
at 43–44. See also id., at 40–41. That formulation, however, leaves
many questions unanswered. How direct or signiﬁcant does the conﬂict­
ing ﬁnancial interest have to be? To what extent does the ofﬁcial action
have to further that interest in order to amount to fraud? To whom
should the disclosure be made, and what information should it convey?
These questions and others call for particular care in attempting to formu­
late an adequate criminal prohibition in this context.

=== PAGE 55 ===
412             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

                               4
   Interpreted to encompass only bribery and kickback
schemes, § 1346 is not unconstitutionally vague. Recall that
the void-for-vagueness doctrine addresses concerns about
(1) fair notice and (2) arbitrary and discriminatory prosecu­
tions. See Kolender, 461 U. S., at 357. A prohibition on
fraudulently depriving another of one’s honest services by
accepting bribes or kickbacks does not present a problem on
either score.
   As to fair notice, “whatever the school of thought concern­
ing the scope and meaning of ” § 1346, it has always been
“as plain as a pikestaff that” bribes and kickbacks constitute
honest-services fraud, Williams v. United States, 341 U. S.
97, 101 (1951), and the statute’s mens rea requirement fur­
ther blunts any notice concern, see, e. g., Screws v. United
States, 325 U. S. 91, 101–104 (1945) (plurality opinion). See
also Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U. S. 601, 608 (1973)
(“[E]ven if the outermost boundaries of [a statute are] impre­
cise, any such uncertainty has little relevance . . . where ap­
pellants’ conduct falls squarely within the ‘hard core’ of the
statute’s proscriptions.”). Today’s decision clariﬁes that no
other misconduct falls within § 1346’s province. See United
States v. Lanier, 520 U. S. 259, 266 (1997) (“[C]larity at the
requisite level may be supplied by judicial gloss on an other­
wise uncertain statute.”).
   As to arbitrary prosecutions, we perceive no signiﬁcant
risk that the honest-services statute, as we interpret it
today, will be stretched out of shape. Its prohibition on
bribes and kickbacks draws content not only from the pre-
McNally case law, but also from federal statutes proscrib­
ing—and deﬁning—similar crimes. See, e. g., 18 U. S. C.
§§ 201(b), 666(a)(2); 41 U. S. C. § 52(2) (“The term ‘kickback’
means any money, fee, commission, credit, gift, gratuity,
thing of value, or compensation of any kind which is pro­
vided, directly or indirectly, to [enumerated persons] for
the purpose of improperly obtaining or rewarding favor­

=== PAGE 56 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    413

                           Opinion of the Court

able treatment in connection with [enumerated circum­
stances].”).45 See also, e. g., United States v. Ganim, 510
F. 3d 134, 147–149 (CA2 2007) (Sotomayor, J.) (reviewing
honest-services conviction involving bribery in light of ele­
ments of bribery under other federal statutes); United States
v. Whitﬁeld, 590 F. 3d 325, 352–353 (CA5 2009); United States
v. Kemp, 500 F. 3d 257, 281–286 (CA3 2007). A criminal de­
fendant who participated in a bribery or kickback scheme,
in short, cannot tenably complain about prosecution under
§ 1346 on vagueness grounds.

                                     C
   It remains to determine whether Skilling’s conduct vio­
lated § 1346. Skilling ’s honest-services prosecution, the
Government concedes, was not “prototypical.” Brief for
United States 49. The Government charged Skilling with
conspiring to defraud Enron’s shareholders by misrepresent­
ing the company’s ﬁscal health, thereby artiﬁcially inﬂating
its stock price. It was the Government’s theory at trial that
Skilling “proﬁted from the fraudulent scheme . . . through
the receipt of salary and bonuses, . . . and through the sale
of approximately $200 million in Enron stock, which netted
him $89 million.” Id., at 51.
   The Government did not, at any time, allege that Skilling
solicited or accepted side payments from a third party in
exchange for making these misrepresentations. See Record
41328 (May 11, 2006 Letter from the Government to the Dis­
trict Court) (“[T]he indictment does not allege, and the gov­
ernment’s evidence did not show, that [Skilling] engaged in
bribery.”). It is therefore clear that, as we read § 1346, Skil­
ling did not commit honest-services fraud.
   45
      Overlap with other federal statutes does not render § 1346 superﬂu­
ous. The principal federal bribery statute, § 201, for example, generally
applies only to federal public ofﬁcials, so § 1346’s application to state and
local corruption and to private-sector fraud reaches misconduct that might
otherwise go unpunished.

=== PAGE 57 ===
414                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of the Court

   Because the indictment alleged three objects of the con­
spiracy—honest-services wire fraud, money-or-property
wire fraud, and securities fraud—Skilling’s conviction is
ﬂawed. See Yates v. United States, 354 U. S. 298 (1957) (con­
stitutional error occurs when a jury is instructed on alterna­
tive theories of guilt and returns a general verdict that may
rest on a legally invalid theory). This determination, how­
ever, does not necessarily require reversal of the conspiracy
conviction; we recently conﬁrmed, in Hedgpeth v. Pulido, 555
U. S. 57 (2008) (per curiam), that errors of the Yates vari­
ety are subject to harmless-error analysis. The parties vig­
orously dispute whether the error was harmless. Compare
Brief for United States 52 (“[A]ny juror who voted for convic­
tion based on [the honest-services theory] also would have
found [Skilling] guilty of conspiring to commit securities
fraud.”) with Reply Brief 30 (The Government “cannot show
that the conspiracy conviction rested only on the securities-
fraud theory, rather than the distinct, legally-ﬂawed honest-
services theory.”). We leave this dispute for resolution on
remand.46
   Whether potential reversal on the conspiracy count
touches any of Skilling’s other convictions is also an open
question. All of his convictions, Skilling contends, hinged
on the conspiracy count and, like dominoes, must fall if it
falls. The District Court, deciding Skilling’s motion for bail
pending appeal, found this argument dubious, App. 1141a–
1142a, but the Fifth Circuit had no occasion to rule on it.
That court may do so on remand.

  46
     The Fifth Circuit appeared to prejudge this issue, noting that, “if any
of the three objects of Skilling’s conspiracy offers a legally insufﬁcient
theory,” it “must set aside his conviction.” 554 F. 3d, at 543. That rea­
soning relied on the mistaken premise that Hedgpeth v. Pulido, 555 U. S.
57 (2008) (per curiam), governs only cases on collateral review. See 554
F. 3d, at 543, n. 10. Harmless-error analysis, we clarify, applies equally
to cases on direct appeal. Accordingly, the Fifth Circuit, on remand,
should take a fresh look at the parties’ harmless-error arguments.

=== PAGE 58 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)            415

                      Opinion of Scalia, J.

                         *      *      *
  For the foregoing reasons, we afﬁrm the Fifth Circuit’s
ruling on Skilling’s fair-trial argument, vacate its ruling on
his conspiracy conviction, and remand the case for proceed­
ings consistent with this opinion.
                                             It is so ordered.

  Justice Scalia, with whom Justice Thomas joins, and
with whom Justice Kennedy joins except as to Part III,
concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
   I agree with the Court that petitioner Jeffrey Skilling’s
challenge to the impartiality of his jury and to the District
Court’s conduct of the voir dire fails. I therefore join Parts
I and II of the Court’s opinion. I also agree that the deci­
sion upholding Skilling’s conviction for so-called “honest­
services fraud” must be reversed, but for a different reason.
In my view, the speciﬁcation in 18 U. S. C. § 1346 (2006 ed.)
that “scheme or artiﬁce to defraud” in the mail-fraud and
wire-fraud statutes, §§ 1341 and 1343 (2006 ed., Supp. II), in­
cludes “a scheme or artiﬁce to deprive another of the in­
tangible right of honest services” is vague, and therefore vio­
lates the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment. The
Court strikes a pose of judicial humility in proclaiming that
our task is “not to destroy the Act . . . but to construe it,”
ante, at 407 (internal quotation marks omitted). But in
transforming the prohibition of “honest-services fraud” into
a prohibition of “bribery and kickbacks” it is wielding a
power we long ago abjured: the power to deﬁne new federal
crimes. See United States v. Hudson, 7 Cranch 32, 34
(1812).
                               I
  A criminal statute must clearly deﬁne the conduct it pro­
scribes, see Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 U. S. 104, 108
(1972). A statute that is unconstitutionally vague cannot be
saved by a more precise indictment, see Lanzetta v. New

=== PAGE 59 ===
416             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of Scalia, J.

Jersey, 306 U. S. 451, 453 (1939), nor by judicial construction
that writes in speciﬁc criteria that its text does not contain,
see United States v. Reese, 92 U. S. 214, 219–221 (1876). Our
cases have described vague statutes as failing “to provide a
person of ordinary intelligence fair notice of what is prohib­
ited, or [as being] so standardless that [they] authoriz[e] or
encourag[e] seriously discriminatory enforcement.” United
States v. Williams, 553 U. S. 285, 304 (2008). Here, Skilling
argues that § 1346 fails to provide fair notice and encourages
arbitrary enforcement because it provides no deﬁnition of
the right of honest services whose deprivation it prohibits.
Brief for Petitioner 38–39, 42–44. In my view Skilling is
correct.
   The Court maintains that “the intangible right of honest
services” means the right not to have one’s ﬁduciaries accept
“bribes or kickbacks.” Its ﬁrst step in reaching that conclu­
sion is the assertion that the phrase refers to “the doctrine
developed” in cases decided by lower federal courts prior to
our decision in McNally v. United States, 483 U. S. 350
(1987). Ante, at 404. I do not contest that. I agree that
Congress used the novel phrase to adopt the lower-court case
law that had been disapproved by McNally—what the Court
calls “the pre-McNally honest-services doctrine,” ante, at
407. The problem is that that doctrine provides no “ascer­
tainable standard of guilt,” United States v. L. Cohen Gro­
cery Co., 255 U. S. 81, 89 (1921), and certainly is not limited
to “bribes or kickbacks.”
   Investigation into the meaning of “ the pre-McNally
honest-services doctrine” might logically begin with Mc-
Nally itself, which rejected it. That case repudiated the
many Court of Appeals holdings that had expanded the
meaning of “fraud” in the mail-fraud and wire-fraud statutes
beyond deceptive schemes to obtain property. 483 U. S., at
360. If the repudiated cases stood for a prohibition of “brib­
ery and kickbacks,” one would have expected those words to
appear in the opinion’s description of the cases. In fact,

=== PAGE 60 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)              417

                       Opinion of Scalia, J.

they do not. Not at all. Nor did McNally even provide
a consistent deﬁnition of the pre-existing theory of fraud it
rejected. It referred variously to a right of citizens “to
have the [State]’s affairs conducted honestly,” id., at 353, to
“honest and impartial government,” id., at 355, to “good gov­
ernment,” id., at 356, and “to have public ofﬁcials perform
their duties honestly,” id., at 358. It described prior case
law as holding that “a public ofﬁcial owes a ﬁduciary duty to
the public, and misuse of his ofﬁce for private gain is a
fraud,” id., at 355.
   But the pre-McNally Court of Appeals opinions were not
limited to fraud by public ofﬁcials. Some courts had held
that those ﬁduciaries subject to the “honest services” obli­
gation included private individuals who merely participated
in public decisions, see, e. g., United States v. Gray, 790 F.
2d 1290, 1295–1296 (CA6 1986) (per curiam) (citing United
States v. Margiotta, 688 F. 2d 108, 122 (CA2 1982)), and even
private employees who had no role in public decisions, see,
e. g., United States v. Lemire, 720 F. 2d 1327, 1335–1336
(CADC 1983); United States v. Von Barta, 635 F. 2d 999, 1007
(CA2 1980). Moreover, “to say that a man is a ﬁduciary only
begins [the] analysis; it gives direction to further inquiry. . . .
What obligations does he owe as a ﬁduciary?” SEC v. Chen­
ery Corp., 318 U. S. 80, 85–86 (1943). None of the “honest
services” cases, neither those pertaining to public ofﬁcials
nor those pertaining to private employees, deﬁned the na­
ture and content of the ﬁduciary duty central to the “fraud”
offense.
   There was not even universal agreement concerning the
source of the ﬁduciary obligation—whether it must be posi­
tive state or federal law, see, e. g., United States v. Rabbitt,
583 F. 2d 1014, 1026 (CA8 1978), or merely general principles,
such as the “obligations of loyalty and ﬁdelity” that inhere
in the “employment relationship,” Lemire, supra, at 1336.
The decision McNally reversed had grounded the duty in
general (not jurisdiction-speciﬁc) trust law, see Gray, supra,

=== PAGE 61 ===
418                SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                          Opinion of Scalia, J.

at 1294, a corpus juris festooned with various duties. See,
e. g., Restatement (Second) of Trusts §§ 169–185 (1976). An­
other pre-McNally case referred to the general law of
agency, United States v. Ballard, 663 F. 2d 534, 543, n. 22
(CA5 1981), modiﬁed on other grounds by 680 F. 2d 352
(1982), which imposes duties quite different from those of a
trustee.1 See Restatement (Second) of Agency §§ 377–398
(1957).
   This indeterminacy does not disappear if one assumes that
the pre-McNally cases developed a federal, common-law
ﬁduciary duty; the duty remained hopelessly undeﬁned.
Some courts described it in astoundingly broad language.
Blachly v. United States, 380 F. 2d 665 (CA5 1967), loftily
declared that “[l]aw puts its imprimatur on the accepted
moral standards and condemns conduct which fails to match
the ‘reﬂection of moral uprightness, of fundamental honesty,
fair play and right dealing in the general and business life of
members of society.’ ” Id., at 671 (quoting Gregory v. United
States, 253 F. 2d 104, 109 (CA5 1958)). Other courts unhelp­
fully added that any scheme “contrary to public policy” was
also condemned by the statute, United States v. Bohonus,
628 F. 2d 1167, 1171 (CA9 1980). See also United States v.
Mandel, 591 F. 2d 1347, 1361 (CA4 1979) (any scheme that is
“contrary to public policy and conﬂicts with accepted stand­
ards of moral uprightness, fundamental honesty, fair play and
right dealing”). Even opinions that did not indulge in such
grandiloquence did not specify the duty at issue beyond loy­
alty or honesty, see, e. g., Von Barta, supra, at 1005–1006.
Moreover, the demands of the duty were said to be greater

  1
   The Court is untroubled by these divisions because “these debates
were rare in bribe and kickback cases,” in which “[t]he existence of a
ﬁduciary relationship, under any deﬁnition of that term, was usually be­
yond dispute,” ante, at 407, n. 41. This misses the point. The Courts of
Appeals may have consistently found unlawful the acceptance of a bribe or
kickback by one or another sort of ﬁduciary, but they have not consistently
described (as the statute does not) any test for who is a ﬁduciary.

=== PAGE 62 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)             419

                       Opinion of Scalia, J.

for public ofﬁcials than for private employees, see, e. g., Lem-
ire, supra, at 1337, n. 13; Ballard, supra, at 541, n. 17, but in
what respects (or by how much) was never made clear.
   The indeﬁniteness of the ﬁduciary duty is not all. Many
courts held that some je-ne-sais-quoi beyond a mere breach
of ﬁduciary duty was needed to establish honest-services
fraud. See, e. g., Von Barta, supra, at 1006 (collecting
cases); United States v. George, 477 F. 2d 508, 512 (CA7 1973).
There was, unsurprisingly, some dispute about that, at least
in the context of acts by persons owing duties to the public.
See United States v. Price, 788 F. 2d 234, 237 (CA4 1986).
And even among those courts that did require something
additional where a public ofﬁcial was involved, there was dis­
agreement as to what the addition should be. For example,
in United States v. Bush, 522 F. 2d 641 (1975), the Seventh
Circuit held that material misrepresentations and active con­
cealment were enough, id., at 647–648. But in Rabbitt, 583
F. 2d 1014, the Eighth Circuit held that actual harm to the
State was needed, id., at 1026.
   Similar disagreements occurred with respect to private
employees. Courts disputed whether the defendant must
use his ﬁduciary position for his own gain. Compare Lem-
ire, supra, at 1335 (yes), with United States v. Bronston,
658 F. 2d 920, 926 (CA2 1981) (no). One opinion upheld a
mail-fraud conviction on the ground that the defendant’s
“failure to disclose his receipt of kickbacks and consulting
fees from [his employer’s] suppliers resulted in a breach of
his ﬁduciary duties depriving his employer of his loyal and
honest services.” United States v. Bryza, 522 F. 2d 414, 422
(CA7 1975). Another opinion, however, demanded more
than an intentional failure to disclose: “There must be a fail­
ure to disclose something which in the knowledge or contem­
plation of the employee poses an independent business risk
to the employer.” Lemire, supra, at 1337. Other courts
required that the victim suffer some loss, see, e. g., Ballard,
supra, at 541–542—a proposition that, of course, other courts

=== PAGE 63 ===
420                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of Scalia, J.

rejected, see, e. g., United States v. Newman, 664 F. 2d 12,
20 (CA2 1981); United States v. O’Malley, 535 F. 2d 589, 592
(CA10 1976). The Court’s statement today that there was a
deprivation of honest services even if “the scheme occa­
sioned a money or property gain for the betrayed party,”
ante, at 400, is therefore true, except to the extent it is not.
   In short, the ﬁrst step in the Court’s analysis—holding
that “the intangible right of honest services” refers to “the
honest-services doctrine recognized in Courts of Appeals’ de­
cisions before McNally,” ante, at 404—is a step out of the
frying pan into the ﬁre. The pre-McNally cases provide no
clear indication of what constitutes a denial of the right of
honest services. The possibilities range from any action
that is contrary to public policy or otherwise immoral, to
only the disloyalty of a public ofﬁcial or employee to his prin­
cipal, to only the secret use of a perpetrator’s position of
trust in order to harm whomever he is beholden to. The
duty probably did not have to be rooted in state law, but
maybe it did. It might have been more demanding in the
case of public ofﬁcials, but perhaps not. At the time § 1346
was enacted there was no settled criterion for choosing
among these options, for conclusively settling what was in
and what was out.2
                               II
  The Court is aware of all this. It knows that adopting by
reference “the pre-McNally honest-services doctrine,” ante,
at 407, is adopting by reference nothing more precise than

   2
     Courts since § 1346’s enactment have fared no better, reproducing some
of the same disputes that predated McNally. See, e. g., Sorich v. United
States, 555 U. S. 1204, 1206 (2009) (Scalia, J., dissenting from denial of
certiorari) (collecting cases). We have previously found important to our
vagueness analysis “the conﬂicting results which have arisen from the
painstaking attempts of enlightened judges in seeking to carry out [a]
statute in cases brought before them.” United States v. L. Cohen Grocery
Co., 255 U. S. 81, 89 (1921). I am at a loss to explain why the Court barely
mentions those conﬂicts today.

=== PAGE 64 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)             421

                      Opinion of Scalia, J.

the referring term itself (“the intangible right of honest
services”). Hence the deus ex machina: “[W]e pare that
body of precedent down to its core,” ante, at 404. Since the
honest-services doctrine “had its genesis” in bribery prose­
cutions, and since several cases and counsel for Skilling re­
ferred to bribery and kickback schemes as “core” or “para­
digm” or “typical” examples, or “[t]he most obvious form,” of
honest-services fraud, ante, at 408 (internal quotation marks
omitted), and since two cases and counsel for the Govern­
ment say that they formed the “vast majority,” or “most” or
at least “[t]he bulk” of honest-services cases, ante, at 407–408
(internal quotation marks omitted), THEREFORE it must
be the case that they are all Congress meant by its reference
to the honest-services doctrine.
   Even if that conclusion followed from its premises, it would
not sufﬁce to eliminate the vagueness of the statute. It
would solve (perhaps) the indeterminacy of what acts consti­
tute a breach of the “honest services” obligation under the
pre-McNally law. But it would not solve the most funda­
mental indeterminacy: the character of the “ﬁduciary capac­
ity” to which the bribery and kickback restriction applies.
Does it apply only to public ofﬁcials? Or in addition to pri­
vate individuals who contract with the public? Or to every­
one, including the corporate ofﬁcer here? The pre-McNally
case law does not provide an answer. Thus, even with the
bribery and kickback limitation the statute does not answer
the question, “What is the criterion of guilt?”
   But that is perhaps beside the point, because it is obvious
that mere prohibition of bribery and kickbacks was not the
intent of the statute. To say that bribery and kickbacks
represented “the core” of the doctrine, or that most cases
applying the doctrine involved those offenses, is not to say
that they are the doctrine. All it proves is that the multifar­
ious versions of the doctrine overlap with regard to those
offenses. But the doctrine itself is much more. Among
all the pre-McNally smorgasbord offerings of varieties of

=== PAGE 65 ===
422                SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                          Opinion of Scalia, J.

honest-services fraud, not one is limited to bribery and kick­
backs. That is a dish the Court has cooked up all on its own.
   Thus, the Court’s claim to “respec[t] the legislature,” ante,
at 409, n. 43 (emphasis deleted), is false. It is entirely clear
(as the Court and I agree) that Congress meant to reinstate
the body of pre-McNally honest-services law; and entirely
clear that that prohibited much more (though precisely what
more is uncertain) than bribery and kickbacks. Perhaps it
is true that “Congress intended § 1346 to reach at least
bribes and kickbacks,” ante, at 408. That simply does not
mean, as the Court now holds, that “§ 1346 criminalizes only”
bribery and kickbacks, ante, at 409.
   Arriving at that conclusion requires not interpretation but
invention. The Court replaces a vague criminal standard
that Congress adopted with a more narrow one (included
within the vague one) that can pass constitutional muster.
I know of no precedent for such “paring down,” 3 and it seems
to me clearly beyond judicial power. This is not, as the
Court claims, ante, at 406, simply a matter of adopting a
“limiting construction” in the face of potential unconstitu­

  3
    The only alleged precedent the Court dares to describe is Civil Service
Comm’n v. Letter Carriers, 413 U. S. 548 (1973). That case involved a
provision of the Hatch Act incorporating prior adjudications of the Civil
Service Commission. We upheld the provision against a vagueness chal­
lenge—not, however, by “paring down” the adjudications to a more narrow
rule that we invented, but by concluding that what they held was not
vague. See id., at 571–574. The string of cases the Court lists, see ante,
at 406, n. 40 (almost none of which addressed claims of vagueness), have
nothing to do with “paring down.” The one that comes closest, United
States v. Thirty-seven Photographs, 402 U. S. 363 (1971), speciﬁed a time
limit within which proceedings authorized by statute for the forfeiture of
obscene imported materials had to be commenced and completed. That
is not much different from “reading in” a reasonable-time requirement
for obligations undertaken in contracts, and can hardly be described as a
rewriting or “paring down” of the statute. The Court relied on legislative
history anticipating that the proceedings would be prompt, id., at 370–371,
and noted that (unlike here) it was not “decid[ing] issues of policy,” id.,
at 372.

=== PAGE 66 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)              423

                       Opinion of Scalia, J.

tionality. To do that, our cases have been careful to note,
the narrowing construction must be “fairly possible,” Boos
v. Barry, 485 U. S. 312, 331 (1988), “reasonable,” Hooper v.
California, 155 U. S. 648, 657 (1895), or not “plainly contrary
to the intent of Congress,” Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. v.
Florida Gulf Coast Building & Constr. Trades Council, 485
U. S. 568, 575 (1988). As we have seen (and the Court does
not contest), no court before McNally concluded that the
“deprivation of honest services” meant only the acceptance
of bribes or kickbacks. If it were a “fairly possible” or “rea­
sonable” construction, not “contrary to the intent of Con­
gress,” one would think that some court would have adopted
it. The Court does not even point to a post-McNally case
that reads § 1346 to cover only bribery and kickbacks, and I
am aware of none.
   The canon of constitutional avoidance, on which the Court
so heavily relies, see ante, at 405–406, states that “when the
constitutionality of a statute is assailed, if the statute be rea­
sonably susceptible of two interpretations, by one of which
it would be unconstitutional and by the other valid, it is our
plain duty to adopt that construction which will save the
statute from constitutional inﬁrmity.” United States ex rel.
Attorney General v. Delaware & Hudson Co., 213 U. S. 366,
407 (1909); see also United States v. Rumely, 345 U. S. 41, 45
(1953) (describing the canon as decisive “in the choice of fair
alternatives”). Here there is no choice to be made between
two “fair alternatives.” Until today, no one has thought
(and there is no basis for thinking) that the honest-services
statute prohibited only bribery and kickbacks.
   I certainly agree with the Court that we must, “if we can,”
uphold, rather than “condemn,” Congress’s enactments, ante,
at 403. But I do not believe we have the power, in order to
uphold an enactment, to rewrite it. Congress enacted the
entirety of the pre-McNally honest-services law, the content
of which is (to put it mildly) unclear. In prior vagueness
cases, we have resisted the temptation to make all things

=== PAGE 67 ===
424             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of Scalia, J.

right with the stroke of our pen. See, e. g., Smith v. Goguen,
415 U. S. 566, 575 (1974). I would show the same restraint
today, and reverse Skilling’s conviction on the basis that
§ 1346 provides no “ascertainable standard” for the conduct
it condemns, L. Cohen, 255 U. S., at 89. Instead, the Court
today adds to our functions the prescription of criminal law.

                              III
   A brief word about the appropriate remedy. As I noted
supra, at 416, Skilling has argued that § 1346 cannot be con­
stitutionally applied to him because it affords no deﬁnition
of the right whose deprivation it prohibits. Though this
reasoning is categorical, it does not make Skilling’s challenge
a “facial” one, in the sense that it seeks invalidation of
the statute in all its applications, as opposed to preventing
its enforcement against him. I continue to doubt whether
“striking down” a statute is ever an appropriate exercise of
our Article III power. See Chicago v. Morales, 527 U. S. 41,
77 (1999) (Scalia, J., dissenting). In the present case, the
universality of the inﬁrmity Skilling identiﬁes in § 1346 may
mean that if he wins, anyone else prosecuted under the stat­
ute will win as well, see Smith, supra, at 576–578. But Skil­
ling only asks that his conviction be reversed, Brief for Peti­
tioner 57–58, so the remedy he seeks is not facial invalidation.
   I would therefore reverse Skilling’s conviction under
§ 1346 on the ground that it fails to deﬁne the conduct it
prohibits. The fate of the statute in future prosecutions—
obvious from my reasoning in the case—would be a matter
for stare decisis.
                          *     *     *
  It is hard to imagine a case that more clearly ﬁts the de­
scription of what Chief Justice Waite said could not be done,
in a colorful passage oft-cited in our vagueness opinions,
United States v. Reese, 92 U. S., at 221:

=== PAGE 68 ===
                    Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)             425

                        Opinion of Alito, J.

    “The question, then, to be determined, is, whether we
    can introduce words of limitation into a penal statute so
    as to make it speciﬁc, when, as expressed, it is general
    only.
      “It would certainly be dangerous if the legislature
    could set a net large enough to catch all possible of­
    fenders, and leave it to the courts to step inside and
    say who could be rightfully detained, and who should
    be set at large. This would, to some extent, substi­
    tute the judicial for the legislative department of the
    government. . . .
      “To limit this statute in the manner now asked for
    would be to make a new law, not to enforce an old one.
    This is no part of our duty.”
  Justice Alito, concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment.
   I join the judgment of the Court and all but Part II of the
Court’s opinion. I write separately to address petitioner’s
jury-trial argument.
   The Sixth Amendment guarantees criminal defendants a
trial before “an impartial jury.” In my view, this require­
ment is satisﬁed so long as no biased juror is actually seated
at trial. Of course, evidence of pretrial media attention and
widespread community hostility may play a role in the bias
inquiry. Such evidence may be important in assessing the
adequacy of voir dire, see, e. g., Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500 U. S.
415, 428–432 (1991), or in reviewing the denial of requests to
dismiss particular jurors for cause, see, e. g., Patton v. Yount,
467 U. S. 1025, 1036–1040 (1984). There are occasions in
which such evidence weighs heavily in favor of a change of
venue. In the end, however, if no biased juror is actually
seated, there is no violation of the defendant’s right to an
impartial jury. See id., at 1031–1035, 1040; Murphy v. Flor­
ida, 421 U. S. 794, 800–801, 803 (1975); see also Rivera v.

=== PAGE 69 ===
426             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of Alito, J.

Illinois, 556 U. S. 148, 157–159 (2009); United States v.
Martinez-Salazar, 528 U. S. 304, 311, 316–317 (2000); Smith
v. Phillips, 455 U. S. 209, 215–218 (1982).
   Petitioner advances a very different understanding of the
jury-trial right. Where there is extraordinary pretrial pub­
licity and community hostility, he contends, a court must pre­
sume juror prejudice and thus grant a change of venue.
Brief for Petitioner 25–34. I disagree. Careful voir dire
can often ensure the selection of impartial jurors even where
pretrial media coverage has generated much hostile commu­
nity sentiment. Moreover, once a jury has been selected,
there are measures that a trial judge may take to insulate
jurors from media coverage during the course of the trial.
What the Sixth Amendment requires is “an impartial jury.”
If the jury that sits and returns a verdict is impartial, a de­
fendant has received what the Sixth Amendment requires.
   The rule that petitioner advances departs from the text of
the Sixth Amendment and is difﬁcult to apply. It requires a
trial judge to determine whether the adverse pretrial media
coverage and community hostility in a particular case have
reached a certain level of severity, but there is no clear way
of demarcating that level or of determining whether it has
been met.
   Petitioner relies chieﬂy on three cases from the 1960’s—
Sheppard v. Maxwell, 384 U. S. 333 (1966), Estes v. Texas,
381 U. S. 532 (1965), and Rideau v. Louisiana, 373 U. S. 723
(1963). I do not read those cases as demanding petitioner’s
suggested approach. As the Court notes, Sheppard and
Estes primarily “involved media interference with courtroom
proceedings during trial.” Ante, at 382, n. 14; see also post,
at 446 (Sotomayor, J., concurring in part and dissenting in
part). Rideau involved unique events in a small community.
   I share some of Justice Sotomayor’s concerns about the
adequacy of the voir dire in this case and the trial judge’s
ﬁndings that certain jurors could be impartial. See post, at

=== PAGE 70 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)             427

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

458–462. But those highly fact-speciﬁc issues are not within
the question presented. Pet. for Cert. i. I also do not un­
derstand the opinion of the Court as reaching any question
regarding a change of venue under Federal Rule of Crimi­
nal Procedure 21.
   Because petitioner, in my view, is not entitled to a reversal
of the decision below on the jury-trial question that is before
us, I join the judgment of the Court in full.

  Justice Sotomayor, with whom Justice Stevens and
Justice Breyer join, concurring in part and dissenting in
part.
   I concur in the Court’s resolution of the honest-services
fraud question and join Part III of its opinion. I respect­
fully dissent, however, from the Court’s conclusion that Jef­
frey Skilling received a fair trial before an impartial jury.
Under our relevant precedents, the more intense the public’s
antipathy toward a defendant, the more careful a court must
be to prevent that sentiment from tainting the jury. In this
case, passions ran extremely high. The sudden collapse of
Enron directly affected thousands of people in the Houston
area and shocked the entire community. The accompanying
barrage of local media coverage was massive in volume and
often caustic in tone. As Enron’s one-time chief executive
ofﬁcer (CEO), Skilling was at the center of the storm. Even
if these extraordinary circumstances did not constitutionally
compel a change of venue, they required the District Court
to conduct a thorough voir dire in which prospective jurors’
attitudes about the case were closely scrutinized. The Dis­
trict Court’s inquiry lacked the necessary thoroughness and
left serious doubts about whether the jury empaneled to de­
cide Skilling’s case was capable of rendering an impartial
decision based solely on the evidence presented in the court­
room. Accordingly, I would grant Skilling relief on his fair-
trial claim.

=== PAGE 71 ===
428             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

                               I
   The majority understates the breadth and depth of com­
munity hostility toward Skilling and overlooks signiﬁcant de­
ﬁciencies in the District Court’s jury selection process. The
failure of Enron wounded Houston deeply. Virtually over­
night, what had been the city’s “largest, most visible, and
most prosperous company,” its “foremost social and charita­
ble force,” and “a source of civic pride” was reduced to a
“shattered shell.” App. ¶¶ 11, 13, pp. 649a–650a, 1152a.
Thousands of the company’s employees lost their jobs and
saw their retirement savings vanish. As the effects rippled
through the local economy, thousands of additional jobs dis­
appeared, businesses shuttered, and community groups that
once beneﬁted from Enron’s largesse felt the loss of millions
of dollars in contributions. See, e. g., 3 Supp. Record 1229,
1267; see also 554 F. 3d 529, 560 (CA5 2009) (“Accounting
ﬁrms that serviced Enron’s books had less work, hotels had
more open rooms, restaurants sold fewer meals, and so on”).
Enron’s community ties were so extensive that the entire
local U. S. Attorney’s Ofﬁce was forced to recuse itself from
the Government’s investigation into the company’s fall. See
3 Supp. Record 608 (ofﬁcial press release).
   With Enron’s demise affecting the lives of so many Hous­
tonians, local media coverage of the story saturated the com­
munity. According to a defense media expert, the Houston
Chronicle—the area’s leading newspaper—assigned as many
as 12 reporters to work on the Enron story full time. App.
568a–569a. The paper mentioned Enron in more than 4,000
articles during the 3-year period following the company’s De­
cember 2001 bankruptcy ﬁling. Hundreds of these articles
discussed Skilling by name. See 3 Supp. Record 2114.
Skilling’s expert, a professional journalist and academic with
30 years’ experience, could not “recall another instance
where a local paper dedicated as many resources to a single
topic over such an extended period of time as the Houston
Chronicle . . . dedicated to Enron.” App. ¶ 32, at 570a.

=== PAGE 72 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)            429

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

Local television news coverage was similarly pervasive and,
in terms of “editorial theme,” “largely followed the Chroni­
cle’s lead.” Id., ¶ 11, at 559a; see also id., at 717a. Between
May 2002 and October 2004, local stations aired an estimated
19,000 news segments involving Enron, more than 1,600 of
which mentioned Skilling. 3 Supp. Record 2116.
   While many of the stories were straightforward news
items, many others conveyed and ampliﬁed the community’s
outrage at the top executives perceived to be responsible for
the company’s bankruptcy. A Chronicle report on Skilling’s
2002 testimony before Congress is typical of the coverage.
It began, “Across Houston, Enron employees watched former
chief executive Jeffrey Skilling’s congressional testimony on
television, turning incredulous, angry and then sarcastic by
turns, as a man they knew as savvy and detail-oriented
pleaded memory failure and ignorance about critical ﬁnan­
cial transactions at the now-collapsed energy giant.” App.
1218a. “ ‘He is lying; he knew everything,’ said [an em­
ployee], who said she had seen Skilling frequently over her
18 years with the ﬁrm, where Skilling was known for his
intimate grasp of the inner doings at the company. ‘I am
getting sicker by the minute.’ ” Id., at 1219a. A compan­
ion piece quoted a local attorney who called Skilling an
“idiot” who was “in denial”; he added, “I’m glad [Skilling’s]
not my client.” Id., at 592a–593a (internal quotation marks
omitted).
   Articles deriding Enron’s senior executives were juxta­
posed with pieces expressing sympathy toward and solidar­
ity with the company’s many victims. Skilling’s media ex­
pert counted nearly a hundred victim-related stories in the
Chronicle, including a “multi-page layout entitled ‘The Faces
of Enron,’ ” which poignantly described the gut-wrenching
experiences of former employees who lost vast sums of
money, faced eviction from their homes, could not afford
Christmas gifts for their children, and felt “scared,” “hurt,”
“humiliat[ed],” “helpless,” and “betrayed.” Id., ¶ 71, at

=== PAGE 73 ===
430                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

585a–586a. The conventional wisdom that blame for En­
ron’s devastating implosion and the ensuing human tragedy
ultimately rested with Skilling and former Enron Chairman
Kenneth Lay became so deeply ingrained in the popular
imagination that references to their involvement even turned
up on the sports pages: “If you believe the story about
[Coach Bill Parcells] not having anything to do with the
end of Emmitt Smith’s Cowboys career, then you probably
believe in other far-fetched concepts. Like Jeff Skilling
having nothing to do with Enron’s collapse.” 3 Supp. Rec­
ord 811.
   When a federal grand jury indicted Skilling, Lay, and
Richard Causey—Enron’s former chief accounting ofﬁcer—
in 2004 on charges of conspiracy to defraud, securities fraud,
and other crimes, the media placed them directly in their
crosshairs. In the words of one article, “there was one thing
those whose lives were touched by the once-exalted company
all seemed to agree upon: The indictment of former Enron
CEO Jeff Skilling was overdue.” App. 1393a. Scofﬁng at
Skilling’s attempts to paint himself as “a ‘victim’ of his sub­
ordinates,” id., at 1394a, the Chronicle derided “the doofus
defense” that Lay and Skilling were expected to offer, id., at
1401a.1 The Chronicle referred to the coming Skilling/Lay
trial as “the main event” and “The Big One,” which would

   1
     See also App. 735a (describing Enron as “hardball fraud” and noting
that “Enron prosecutors have approached the case more like an organized
crime investigation than a corporate fraud prosecution,” a “tactic [that]
makes sense” given “the sheer pervasiveness of fraud, corruption and
self-dealing”); id., at 1403a (“Lay stood proudly in front of Enron’s facade
of success, while Skilling and his own prot[ege], [Andrew] Fastow, ginned
up increasingly convoluted mechanisms for concealing the ﬁnancial re-
ality. . . . A court will decide the particulars, but yes, Ken Lay knew”);
id., at 1406a, 1409a (describing Enron’s collapse as “failure as a result of
fraud” and criticizing Skilling for using “vitriol [as] a smokescreen” and
“bolting for the door” just before Enron’s stock price plummeted); 3 Supp.
Record 1711 (discussing the role of Skilling and Lay in “the granddaddy
of all corporate frauds”).

=== PAGE 74 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    431

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

ﬁnally bring “the true measure of justice in the Enron saga.”
Record 40002; App. 1457a, 1460a.2 On the day the supersed­
ing indictment charging Lay was issued, “the Chronicle dedi­
cated three-quarters of its front page, 2 other full pages, and
substantial portions of 4 other pages, all in the front or busi­
ness sections, to th[e] story.” Id., ¶ 57, at 580a–581a.
   Citing the widely felt sense of victimhood among Houstoni­
ans and the voluminous adverse publicity, Skilling moved in
November 2004 for a change of venue.3 The District Court
denied the motion, characterizing the media coverage as
largely “objective and unemotional.” App. to Brief for
United States 11a. Voir dire, it concluded, would provide
an effective means to “ferret out any bias” in the jury pool.
Id., at 18a; see ante, at 370.
   To that end, the District Court began the jury selection
process by mailing screening questionnaires to 400 prospec­
tive jurors in November 2005. The completed question­
naires of the 283 respondents not excused for hardship
dramatically illustrated the widespread impact of Enron’s
collapse on the Houston community and conﬁrmed the in­
tense animosity of Houstonians toward Skilling and his co-
defendants. More than one-third of the prospective jurors
(approximately 99 of 283, by my count) indicated that they

  2
    According to Skilling’s media expert, local television stations “adopted
these same themes” and “dr[o]ve them home through such vivid and re­
peated visual imagery as replaying footage of Skilling’s . . . ‘perp walk’
when details about Skilling’s upcoming trial [we]re discussed.” App. ¶ 65,
at 584a. During arraignment, news outlets “followed each man as he
drove from his home to FBI headquarters, to the court, and back home,
often providing ‘color’ commentary—such as interviewing former Enron
employees for comment on the day’s events.” Id., ¶ 60, at 581a.
  3
    Reporting on the change-of-venue motion, the Chronicle described
Skilling as a “desperate defendant,” and the Austin American-Statesman
opined that while a change of venue may make sense “[f]rom a legal per­
spective,” “from the standpoint of pure justice, the wealthy executives
really should be judged right where their economic hurricane struck with
the most force.” Id., at 748a, 747a.

=== PAGE 75 ===
432                  SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                          Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

or persons they knew had lost money or jobs as a result of
the Enron bankruptcy. Two-thirds of the jurors (about 188
of 283) expressed views about Enron or the defendants that
suggested a potential predisposition to convict. In many in­
stances, they did not mince words, describing Skilling as
“smug,” “arrogant,” “brash,” “conceited,” “greedy,” “deceit­
ful,” “totally unethical and criminal,” “a crook,” “the biggest
liar on the face of the earth,” and “guilty as sin” (capitaliza­
tion omitted).4 Only about 5 percent of the prospective ju­
rors (15 of 283) did not read the Houston Chronicle, had not
otherwise “heard or read about any of the Enron cases,”
Record 13019, were not connected to Enron victims, and
gave no answers suggesting possible antipathy toward the
defendants.5 The parties jointly stipulated to the dismissal

  4
     See, e. g., Juror 1 (“Ken Lay and the others are guilty as all get out
and ought to go to jail”; Skilling is “[b]rash, [a]rrogant [and] [c]onceited”;
“I ﬁnd it morally awful that these people are still running loose”); Juror
70 (“Mr. Skilling is the biggest liar on the face of the earth”); Juror 163
(Skilling “would lie to his mother if it would further his cause”); Juror 185
(“I think [Skilling] was arrogant and a crook”); Juror 200 (Skilling is a
“[s]killful [l]iar [and] crook” who did “a lot of the dirty work”; the defend­
ants would “have to be blind, deaf, [and] stupid to be unaware of what was
happening” (emphasis deleted)); Juror 206 (Skilling is “[t]otally unethical
and criminal”; the defendants “are all guilty and should be reduced to
having to beg on the corner [and] live under a bridge”); Juror 238 (“They
are all guilty as sin—come on now”); Juror 299 (Skilling “initiated, de­
signed, [and] authorized certain illegal actions”); Juror 314 (Lay “should
‘fess up’ and take his punishment like a man”; “[t]he same goes for Jeffrey
Skilling. . . . He and his family . . . should be stripped of all of their assets
[and] made to start over just like the thousands he made start all over”);
Juror 377 (Skilling is “[s]mug,” “[g]reedy,” and “[d]isingenu[ous]”; he “had
an active hand in creating and sustaining a fraud”). Defendants’ Re­
newed Motion for Change of Venue, Record, Doc. 618 (Sealed Exhs.) (here­
inafter Skilling’s Renewed Venue Motion); see also App. 794a–797a (sum­
marizing additional responses).
   5
     Another 20 percent (about 59 of 283) indicated that they read the
Chronicle or had otherwise heard about the Enron cases but did not report
that they were victims or make comments suggesting possible bias against
the defendants.

=== PAGE 76 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                      433

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

of 119 members of the jury pool for cause, hardship, or dis­
ability, but numerous individuals who had made harsh com­
ments about Skilling remained.6
   On December 28, 2005, shortly after the questionnaires
had been returned, Causey pleaded guilty. The plea was
covered in lead newspaper and television stories. A front-
page headline in the Chronicle proclaimed that “Causey’s
plea wreaks havoc for Lay, Skilling.” Record 12049, n. 13;
see also ibid. (quoting a former U. S. attorney who described
the plea as “a serious blow to the defense”). A Chronicle
editorial opined that “Causey’s admission of securities fraud
. . . makes less plausible Lay’s claim that most of the guilty

   6
     See, e. g., Juror 29 (Skilling is “[n]ot an honest man”); Juror 104 (Skil­
ling “knows more than he’s admitting”); Juror 211 (“I believe he was in­
volved in wrong doings”); Juror 219 (“So many people lost their life sav­
ings because of the dishonesty of some members of the executive team”;
Skilling was “[t]oo aggressive w[ith] accounting”); Juror 234 (“With his
level of control and power, hard to believe that he was unaware and not
responsible in some way”); Juror 240 (Skilling “[s]eems to be very much
involved in criminal goings on”); Juror 255 (“[T]housands of people were
taken advantage of by executives at Enron”; Skilling is “arrogant”; “Skil­
ling was Andrew Fastow’s immediate superior. Fastow has plead[ed]
guilty to felony charges. I believe Skilling was aware of Fastow’s illegal
behavior”); Juror 263 (“Nice try resigning 6 months before the collaps[e],
but again, he had to know what was going on”); Juror 272 (Skilling “[k]new
he was getting out before the [d]am [b]roke”); Juror 292 (Skilling “[b]ailed
out when he knew Enron was going down”); Juror 315 (“[H]ow could they
not know and they seem to be lying about some things”); Juror 328 (“They
should be held responsible as ofﬁcers of this company for what happened”);
Juror 350 (“I believe he greatly misused his power and affected hundreds
of lives as a result”; “I believe they are all guilty. Their ‘doings’ affected
not only those employed by Enron but many others as well”); Juror 360
(“I seem to remember him trying to claim to have mental or emotional
issues that would remove him from any guilt. I think that is deceitful.
It seems as though he is a big player in the downfall”); Juror 378
(“I believe he knew, and certainly should have known as the CEO, that
illegal and improper [activities] were rampant in Enron”; “I believe all of
them were instrumental, and were co-conspirators, in the massive fraud
perpetrated at Enron”). Skilling’s Renewed Venue Motion.

=== PAGE 77 ===
434             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

pleas were the result of prosecutorial pressure rather than
actual wrongdoing.” Id., at 12391.
   With the trial date quickly approaching, Skilling renewed
his change-of-venue motion, arguing that both the question­
naire responses and the Causey guilty plea conﬁrmed that he
could not receive a fair trial in Houston. In the alternative,
Skilling asserted that “defendants are entitled to a more
thorough jury selection process than currently envisioned by
the [c]ourt.” Id., at 12067. The court had announced its
intention to question individual jurors at the bench with one
attorney for each side present, and to complete the voir dire
in a single day. See, e. g., id., at 11804–11805, 11808. Skil­
ling proposed, inter alia, that defense counsel be afforded
a greater role in questioning, id., at 12074; that jurors be
questioned privately in camera or in a closed courtroom
where it would be easier for counsel to consult with their
colleagues, clients, and jury consultants, id., at 12070–12072;
and that the court “avoid leading questions,” which “tend to
[e]licit afﬁrmative responses from prospective jurors that
may not reﬂect their actual views,” id., at 12072. At a mini­
mum, Skilling asserted, the court should grant a continuance
of at least 30 days and send a revised questionnaire to a new
group of prospective jurors. Id., at 12074–12075.
   The District Court denied Skilling’s motion without a
hearing, stating in a brief order that it was “not persuaded
that the evidence or arguments urged by defendants . . .
establish that pretrial publicity and/or community prejudice
raise a presumption of inherent jury prejudice.” Id., at
14115. According to the court, the “jury questionnaires sent
to the remaining members of the jury panel and the court’s
voir dire examination of the jury panel provide adequate
safeguards to defendants and will result in the selection of a
fair and impartial jury in this case.” Id., at 14115–14116.
The court did agree to delay the trial by two weeks, until
January 30, 2006.

=== PAGE 78 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)           435

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

   The coming trial featured prominently in local news out­
lets. A front-page, eve-of-trial story in the Chronicle de­
scribed “the hurt and anger and resentment” that had been
“churn[ing] inside” Houstonians since Enron’s collapse. Id.,
at 39946. Again criticizing Lay and Skilling for offering a
“doofus defense” (“a plea of not guilty by reason of empty­
headedness”), the paper stated that “Lay and Skilling took
hundreds of millions in compensation yet now fail to accept
the responsibility that went with it.” Ibid. The article al­
lowed that the defendants’ guilt, “though perhaps widely as­
sumed, remains even now an assertion. A jury now takes
up the task of deciding whether that assertion is valid.” Id.,
at 39947. The next paragraph, however, assured readers
that “it’s normal for your skin to crawl when Lay or Skilling
claim with doe-eyed innocence that they were unaware that
something was amiss at Enron. The company’s utter failure
belies the claim.” Ibid. (one paragraph break omitted); see
also id., at 39904 (declaring that Lay and Skilling would
“have to offer a convincing explanation for how executives
once touted as corporate geniuses could be so much in the
dark about the illegal activities and deceptive ﬁnances of
their own company”).
   It is against this backdrop of widespread community im­
pact and pervasive pretrial publicity that jury selection in
Skilling’s case unfolded. Approximately 160 prospective ju­
rors appeared for voir dire at a federal courthouse located
“about six blocks from Enron’s former headquarters.” 554
F. 3d, at 561. Addressing them as a group, the District
Court began by brieﬂy describing the case and providing a
standard admonition about the need to be fair and impartial
and to decide the case based solely on the trial evidence and
jury instructions. The court then asked whether anyone
had “any reservations about your ability to conscientiously
and fairly follow these very important rules.” App. 815a.
Two individuals raised their hands and were called forward

=== PAGE 79 ===
436                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

to the bench. One told the court that he thought Lay and
Skilling “knew exactly what they were doing” and would
have to prove their innocence. Id., at 818a–819a. The sec­
ond juror, who had stated on his written questionnaire that
he held no opinion that would preclude him from being im­
partial, declared that he “would dearly love to sit on this
jury. I would love to claim responsibility, at least 1⁄12 of the
responsibility, for putting these sons of bitches away for the
rest of their lives.” Id., at 819a–820a. The court excused
both jurors for cause.
  The court proceeded to question individual jurors from the
bench. As the majority recounts, ante, at 373–374, the court
asked them a few general yes/no questions about their expo­
sure to Enron-related news, often variations of, “Do you re­
call any particular articles that stand out that you’ve read
about the case?” App. 850a. The court also asked about
questionnaire answers that suggested bias, focusing mainly
on whether, notwithstanding seemingly partial comments,
the prospective jurors believed they “could be fair” and “put
the government to its proof.” Id., at 852a. Counsel were
permitted to follow up on issues raised by the court. The
court made clear, however, that its patience would be limited,
see, e. g., id., at 879a, and questioning tended to be brief—
generally less than ﬁve minutes per person. Even so, it ex­
posed disqualifying biases among several prospective jurors
who had earlier expressed no concerns about their ability to
be fair.7
  7
    See App. 894a (Juror 43) (expressed the view that the defendants “stole
money” from their employees); id., at 922a (Juror 55) (admitted that she
“lean[ed] towards prejudging” the defendants); id., at 946a (Juror 71)
(stated that she would place the burden of proof on the defendants); id.,
at 954a–960a (Juror 75) (indicated that she could not set aside her view
that there was fraud at Enron); id., at 1003a–1006a (Juror 104) (stated that
she questioned the defendants’ innocence and that she “would be very
upset with the government if they could not prove their case”); id., at
1008a (Juror 112) (expressed that the view that the defendants were
guilty).

=== PAGE 80 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)            437

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

   Once it identiﬁed 38 qualiﬁed prospective jurors, the court
allowed the defense and Government to exercise their allot­
ted peremptory challenges. This left 12 jurors and 4 alter­
nates, who were sworn in and instructed, for the ﬁrst time,
“not [to] read anything dealing with this case or listen to any
discussion of the case on radio or television or access any
Internet sites that may deal with the case” and to “inform
your friends and family members that they should not dis­
cuss with you anything they may have read or heard about
this case.” Id., at 1026a. Start to ﬁnish, the selection proc­
ess took about ﬁve hours.
   Skilling’s trial commenced the next day and lasted four
months. After several days of deliberations, the jury found
Skilling guilty of conspiracy, 12 counts of securities fraud, 5
counts of making false representations to auditors, and 1
count of insider trading; it acquitted on 9 insider trading
counts. The jury found Lay guilty on all counts.
   On appeal, Skilling asserted that he had been denied his
constitutional right to a fair trial before an impartial jury.
Addressing this claim, the Court of Appeals began by dis­
avowing the District Court’s ﬁndings concerning “commu­
nity hostility.” There was, the court concluded, “sufﬁcient
inﬂammatory pretrial material to require a ﬁnding of pre­
sumed prejudice, especially in light of the immense volume
of coverage.” 554 F. 3d, at 559. “[P]rejudice was [also] in­
herent in an alleged co-conspirator’s well-publicized decision
to plead guilty on the eve of trial.” Ibid. The Court of
Appeals, moreover, faulted the District Court for failing to
“consider the wider context.” Id., at 560. “[I]t was not
enough for the court merely to assess the tone of the news
reporting. The evaluation of the volume and nature of re­
porting is merely a proxy for the real inquiry: whether there
could be a fair trial by an impartial jury that was not inﬂu­
enced by outside, irrelevant sources.” Ibid. (internal quota­
tion marks and footnote omitted). According to the Court
of Appeals, “[t]he district court seemed to overlook that the

=== PAGE 81 ===
438             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

prejudice came from more than just pretrial media publicity,
but also from the sheer number of victims.” Ibid.
   Having determined that “Skilling was entitled to a pre­
sumption of prejudice,” the Court of Appeals proceeded to
explain that “the presumption is rebuttable, . . . and the gov­
ernment may demonstrate from the voir dire that an im­
partial jury was actually impanelled.” Id., at 561 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Describing the voir dire as
“exemplary,” “searching,” and “proper and thorough,” id., at
562, the court concluded that “[t]he government [had] met
its burden of showing that the actual jury that convicted
Skilling was impartial,” id., at 564–565. On this basis, the
Court of Appeals rejected Skilling’s claim and afﬁrmed his
convictions.
                              II
   The Sixth Amendment right to an impartial jury and the
due process right to a fundamentally fair trial guarantee to
criminal defendants a trial in which jurors set aside precon­
ceptions, disregard extrajudicial inﬂuences, and decide guilt
or innocence “based on the evidence presented in court.”
Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U. S. 717, 723 (1961); see also Sheppard
v. Maxwell, 384 U. S. 333, 362 (1966). Community passions,
often inﬂamed by adverse pretrial publicity, can call the in­
tegrity of a trial into doubt. In some instances, this Court
has observed, the hostility of the community becomes so se­
vere as to give rise to a “presumption of [juror] prejudice.”
Patton v. Yount, 467 U. S. 1025, 1031 (1984).
   The Court of Appeals incorporated the concept of pre­
sumptive prejudice into a burden-shifting framework: Once
the defendant musters sufﬁcient evidence of community hos­
tility, the onus shifts to the Government to prove the impar­
tiality of the jury. The majority similarly envisions a ﬁxed
point at which public passions become so intense that preju­
dice to a defendant’s fair-trial rights must be presumed.
The majority declines, however, to decide whether the pre­
sumption is rebuttable, as the Court of Appeals held.

=== PAGE 82 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)             439

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

   This Court has never treated the notion of presumptive
prejudice so formalistically. Our decisions instead merely
convey the commonsense understanding that as the tide of
public enmity rises, so too does the danger that the preju­
dices of the community will inﬁltrate the jury. The underly­
ing question has always been this: Do we have conﬁdence
that the jury’s verdict was “induced only by evidence and
argument in open court, and not by any outside inﬂuence,
whether of private talk or public print”? Patterson v. Colo­
rado ex rel. Attorney General of Colo., 205 U. S. 454, 462
(1907).
   The inquiry is necessarily case speciﬁc. In selecting a
jury, a trial court must take measures adapted to the inten­
sity, pervasiveness, and character of the pretrial public­
ity and community animus. Reviewing courts, meanwhile,
must assess whether the trial court’s procedures sufﬁced
under the circumstances to keep the jury free from disquali­
fying bias. Cf. Murphy v. Florida, 421 U. S. 794, 799 (1975)
(scrutinizing the record for “any indications in the totality of
circumstances that petitioner’s trial was not fundamentally
fair”). This Court’s precedents illustrate the sort of steps
required in different situations to safeguard a defendant’s
constitutional right to a fair trial before an impartial jury.
   At one end of the spectrum, this Court has, on rare occa­
sion, confronted such inherently prejudicial circumstances
that it has reversed a defendant’s conviction “without paus­
ing to examine . . . the voir dire examination of the members
of the jury.” Rideau v. Louisiana, 373 U. S. 723, 727 (1963).
In Rideau, repeated television broadcasts of the defendant’s
confession to murder, robbery, and kidnaping so thoroughly
poisoned local sentiment as to raise doubts that even the
most careful voir dire could have secured an impartial jury.
A change of venue, the Court determined, was thus the
only way to ensure a fair trial. Ibid.; see also 6 W. LaFave,
J. Israel, N. King, & O. Kerr, Criminal Procedure § 23.2(a),
p. 264 (3d ed. 2007) (hereinafter LaFave) (“The best reading

=== PAGE 83 ===
440             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

of Rideau is that the Court there recognized that prejudicial
publicity may be so inﬂammatory and so pervasive that the
voir dire simply cannot be trusted to fully reveal the likely
prejudice among prospective jurors”).
   As the majority describes, ante, at 379–380, this Court
reached similar conclusions in Estes v. Texas, 381 U. S. 532
(1965), and Sheppard, 384 U. S. 333. These cases involved
not only massive pretrial publicity but also media disruption
of the trial process itself. Rejecting the argument that the
defendants were not entitled to relief from their convictions
because they “ha[d] established no isolatable prejudice,” the
Court described the “untoward circumstances” as “inher­
ently suspect.” Estes, 381 U. S., at 542, 544. It would have
been difﬁcult for the jurors not to have been swayed, at least
subconsciously, by the “bedlam” that surrounded them.
Sheppard, 384 U. S., at 355. Criticizing the trial courts’ fail­
ures “to protect the jury from outside inﬂuence,” id., at 358,
the Court stressed that, “where there is a reasonable likeli­
hood that prejudicial news prior to trial will prevent a fair
trial, the judge should continue the case until the threat
abates, or transfer it to another [venue] not so permeated
with publicity.” Id., at 363. Estes and Sheppard thus ap­
plied Rideau’s insight that in particularly extreme circum­
stances even the most rigorous voir dire cannot sufﬁce to
dispel the reasonable likelihood of jury bias.
   Apart from these exceptional cases, this Court has de­
clined to discount voir dire entirely and has instead exam­
ined the particulars of the jury selection process to deter­
mine whether it sufﬁced to produce a jury untainted by
pretrial publicity and community animus. The Court has
recognized that when antipathy toward a defendant per­
vades the community there is a high risk that biased jurors
will ﬁnd their way onto the panel. The danger is not merely
that some prospective jurors will deliberately hide their
prejudices, but also that, as “part of a community deeply
hostile to the accused,” “they may unwittingly [be] inﬂu­

=== PAGE 84 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)             441

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

enced” by the fervor that surrounds them. Murphy, 421
U. S., at 803. To ensure an impartial jury in such adverse
circumstances, a trial court must carefully consider the
knowledge and attitudes of prospective jurors and then
closely scrutinize the reliability of their assurances of fair­
ness. Cf. Morgan v. Illinois, 504 U. S. 719, 729 (1992)
(“[P]art of the guarantee of a defendant’s right to an impar­
tial jury is an adequate voir dire to identify unqualiﬁed
jurors”).
   Irvin offers an example of a case in which the trial court’s
voir dire did not sufﬁce to counter the “wave of public pas­
sion” that had swept the community prior to the defendant’s
trial. 366 U. S., at 728. The local news media had “ex­
tensively covered” the crimes (a murder spree), “arous[ing]
great excitement and indignation.” Id., at 719 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Following Irvin’s arrest, the
press “blanketed” the community with “a barrage of newspa­
per headlines, articles, cartoons and pictures” communicating
numerous unfavorable details about Irvin, including that he
had purportedly confessed. Id., at 725. Nearly 90 percent
of the 430 prospective jurors examined during the trial
court’s voir dire “entertained some opinion as to guilt—rang­
ing in intensity from mere suspicion to absolute certainty.”
Id., at 727. Of the 12 jurors seated, 8 “thought petitioner
was guilty,” although “each indicated that notwithstanding
his opinion he could render an impartial verdict.” Id., at
727, 724.
   Despite the seated jurors’ assurances of impartiality, this
Court invalidated Irvin’s conviction for want of due process.
“It is not required,” this Court declared, “that the jurors be
totally ignorant of the facts and issues involved. . . . It is
sufﬁcient if the juror can lay aside his impression or opinion
and render a verdict based on the evidence presented in
court.” Id., at 722–723. The Court emphasized, however,
that a juror’s word on this matter is not decisive, particularly
when “the build-up of prejudice [in the community] is clear

=== PAGE 85 ===
442                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

and convincing.” Id., at 725. Many of Irvin’s jurors, the
Court noted, had been inﬂuenced by “the pattern of deep
and bitter prejudice shown to be present throughout the
community.” Id., at 727 (internal quotation marks omitted).
The Court did not “doubt [that] each juror was sincere when
he said that he would be fair and impartial to [Irvin], but . . .
[w]here so many, so many times, admitted prejudice, such a
statement of impartiality can be given little weight.” Id.,
at 728.
   The media coverage and community animosity in Irvin
were particularly intense. In three subsequent cases, this
Court recognized that high-proﬁle cases may generate sub­
stantial publicity without stirring similar public passions.
The jury selection process in such cases, the Court clariﬁed,
generally need not be as exhaustive as in a case such as
Irvin. So long as the trial court conducts a reasonable in­
quiry into extrajudicial inﬂuences and the ability of prospec­
tive jurors to presume innocence and render a verdict based
solely on the trial evidence, we would generally have no rea­
son to doubt the jury’s impartiality.8
   The ﬁrst of these cases, Murphy, 421 U. S. 794, involved a
well-known defendant put on trial for a widely publicized
Miami Beach robbery. The state trial court denied his mo­
tion for a change of venue and during voir dire excused 20
of the 78 prospective jurors for cause. Distinguishing Irvin,
this Court saw no indication in the voir dire of “such hostility
to [Murphy] by the jurors who served in his trial as to sug­
gest a partiality that could not be laid aside.” 421 U. S., at
800. Although some jurors “had a vague recollection of the
robbery with which [Murphy] was charged and each had

  8
    Of course, even if the jury selection process is adequate, a trial court
violates a defendant’s right to an impartial jury if it erroneously denies a
for-cause challenge to a biased venire member who ultimately sits on the
jury. See, e. g., United States v. Martinez-Salazar, 528 U. S. 304, 316
(2000) (“[T]he seating of any juror who should have been dismissed for
cause . . . would require reversal”).

=== PAGE 86 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)            443

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

some knowledge of [his] past crimes,” “none betrayed any
belief in the relevance of [Murphy’s] past to the present
case.” Ibid.; see also ibid., n. 4 (contrasting a juror’s “mere
familiarity with [a defendant] or his past” with “an actual
predisposition against him”). “[T]hese indicia of impartial­
ity,” the Court suggested, “might be disregarded in a case
where the general atmosphere in the community or court­
room is sufﬁciently inﬂammatory, but the circumstances sur­
rounding [Murphy’s] trial [were] not at all of that variety.”
Id., at 802.
   In a second case, Yount, 467 U. S. 1025, the defendant was
granted a new trial four years after being convicted of mur­
der. He requested a change of venue, citing pretrial public­
ity and the widespread local knowledge that he had pre­
viously been convicted and had made confessions that would
be inadmissible in court. The state trial court denied
Yount’s motion and seated a jury following a 10-day voir dire
of 292 prospective jurors. Nearly all of the prospective ju­
rors had heard of the case, and 77 percent “admitted they
would carry an opinion into the jury box.” Id., at 1029.
Declining to grant relief on federal habeas review, this Court
stressed the signiﬁcant interval between Yount’s ﬁrst trial—
when “adverse publicity and the community’s sense of out­
rage were at their height”—and his second trial, which “did
not occur until four years later, at a time when prejudicial
publicity was greatly diminished and community sentiment
had softened.” Id., at 1032. While 8 of the 14 seated jurors
and alternates had “at some time . . . formed an opinion as
to Yount’s guilt,” the “particularly extensive” voir dire con­
ﬁrmed that “time had weakened or eliminated any” bias they
once may have harbored. Id., at 1029–1030, 1034, n. 10,
1033. Accordingly, this Court concluded, “the trial court did
not commit manifest error in ﬁnding that the jury as a whole
was impartial.” Id., at 1032.
   This Court most recently wrestled with the issue of pre­
trial publicity in Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500 U. S. 415 (1991).

=== PAGE 87 ===
444             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

Mu’Min stood accused of murdering a woman while out of
prison on a work detail. Citing 47 newspaper articles about
the crime, Mu’Min moved for a change of venue. The state
trial court deferred its ruling and attempted to seat a jury.
During group questioning, 16 of the 26 prospective jurors
indicated that they had heard about the case from media or
other sources. Dividing these prospective jurors into panels
of four, the court asked further general questions about their
ability to be fair given what they had heard or read. One
juror answered equivocally and was dismissed for cause.
The court refused Mu’Min’s request to ask more speciﬁc
questions “relating to the content of news items that poten­
tial jurors might have read or seen.” Id., at 419. Of the 12
persons who served on the jury, “8 had at one time or an­
other read or heard something about the case. None had
indicated that he had formed an opinion about the case or
would be biased in any way.” Id., at 421.
   Rejecting Mu’Min’s attempt to analogize his case to Irvin,
this Court observed that “the cases differ both in the kind
of community in which the coverage took place and in extent
of media coverage.” 500 U. S., at 429. Mu’Min’s offense oc­
curred in the metropolitan Washington, D. C., area, “which
has a population of over 3 million, and in which, unfortu­
nately, hundreds of murders are committed each year.”
Ibid. While the crime garnered “substantial” pretrial pub­
licity, the coverage was not as pervasive as in Irvin and “did
not contain the same sort of damaging information.” 500
U. S., at 429–430. Moreover, in contrast to Irvin, the seated
jurors uniformly disclaimed having ever formed an opinion
about the case. Given these circumstances, this Court re­
buffed Mu’Min’s assertion that the trial court committed
constitutional error by declining to “make precise inquiries
about the contents of any news reports that potential jurors
have read.” 500 U. S., at 424. The Court stressed, how­
ever, that its ruling was context speciﬁc: “Had the trial court
in this case been confronted with the ‘wave of public passion’

=== PAGE 88 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)           445

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

engendered by pretrial publicity that occurred in connection
with Irvin’s trial, the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment might well have required more extensive ex­
amination of potential jurors than it undertook here.” Id.,
at 429.
                             III
   It is necessary to determine how this case compares to our
existing fair-trial precedents. Were the circumstances so
inherently prejudicial that, as in Rideau, even the most scru­
pulous voir dire would have been “but a hollow formality”
incapable of reliably producing an impartial jury? 373 U. S.,
at 726. If the circumstances were not of this character, did
the District Court conduct a jury selection process sufﬁ­
ciently adapted to the level of pretrial publicity and commu­
nity animus to ensure the seating of jurors capable of pre­
suming innocence and shutting out extrajudicial inﬂuences?

                                A
   Though the question is close, I agree with the Court that
the prospect of seating an unbiased jury in Houston was not
so remote as to compel the conclusion that the District Court
acted unconstitutionally in denying Skilling ’s motion to
change venue. Three considerations lead me to this conclu­
sion. First, as the Court observes, ante, at 382, the size and
diversity of the Houston community make it probable that
the jury pool contained a nontrivial number of persons who
were unaffected by Enron’s collapse, neutral in their outlook,
and unlikely to be swept up in the public furor. Second,
media coverage of the case, while ubiquitous and often in­
ﬂammatory, did not, as the Court points out, ante, at 382–383,
contain a confession by Skilling or similar “smoking-gun”
evidence of speciﬁc criminal acts. For many prospective
jurors, the guilty plea of codefendant and alleged co-
conspirator Causey, along with the pleas and convictions of
other Enron executives, no doubt suggested guilt by associa­
tion. But reasonable minds exposed to such information

=== PAGE 89 ===
446                   SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

would not necessarily have formed an indelible impression
that Skilling himself was guilty as charged. Cf. Rideau, 373
U. S., at 726 (a majority of the county’s residents were “ex­
posed repeatedly and in depth to the spectacle of Rideau
personally confessing in detail to the crimes with which he
was later to be charged”). Third, there is no suggestion that
the courtroom in this case became, as in Estes and Sheppard,
a “carnival” in which the “calmness and solemnity” of the
proceedings were compromised. Sheppard, 384 U. S., at
358, 350 (internal quotation marks omitted). It is thus ap­
propriate to examine the voir dire and determine whether
it instills conﬁdence in the impartiality of the jury actually
selected.9
                               B
   In concluding that the voir dire “adequately detect[ed] and
defuse[d] juror bias,” ante, at 385, the Court downplays the
   9
     Whether the District Court abused its discretion in declining to change
venue pursuant to the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure is a different
question. See Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 21(a) (“Upon the defendant’s motion,
the court must transfer the proceeding against that defendant to another
district if the court is satisﬁed that so great a prejudice against the defend­
ant exists in the transferring district that the defendant cannot obtain a
fair and impartial trial there”). As this Court has indicated, its supervi­
sory powers confer “more latitude” to set standards for the conduct of
trials in federal courts than in state courts. Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500
U. S. 415, 424 (1991). While the circumstances may not constitutionally
compel a change of venue “without pausing to examine . . . the voir dire,”
Rideau v. Louisiana, 373 U. S. 723, 727 (1963), the widely felt sense of
victimhood among Houstonians and the community’s deep-seated animus
toward Skilling certainly meant that the task of reliably identifying un­
tainted jurors posed a major challenge, with no guarantee of success. It
likely would have been far easier to empanel an impartial jury in a venue
where the Enron story had less salience. I thus agree with the Court of
Appeals that “[i]t would not have been imprudent for the [District] [C]ourt
to have granted Skilling’s transfer motion.” 554 F. 3d 529, 558 (CA5
2009). Skilling, however, likely forfeited any Rule 21 or supervisory pow­
ers claim by failing to present it either in his opening brief before the
Fifth Circuit, see id., at 559, n. 39, or in his petition for certiorari, cf. ante,
at 378, n. 11.

=== PAGE 90 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)             447

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

extent of the community’s antipathy toward Skilling and ex­
aggerates the rigor of the jury selection process. The dev­
astating impact of Enron’s collapse and the relentless media
coverage demanded exceptional care on the part of the Dis­
trict Court to ensure the seating of an impartial jury. While
the procedures employed by the District Court might have
been adequate in the typical high-proﬁle case, they did not
sufﬁce in the extraordinary circumstances of this case to
safeguard Skilling’s constitutional right to a fair trial before
an impartial jury.
   In conducting this analysis, I am mindful of the “wide dis­
cretion” owed to trial courts when it comes to jury-related
issues. Mu’Min, 500 U. S., at 427; cf. ante, at 386–387.
Trial courts are uniquely positioned to assess public senti­
ment and the credibility of prospective jurors. Proximity to
events, however, is not always a virtue. Persons in the
midst of a tumult often lack a panoramic view. “[A]ppellate
tribunals [thus] have the duty to make an independent evalu­
ation of the circumstances.” Sheppard, 384 U. S., at 362.
In particular, reviewing courts are well qualiﬁed to inquire
into whether a trial court implemented procedures adequate
to keep community prejudices from infecting the jury. If
the jury selection process does not beﬁt the circumstances of
the case, the trial court’s rulings on impartiality are neces­
sarily called into doubt. See Morgan, 504 U. S., at 729–730
(“ ‘Without an adequate voir dire the trial judge’s respon­
sibility to remove prospective jurors who will not be able
impartially to follow the court’s instructions and evaluate
the evidence cannot be fulﬁlled’ ” (quoting Rosales-Lopez v.
United States, 451 U. S. 182, 188 (1981) (plurality opinion)));
see also Mu’Min, 500 U. S., at 451 (Kennedy, J., dissenting)
(“Our willingness to accord substantial deference to a trial
court’s ﬁnding of juror impartiality rests on our expectation
that the trial court will conduct a sufﬁcient voir dire to de­
termine the credibility of a juror professing to be impartial”).

=== PAGE 91 ===
448                SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

                                    1
   As the Court of Appeals apprehended, the District Court
gave short shrift to the mountainous evidence of public hos­
tility. For Houstonians, Enron’s collapse was an event of
once-in-a-generation proportions. Not only was the volume
of media coverage “immense” and frequently intemperate,
but “the sheer number of victims” created a climate in which
animosity toward Skilling ran deep and the desire for convic­
tion was widely shared. 554 F. 3d, at 559–560.
   The level of public animus toward Skilling dwarfed that
present in cases such as Murphy and Mu’Min. The pretrial
publicity in those cases consisted of dozens of news reports,
most of which were “largely factual in nature.” Murphy,
421 U. S., at 802. There was no indication that the rele­
vant communities had been captivated by the cases or had
adopted ﬁxed views about the defendants. In contrast, the
number of media reports in this case reached the tens of
thousands, and full-throated denunciations of Skilling were
common. The much closer analogy is thus to Irvin, which
similarly featured a “barrage” of media coverage and a “huge
. . . wave of public passion,” 366 U. S., at 725, 728, although
even that case did not, as here, involve direct harm to entire
segments of the community.10
   Attempting to distinguish Irvin, the majority suggests
that Skilling’s economic offenses were less incendiary than
Irvin’s violent crime spree and that “news stories about
Enron contained nothing resembling the horrifying informa­
tion rife in reports about Irvin’s rampage of robberies and
murders.” Ante, at 394. Along similar lines, the District
Court described “the facts of this case [as] neither heinous
nor sensational.” App. to Brief for United States 10a. The
majority also points to the four years that passed between

  10
    One of Skilling’s experts noted that, “[i]n cases involving 200 or more
articles, trial judges granted a change of venue 59% of the time.” App.
¶ 30, at 611a.

=== PAGE 92 ===
                         Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                        449

                          Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

Enron’s declaration of bankruptcy and the start of Skilling’s
trial, asserting that “the decibel level of media attention di­
minished somewhat” over this time. Ante, at 383. Neither
of these arguments is persuasive.
   First, while violent crimes may well provoke widespread
community outrage more readily than crimes involving mon­
etary loss, economic crimes are certainly capable of rousing
public passions, particularly when thousands of unsuspecting
people are robbed of their livelihoods and retirement sav­
ings. Indeed, the record in this case is replete with exam­
ples of visceral outrage toward Skilling and other Enron ex­
ecutives. See, e. g., Record 39946 (front-page, eve-of-trial
story describing “the hurt and anger and resentment . . .
churn[ing] inside” the people of Houston). Houstonians
compared Skilling to, among other things, a rapist, an axe
murderer, and an al Qaeda terrorist.11 As one commentator
observed, “[i]t’s a sign of how shocked Houstonians are about
Enron’s ignominious demise that Sept. 11 can be invoked—
and is frequently—to explain the shock of the company’s col­
lapse.” 3 Supp. Record 544. The bad blood was so strong
that Skilling and other top executives hired private security
to protect themselves from persons inclined to take the law
into their own hands. See, e. g., App. 1154a (“After taking
the temperature of Enron’s victims, [a local lawyer] says the
Enron executives are wise to take security precautions”).

   11
      See, e. g., 554 F. 3d, at 559, n. 42 (“I’m livid, absolutely livid . . . . I
have lost my entire friggin’ retirement to these people. They have raped
all of us” (internal quotation marks omitted)); App. 382a (“Hurting that
many elderly people so severely is, I feel, the equivalent of being an axe
murderer. His actions were just as harmful as an axe murderer to the
[community]” (alteration in original)); id., at 1152a–1153a (“Not having the
stuff of suicide bombers, Enron’s executive pilots took full advantage of
golden parachutes to bail out of their high-ﬂying corporate jet after setting
the craft on a course to ﬁnancial oblivion. In a business time frame,
Enron pancaked faster than the twin towers”); id., at 1163a (noting that
“Skilling’s picture turned up alongside Osama bin Laden’s on ‘Wanted’
posters inside the company headquarters”).

=== PAGE 93 ===
450                SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

  Second, the passage of time did little to soften community
sentiment. Contrary to the Court’s suggestion, ante, at 383,
this case in no way resembles Yount, where, by the time of
the defendant’s retrial, “prejudicial publicity [had] greatly
diminished” and community animus had signiﬁcantly waned.
467 U. S., at 1032; see also ibid. (in the months preceding the
defendant’s retrial, newspaper reports about the case aver­
aged “less than one article per month,” and public interest
was “minimal”). The Enron story was a continuing saga,
and “publicity remained intense throughout.” 554 F. 3d, at
560. Not only did Enron’s downfall generate wall-to-wall
news coverage, but so too did a succession of subsequent
Enron-related events.12 Of particular note is the highly
publicized guilty plea of codefendant Causey just weeks be­
fore Skilling’s trial. If anything, the time that elapsed be­
tween the bankruptcy and the trial made the task of seating
an unbiased jury more difﬁcult, not less. For many mem­

  12
    Among the highlights: In 2002, Skilling testiﬁed before Congress, and
other Enron executives invoked their Fifth Amendment rights; Enron au­
ditor Arthur Andersen was indicted, tried, convicted, and sentenced on
charges of obstruction of justice; the Enron Task Force charged Enron
chief ﬁnancial ofﬁcer and Skilling-protege Andrew Fastow with fraud,
money laundering, and other crimes; and at least two Enron employees
pleaded guilty on fraud and tax charges. In 2003, the Enron Task Force
indicted numerous Enron employees, including Ben Glisan, Jr. (the com­
pany’s treasurer), Lea Fastow (wife of Andrew and an assistant treasurer),
and more than half a dozen executives of Enron Broadband Services; sev­
eral Enron employees entered guilty pleas and received prison sentences;
and Enron ﬁled its bankruptcy reorganization plan. In 2004, Andrew and
Lea Fastow both pleaded guilty; Skilling and Causey were indicted in
February; a superseding indictment adding Lay was ﬁled in July; a num­
ber of additional Enron employees entered guilty pleas; and former Enron
employees and Merrill Lynch bankers were defendants in a 6-week trial
in Houston concerning an Enron deal involving the sale of Nigerian
barges. In 2005, a 3-month trial was held in Houston for ﬁve executives
of Enron Broadband Services; various pretrial proceedings occurred in the
runup to the trial of Skilling, Lay, and Causey; and, three weeks before
the scheduled trial date, Causey pleaded guilty to securities fraud.

=== PAGE 94 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)           451

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

bers of the jury pool, each highly publicized Enron-related
guilty plea or conviction likely served to increase their cer­
tainty that Skilling too had engaged in—if not master­
minded—criminal acts, particularly given that the media
coverage reinforced this view. See supra, at 433–434. The
trial of Skilling and Lay was the culmination of all that had
come before. See Record 40002 (noting that “prosecutors
followed the classic pattern of working their way up through
the ranks”). As the Chronicle put it in July 2005, shortly
after the trial of several Enron Broadband Services execu­
tives ended without convictions: “The real trial, the true
measure of justice in the Enron saga, begins in January.
Let the small fry swim free if need be. We’ve got bigger
ﬁsh in need of frying.” App. 1460a (paragraph breaks omit­
ted); see also ibid. (“From the beginning, the Enron prosecu­
tion has had one true measure of success: Lay and Skilling
in a cold steel cage”).
   Any doubt that the prevailing mindset in the Houston com­
munity remained overwhelmingly negative was dispelled by
prospective jurors’ responses to the written questionnaires.
As previously indicated, supra, at 431–433, more than one-
third of the prospective jurors either knew victims of Enron’s
collapse or were victims themselves, and two-thirds gave
responses suggesting an antidefendant bias. In many in­
stances their contempt for Skilling was palpable. See nn. 4,
6, supra. Only a small fraction of the prospective jurors
raised no red ﬂags in their responses. And this was before
Causey’s guilty plea and the ﬂurry of news reports that ac­
companied the approach of trial. One of Skilling’s experts,
a political scientist who had studied pretrial publicity “for
over 35 years” and consulted in more than 200 high-proﬁle
cases (in which he had recommended against venue changes
more often than not), “c[a]me to the conclusion that the ex­
tent and depth of bias shown in these questionnaires is the
highest or at least one of the very highest I have ever en­
countered.” App. ¶¶ 2, 7, at 783a, 785a (emphasis deleted).

=== PAGE 95 ===
452                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

                                     2
   Given the extent of the antipathy evident both in the com­
munity at large and in the responses to the written question­
naire, it was critical for the District Court to take “strong
measures” to ensure the selection of “an impartial jury free
from outside inﬂuences.” Sheppard, 384 U. S., at 362. As
this Court has recognized, “[i]n a community where most ve­
niremen will admit to a disqualifying prejudice, the reliabil­
ity of the others’ protestations may be drawn into question.”
Murphy, 421 U. S., at 803; see also Groppi v. Wisconsin, 400
U. S. 505, 510 (1971) (“ ‘[A]ny judge who has sat with juries
knows that in spite of forms they are extremely likely to be
impregnated by the environing atmosphere’ ” (quoting Frank
v. Mangum, 237 U. S. 309, 349 (1915) (Holmes, J., dissent­
ing))). Perhaps because it had underestimated the public’s
antipathy toward Skilling, the District Court’s 5-hour voir
dire was manifestly insufﬁcient to identify and remove bi­
ased jurors.13

   13
      The majority points out that the jury selection processes in the three
previous Enron trials that had been held in Houston were similarly brief.
See ante, at 388–389. The circumstances of those cases, however, were
very different. In particular, the defendants had not been personally sub­
jected to anything approaching the withering public criticism that had
been directed at Skilling and Lay. As earlier noted, see, e. g., supra, at
451, it was the trial of Skilling and Lay that was widely seen as the climac­
tic event of the Enron saga. Accordingly, my conclusion that the jury
selection process in this unusual case did not sufﬁce to select an impartial
jury does not cast doubt on the adequacy of the processes used in the
earlier Enron prosecutions.
   Moreover, in referencing the length of the voir dire in this case, I do
not mean to suggest that length should be a principal measure of the
adequacy of a jury selection process. Trial courts, including this one,
should be commended for striving to be efﬁcient, but they must always
take care to ensure that their expeditiousness does not compromise a de­
fendant’s fair-trial right. I also express no view with respect to court-led
versus attorney-led voir dire. Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 24(a)
gives district courts discretion to choose between these options, and I
have no doubt that either is capable of producing an impartial jury even

=== PAGE 96 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    453

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

   As an initial matter, important lines of inquiry were not
pursued at all. The majority accepts, for instance, that
“publicity about a codefendant’s guilty plea calls for inquiry
to guard against actual prejudice.” Ante, at 385. Implying
that the District Court undertook this inquiry, the majority
states that “[o]nly two venire members recalled [Causey’s]
plea.” Ibid. In fact, the court asked very few prospective
jurors any questions directed to their knowledge of or feel­
ings about that event.14 Considering how much news the
plea generated, many more than two venire members were
likely aware of it. The lack of questioning, however, makes
the prejudicial impact of the plea on those jurors impossible
to assess.
   The court also rarely asked prospective jurors to describe
personal interactions they may have had about the case, or
to consider whether they might have difﬁculty avoiding dis­
cussion of the case with family, friends, or colleagues during
the course of the lengthy trial. The tidbits of information
that trickled out on these subjects provided cause for con­
cern. In response to general media-related questions, sev­
eral prospective jurors volunteered that they had spoken
with others about the case. Juror 74, for example, indicated
that her husband was the “news person,” that they had
“talked about it,” that she had also heard things “from
work,” and that what she heard was “all negative, of course.”
App. 948a. The court, however, did not seek elaboration

in high-proﬁle cases so long as the trial court ensures that the scope of
the voir dire is tailored to the circumstances.
   14
      Juror 33 brought up the plea in response to the District Court’s ques­
tion about whether he “recall[ed] listening to any particular programs
about the case.” App. 888a. Juror 96, meanwhile, told the court that he
read the “whole” Houston Chronicle every day, including “all the articles
about Enron.” Id., at 992a. The court, however, did not ask any ques­
tions designed to elicit information about the Causey plea. Instead, Juror
96 remarked on the plea only after Skilling’s counsel managed to squeeze
in a followup as to whether he had “read about any guilty pleas in this
case over the last month or two.” Id., at 993a.

=== PAGE 97 ===
454                SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

about the substance of these interactions. Surely many pro­
spective jurors had similar conversations, particularly once
they learned upon receiving the written questionnaire that
they might end up on Skilling’s jury.
   Prospective jurors’ personal interactions, moreover, may
well have left them with the sense that the community was
counting on a conviction. Yet this too was a subject the Dis­
trict Court did not adequately explore. On the few occa­
sions when prospective jurors were asked whether they
would feel pressure from the public to convict, they acknowl­
edged that it might be difﬁcult to return home after deliver­
ing a not-guilty verdict. Juror 75, for instance, told the
court, “I think a lot of people feel that they’re guilty. And
maybe they’re expecting something to come out of this trial.”
Id., at 956a. It would be “tough,” she recognized, “to vote
not guilty and go back into the community.” Id., at 957a;
see also id., at 852a (Juror 10) (admitting “some hesitancy”
about “telling people the government didn’t prove its case”).
   With respect to potential nonmedia sources of bias, the
District Court’s exchange with Juror 101 is particularly trou­
bling.15 Although Juror 101 responded in the negative when
asked whether she had “read anything in the newspaper that
[stood] out in [her] mind,” she volunteered that she “just
heard that, between the two of them, [Skilling and Lay] had
$43 million to contribute for their case and that there was an
insurance policy that they could collect on, also.” Id., at
998a. This information, she explained, “was just something
I overheard today—other jurors talking.” Ibid. It seemed
suspicious, she intimated, “to have an insurance policy ahead
of time.” Id., at 999a. The court advised her that “most
corporations provide insurance for their ofﬁcers and direc­
tors.” Ibid. The court, however, did not investigate the
matter further, even though it had earlier instructed pro­
spective jurors not to talk to each other about the case. Id.,
  15
    Portions of the voir dire transcript erroneously refer to this prospec­
tive juror as “Juror 110.” See, e. g., id., at 996a.

=== PAGE 98 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    455

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

at 843a. It is thus not apparent whether other prospective
jurors also overheard the information and whether they too
believed that it reﬂected unfavorably on the defendants; nor
is it apparent what other outside information may have been
shared among the venire members. At the very least, Juror
101’s statements indicate that the court’s questions were fail­
ing to bring to light the extent of jurors’ exposure to poten­
tially prejudicial facts and that some prospective jurors were
having difﬁculty following the court’s directives.
   The topics that the District Court did cover were ad­
dressed in cursory fashion. Most prospective jurors were
asked just a few yes/no questions about their general expo­
sure to media coverage and a handful of additional questions
concerning any responses to the written questionnaire that
suggested bias. In many instances, their answers were un­
enlightening.16 Yet the court rarely sought to draw them
out with open-ended questions about their impressions of
Enron or Skilling and showed limited patience for counsel’s
followup efforts. See, e. g., id., at 879a, 966a.17 When pro­

   16
      The court’s exchange with Juror 20 (who sat on the jury) is typical:
   “Q. Do you remember reading any particular articles about this case or
Mr. Lay or Mr. Skilling?
   “A. Not until just recently this week, but nothing—
   “Q. And there have been a lot of articles this week.
   “A. Yeah.
   “Q. Do you recall any particular articles you’ve read in the last week
or so?
   “A. Not word for word, no.
   “Q. Did you read all the articles in the Sunday “Chronicle”?
   “A. Some of them.
   “Q. Which ones do you remember reading?
   “A. The one about the trial, I think, and how the trial was going to
work.” Id., at 873a–874a.
   17
      The majority’s criticism of Skilling’s counsel for failing to ask ques­
tions of many of the prospective jurors, cf. ante, at 389, is thus mis­
placed. Given the District Court’s express warning early in the voir dire
that it would not allow counsel “to ask individual questions if [they]
abuse[d]” that right, App. 879a, counsel can hardly be blamed for declining

=== PAGE 99 ===
456                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

spective jurors were more forthcoming, their responses
tended to highlight the ubiquity and negative tone of the
local news coverage, thus underscoring the need to press the
more guarded members of the venire for further informa­
tion.18 Juror 17, for example, mentioned hearing a radio
program that very morning in which a former Enron em­
ployee compared persons who did not think Skilling was
guilty to Holocaust deniers. See id., at 863a (“[H]e said he
thought that he would ﬁnd them guilty automatically if he
was on the jury because he said that it would be worse than
a German trying to say that they didn’t kill the Jews”).19
Other jurors may well have encountered, and been inﬂuenced
by, similarly incendiary rhetoric.
   These deﬁciencies in the form and content of the voir dire
questions contributed to a deeper problem: The District
Court failed to make a sufﬁciently critical assessment of pro­
spective jurors’ assurances of impartiality. Although the
Court insists otherwise, ante, at 392, the voir dire transcript
indicates that the District Court essentially took jurors at

to test the court’s boundaries at every turn. Moreover, the court’s per­
functory exchanges with prospective jurors often gave counsel no clear
avenue for further permissible inquiry.
   18
      Although the District Court underestimated the extent of the commu­
nity hostility, it was certainly aware of the ubiquity of the pretrial public­
ity, acknowledging that “all of us have been exposed to substantial media
attention about this case.” Id., at 841a. The court even made an offhand
remark about one of the prior Enron prosecutions, “the Nigerian barge
case,” apparently expecting that the prospective jurors would understand
the reference. Id., at 840a.
   19
      Taking a more defendant-favorable line than most prospective jurors,
Juror 17 stated that he “thought the guy [on the radio] was pretty narrow
minded,” that “everyone should be considered innocent totally until they
get a chance to come [to] court,” and that the Government might have
been overzealous in some of its Enron-related prosecutions. Id., at 863a–
864a. He added, however, that he “believe[d] there was probably some
accounting fraud [at Enron].” Id., at 864a. The District Court denied
the Government’s request to remove Juror 17 for cause, but he did not
ultimately sit on the jury.

=== PAGE 100 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                     457

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

their word when they promised to be fair. Indeed, the court
declined to dismiss for cause any prospective juror who ul­
timately gave a clear assurance of impartiality, no matter
how much equivocation preceded it. Juror 29, for instance,
wrote on her questionnaire that Skilling was “not an honest
man.” App. 881a. During questioning, she acknowledged
having previously thought the defendants were guilty, and
she disclosed that she lost $50,000–$60,000 in her 401(k) as a
result of Enron’s collapse. Id., at 880a, 883a. But she ulti­
mately agreed that she would be able to presume innocence.
Id., at 881a, 884a. Noting that she “blame[d] Enron for the
loss of her money” and appeared to have “unshakeable bias,”
Skilling’s counsel challenged her for cause. Id., at 885a.
The court, however, declined to remove her, stating that “she
answered candidly she’s going to have an open mind now”
and “agree[ing]” with the Government’s assertion that “we
have to take her at her word.” Id., at 885a–886a.20 As this
Court has made plain, jurors’ assurances of impartiality sim­
ply are not entitled to this sort of talismanic signiﬁcance.
See, e. g., Murphy, 421 U. S., at 800 (“[T]he juror’s assurances

  20
    The majority attempts to downplay the signiﬁcance of Juror 29 by
noting that she did not end up on the jury because Skilling used a peremp­
tory challenge to remove her. See ante, at 395, n. 31. The majority
makes a similar point with respect to other venire members who were not
ultimately seated. See ante, at 389–390, n. 24. The comments of these
venire members, however, are relevant in assessing the impartiality of the
seated jurors, who were similarly “part of a community deeply hostile to
the accused” and who may have been “unwittingly . . . inﬂuenced by it.”
Murphy v. Florida, 421 U. S. 794, 803 (1975); see also Irvin v. Dowd, 366
U. S. 717, 728 (1961). Moreover, the fact that the District Court failed to
remove persons as dubiously qualiﬁed as Juror 29 goes directly to the
adequacy of its voir dire. If Juror 29 made it through to the end of the
selection process, it is difﬁcult to have conﬁdence in the impartiality of the
jurors who sat, especially given how little is known about many of them.
Cf. 6 LaFave § 23.2(f), at 288 (“The responses of those not seated casts
light on the credibility of the seated jurors who were familiar with the
same publicity”).

=== PAGE 101 ===
458             SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

that he is equal to th[e] task cannot be dispositive of the
accused’s rights”); Irvin, 366 U. S., at 728 (“Where so many,
so many times, admi[t] prejudice, . . . a statement of impar­
tiality can be given little weight”).
   Worse still, the District Court on a number of occasions
accepted declarations of impartiality that were equivocal on
their face. Prospective jurors who “hope[d]” they could pre­
sume innocence and did “not necessarily” think Skilling was
guilty were permitted to remain in the pool. App. 932a,
857a. Juror 61, for instance, wrote of Lay on her question­
naire, “Shame on him.” Id., at 931a. Asked by the court
about this, she stated that, “innocent or guilty, he was at the
helm” and “should have known what was going on at the
company.” Ibid.; see also id., at 934a (Skilling is “probably”
“in the same boat as” Lay). The court then asked, “[C]an
you presume, as you start this trial, that Mr. Lay is inno­
cent?” Id., at 932a. She responded, “I hope so, but you
know. I don’t know. I can’t honestly answer that one way
or the other.” Ibid.; see also id., at 933a (“I bring in my
past history. I bring in my biases. I would like to think I
could rise above those, but I’ve never been in this situation
before. So I don’t know how I could honestly answer that
question one way or the other. . . . I do have some concerns”).
Eventually, however, Juror 61 answered “Yes” when the
court asked if she would be able to acquit if she had
“a reasonable doubt that the defendants are guilty.” Id., at
933a–934a. Challenging her for cause, defense counsel in­
sisted that they had not received “a clear and unequivocal
answer” about her ability to be fair. Ibid. The court de­
nied the challenge, stating, “You know, she tried.” Ibid.

                               3
  The majority takes solace in the fact that most of the per­
sons actually seated as jurors and alternates “speciﬁcally
stated that they had paid scant attention to Enron-related

=== PAGE 102 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                     459

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

news.” Ante, at 390–391, and n. 26.21 In context, however,
these general declarations reveal little about the seated ju­
rors’ actual knowledge or views or the possible pressure they
might have felt to convict, and thus cannot instill conﬁdence
that the jurors “were not under [the] sway” of the prevailing
community sentiment. Cf. ante, at 391. Jurors who did not
“get into details” of Enron’s complicated accounting schemes,
App. 856a, nevertheless knew the outline of the oft-repeated
story, including that Skilling and Lay had been cast as the
leading villains. Juror 63, for instance, told the court that
she “may have heard a little bit” about Enron-related litiga­
tion but had not “really pa[id] attention.” Id., at 935a. Yet
she was clearly aware of some speciﬁcs. On her question­
naire, despite stating that she had not followed Enron-
related news, she wrote about “whistleblowers and Arthur
Andersen lying about Enron’s accounting,” and she ex­
pressed the view that Skilling and Lay “probably knew they
were breaking the law.” Supp. App. 105sa–106sa. During
questioning, which lasted barely four minutes, the District
Court obtained no meaningful information about the actual
extent of Juror 63’s familiarity with the case or the basis for
her belief in Skilling’s guilt. Yet it nevertheless accepted
her assurance that she could “absolutely” presume innocence.
App. 937a.22

   21
      The majority also notes that about two-thirds of the seated jurors and
alternates (11 of 16) had no personal Enron connection. Ante, at 389–390,
and n. 25. This means, of course, that ﬁve of the seated jurors and alter­
nates did have connections to friends or colleagues who had lost jobs or
money as a result of Enron’s collapse—a fact that does not strike me as
particularly reassuring.
   22
      As one of Skilling’s jury experts observed, there is a “tendency in voir
dire of jury pool members in high-proﬁle cases to minimize their exposure
to media, their knowledge of prejudicial information, and any biases they
may have.” App. ¶99, at 763a; see also id., ¶95, at 637a (“Those who
perceive themselves or wish to be perceived as good citizens are reluctant
to admit they cannot be fair”). For this reason, the fact that “none of

=== PAGE 103 ===
460                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

   Indeed, the District Court’s anemic questioning did little
to dispel similar doubts about the impartiality of numerous
other seated jurors and alternates. In my estimation, more
than half of those seated made written and oral comments
suggesting active antipathy toward the defendants. The
majority thus misses the mark when it asserts that “Skil­
ling’s seated jurors . . . exhibited nothing like the display of
bias shown in Irvin.” Ante, at 394. Juror 10, for instance,
reported on his written questionnaire that he knew several
co-workers who owned Enron stock; that he personally may
have owned Enron stock through a mutual fund; that he
heard and read about the Enron cases from the “Houston
Chronicle, all three Houston news channels, Fox news, talk­
ing with friends [and] co-workers, [and] Texas Lawyer Maga­
zine”; that he believed Enron’s collapse “was due to greed
and mismanagement”; that “[i]f [Lay] did not know what was
going on in his company, he was really a poor manager/
leader”; and that the defendants were “suspect.” Supp.
App. 11sa–19sa. During questioning, he said he “th[ought]”
he could presume innocence and “believe[d]” he could put
the Government to its proof, but he also acknowledged that
he might have “some hesitancy” “in telling people the gov­
ernment didn’t prove its case.” App. 851a–852a.
   Juror 11 wrote that he “work[ed] with someone who
worked at Enron”; that he got Enron-related news from the
“Houston Chronicle, Channel 2 News, Channel 13 News,
O’Reilly Factor, [and] talking with friends and co-workers”;
that he regularly visited the Chronicle Web site; that “greed
on Enron’s part” caused the company’s collapse; and that
“[a] lot of people were hurt ﬁnancially.” Supp. App. 26sa–
30sa. During questioning, he stated that he would have “no

the seated jurors and alternates checked the ‘yes’ box” on the written
questionnaire when “asked whether they ‘ha[d] an opinion about [Skil­
ling],’ ” ante, at 391, is of minimal signiﬁcance, particularly given that the
Causey plea and the impending trial received signiﬁcant media coverage
after the questionnaires were submitted.

=== PAGE 104 ===
                        Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                    461

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

problem” requiring the Government to prove its case, but he
also told the court that he believed Lay was “greedy” and
that corporate executives are often “stretching the legal lim­
its . . . . I’m not going to say that they’re all crooks, but,
you know.” App. 857a, 854a. Asked whether he would
“star[t] the case with sort of an inkling that because [Lay is]
greedy he must have done something illegal,” he offered an
indeterminate “not necessarily.” Id., at 857.23

   23
      Many other seated jurors and alternates expressed similarly troubling
sentiments. See, e. g., Supp. App. 57sa–60sa (Juror 20) (obtained Enron-
related news from the Chronicle and “local news stations”; blamed Enron’s
collapse on “[n]ot enough corporate controls or effective audit procedures
to prevent mismanagement of corporate assets”; and was “angry that so
many people lost their jobs and their retirement savings”); id., at 72sa–
75sa (Juror 38) (followed Enron-related news from various sources, includ­
ing the Chronicle; was “angry about what happened”; and “fe[lt] bad for
those that worked hard and invested in the corp[oration] only to have it
all taken away”); id., at 117sa–118sa (Juror 64) (had several friends who
worked at Enron and lost money; heard about the Enron cases on the
news; described the collapse as “sad” because “people lost jobs [and]
money—lots of money”; and believed the Government “did the right
thing” in its investigation); id., at 177sa–181sa (Juror 87) (received Enron-
related news from the Chronicle, Channel 13 news, the O’Reilly Factor,
Internet news sources, and friends, family, and co-workers; attributed En­
ron’s collapse to “[p]oor management [and] bad judgment—greed”; la­
mented “[t]he sad state of the long-term loyal employees who are left with
nothing in their retirement accounts”; and “admire[d] [the] bravery” of
Enron whistleblower Sherron Watkins “for bringing the situation to the
attention of the public, which stopped things from getting worse”); id., at
191sa–195sa (Juror 90) (heard Enron-related news from his wife, co­
workers, and television; wrote that “[i]t’s not right for someone . . . to
take” away the money that the “small average worker saves . . . for retire­
ment all his life”; and described the Government’s Enron investigation as
“a good thing”); id., at 221sa–225sa (Juror 113) (obtained information about
Enron from a “co-worker [who] was in the jury pool for Mrs. Fastow’s
trial”; worked for an employer who lost money as a result of Enron’s col­
lapse; found it “sad” that the collapse had affected “such a huge number
of people”; and thought “someone had to be doing something illegal”); id.,
at 236sa–237sa (Juror 116) (knew a colleague who lost money in Enron’s
collapse; obtained Enron-related news from the “Houston Chronicle, Time

=== PAGE 105 ===
462                 SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

  While several seated jurors and alternates did not make
speciﬁc comments suggesting prejudice, their written and
oral responses were so abbreviated as to make it virtually
impossible for the District Court reliably to assess whether
they harbored any latent biases. Juror 13, for instance,
wrote on his questionnaire that he had heard about the
Enron cases from the “[n]ews.” Supp. App. 42sa. The
court questioned him for two minutes, during which time he
conﬁrmed that he had “heard what’s on the news, basically,”
including “that the trial had moved from the 17th to the
31st.” He added that the story “was all over the news on
every detail of Enron.” App. 858a–860a. No meaningful
information about his knowledge or attitudes was obtained.
Similarly, Juror 78 wrote that she had not followed Enron-
related news but was aware that “[m]any people lost their
jobs.” Supp. App. 151sa. The court questioned her for less
than 90 seconds. During that time, she acknowledged that
she had “caught glimpses” of the coverage and “kn[e]w gen­
erally, you know, that the company went bankrupt” and that
there “were some employees that went off and did their own
businesses.” App. 969a. Little more was learned.24
  In assessing the likelihood that bias lurked in the minds of
at least some of these seated jurors, I ﬁnd telling the way in

Magazine, local TV news [and] radio, friends, family, [and] co-workers,
[and] internet news sources”; and noted that what stood out was “[t]he
employees and retirees that lost their savings”).
  24
     Several other jurors fell into this category. Juror 67 wrote on his
questionnaire that he had heard about Enron from the Chronicle and “In­
ternet news sources.” Id., at 133sa. He was questioned for 90 seconds,
during which time he indicated that he had read an article on the Internet
the preceding night “about the jury selection taking place today, stuff like
that.” App. 944a. Juror 99 wrote that she had not heard or read about
the Enron cases and did not “know anything about” Enron. Supp. App.
210sa. The District Court questioned her for barely one minute. She
stated that she had “[n]ot really” learned more about the case, but added
that she had heard “this and that” from her parents. App. 995a–996a.
The court did not press further.

=== PAGE 106 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 358 (2010)                   463

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

which voir dire played out. When the District Court asked
the prospective jurors as a group whether they had any res­
ervations about their ability to presume innocence and put
the Government to its proof, only two answered in the af­
ﬁrmative, and both were excused for cause. Id., at 815a–
820a. The District Court’s individual questioning, though
truncated, exposed disqualifying prejudices among numer­
ous additional prospective jurors who had earlier expressed
no concerns about their impartiality. See n. 7, supra. It
thus strikes me as highly likely that at least some of the
seated jurors, despite stating that they could be fair, har­
bored similar biases that a more probing inquiry would likely
have exposed. Cf. Yount, 467 U. S., at 1034, n. 10 (holding
that the trial court’s “particularly extensive” 10-day voir dire
ensured the jury’s impartiality).25
   The majority suggests, ante, at 383–384, 395, that the
jury’s decision to acquit Skilling on nine relatively minor in­
sider trading charges conﬁrms its impartiality. This argu­
ment, however, mistakes partiality with bad faith or blind
vindictiveness. Jurors who act in good faith and sincerely
believe in their own fairness may nevertheless harbor dis­
qualifying prejudices. Such jurors may well acquit where
evidence is wholly lacking, while subconsciously resolving
closer calls against the defendant rather than giving him the
beneﬁt of the doubt. Cf. United States v. McVeigh, 918
F. Supp. 1467, 1472 (WD Okla. 1996) (Prejudice “may go un­

  25
    The majority suggests that the fact that Skilling “challenged only one
of the seated jurors for cause” indicates that he did not believe the other
jurors were biased. Ante, at 396. Our decisions, however, distinguish
claims involving “the partiality of an individual juror” from antecedent
claims directed at “the partiality of the trial jury as a whole.” Patton v.
Yount, 467 U. S. 1025, 1036 (1984); see also Frazier v. United States, 335
U. S. 497, 514 (1948) (“[T]he two sorts of challenge[s] are distinct and
are therefore to be dealt with separately”). If the jury selection process
does not, as here, give a defendant a fair opportunity to identify biased
jurors, the defendant can hardly be faulted for failing to make for-cause
challenges.

=== PAGE 107 ===
464              SKILLING v. UNITED STATES

                     Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

recognized in those who are affected by it. The prejudice
that may deny a fair trial is not limited to a bias or discrimi­
natory attitude. It includes an impairment of the delibera­
tive process of deductive reasoning from evidentiary facts
resulting from an attribution to something not included in
the evidence. That something has its most powerful effect
if it generates strong emotional responses”). In this regard,
it is signiﬁcant that the Government placed relatively little
emphasis on the nine insider trading counts during its closing
argument, declining to explain its theory on those counts in
any detail whatsoever. Record 37010. The acquittals on
those counts thus provide scant basis for inferring a lack of
prejudice.
                         *     *     *
   In sum, I cannot accept the majority’s conclusion that voir
dire gave the District Court “a sturdy foundation to assess
ﬁtness for jury service.” Cf. ante, at 395. Taken together,
the District Court’s failure to cover certain vital subjects, its
superﬁcial coverage of other topics, and its uncritical accept­
ance of assurances of impartiality leave me doubtful that
Skilling’s jury was indeed free from the deep-seated animos­
ity that pervaded the community at large. “[R]egardless of
the heinousness of the crime charged, the apparent guilt of
the offender[,] or the station in life which he occupies,” our
system of justice demands trials that are fair in both appear­
ance and fact. Irvin, 366 U. S., at 722. Because I do not
believe Skilling’s trial met this standard, I would grant him
relief.

=== PAGE 108 ===
                        OCTOBER TERM, 2009                              465

                                 Syllabus


             BLACK et al. v. UNITED STATES

certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
                the seventh circuit
     No. 08–876. Argued December 8, 2009—Decided June 24, 2010
Petitioners (hereinafter Defendants)—executives of Hollinger Interna­
  tional, Inc. (Hollinger), a publicly held U. S. company—were indicted for
  mail fraud, 18 U. S. C. §§ 1341, 1346, and other federal crimes. At trial,
  the Government pursued alternative mail-fraud theories, charging that
  (1) Defendants stole millions from Hollinger by fraudulently paying
  themselves bogus “noncompetition fees”; and (2) by failing to disclose
  those fees, Defendants deprived Hollinger of their honest services. Be­
  fore jury deliberations began, the Government proposed special-verdict
  forms that would reveal, in the event that the jury voted to convict on
  a mail-fraud count, the particular theory or theories accounting for the
  verdict. Defendants resisted, preferring an unelaborated general ver­
  dict. The Government ultimately acquiesced. The District Court in­
  structed the jury on each of the alternative theories. As to honest-
  services fraud, the court informed the jury, over Defendants’ timely
  objection, that a person commits that offense if he misuses his position
  for private gain for himself and/or a co-schemer and knowingly and in­
  tentionally breaches his duty of loyalty. The jury returned general ver­
  dicts of “guilty” on the mail-fraud counts, found that one Defendant was
  also guilty of obstruction of justice, and acquitted Defendants on all
  other charges.
     On appeal, Defendants urged the invalidity of the honest-services­
  fraud jury instructions. Seeking reversal of their mail-fraud convic­
  tions, Defendants relied on Yates v. United States, 354 U. S. 298, 312,
  which held that a general verdict may be set aside “where the verdict
  is supportable on one ground, but not on another, and it is impossible to
  tell which ground the jury selected.” The Seventh Circuit found no
  inﬁrmity in the honest-services instructions, but further determined
  that even if those instructions were wrong, Defendants could not pre­
  vail. By opposing the Government-proposed special-verdict forms, the
  Court of Appeals declared, Defendants had forfeited their objection to
  the instructions. Their challenge would have become moot, the court
  observed, had the jury received special-verdict forms separating the
  alternative fraud theories, and reported on the forms that Defendants
  were not guilty of honest-services fraud. Defendants, the Court of Ap­
  peals therefore reasoned, bore responsibility for the obscurity of the
  jury’s verdict.

=== PAGE 109 ===
466                  BLACK v. UNITED STATES

                                 Syllabus

Held:
    1. In Skilling v. United States, decided today, ante, p. 358, this Court
 vacated a conviction on the ground that the honest-services component
 of the federal mail-fraud statute, § 1346, criminalizes only schemes to
 defraud that involve bribes or kickbacks. That holding renders the
 honest-services instructions given in this case incorrect. P. 471.
    2. By properly objecting to the honest-services jury instructions at
 trial, Defendants secured their right to challenge those instructions on
 appeal. They did not forfeit that right by declining to acquiesce in the
 Government-proposed special-verdict forms. The Federal Rules of
 Criminal Procedure do not provide for submission of special questions
 to the jury. In contrast, Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 49 provides
 for jury interrogatories of two kinds: special verdicts, Rule 49(a); and
 general verdicts with answers to written questions, Rule 49(b). While
 the Criminal Rules are silent on special verdicts, they are informative
 on objections to instructions. Criminal Rule 30(d) provides that a
 “party who objects to any portion of the instructions or to a failure to
 give a requested instruction must inform the court of the speciﬁc objec­
 tion and the grounds for the objection before the jury retires to deliber­
 ate.” Defendants here, it is undisputed, complied with that require­
 ment. The Seventh Circuit, in essence, added a further requirement
 for preservation of a meaningful objection to jury instructions. It de­
 vised a forfeiture sanction unmoored to any federal statute or criminal
 rule. And it placed in the prosecutor’s hands authority to trigger the
 sanction simply by requesting a special verdict. To boot, the appeals
 court applied the sanction to Defendants, although they lacked any no­
 tice that forfeiture would attend their resistance to the Government’s
 special-verdict request. Criminal Rule 57(b) is designed to ward off
 such judicial invention. It provides: “No sanction . . . may be imposed
 for noncompliance with any requirement not in federal law [or] federal
 rules . . . unless the alleged violator was furnished with actual notice of
 the requirement before the noncompliance.” Pp. 472–474.
    3. As in Skilling, the Court expresses no opinion on whether the
 honest-services instructional error was ultimately harmless, but leaves
 that matter for consideration on remand. P. 474.
530 F. 3d 596, vacated and remanded.

   Ginsburg, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Roberts,
C. J., and Stevens, Breyer, Alito, and Sotomayor, JJ., joined. Scalia,
J., ﬁled an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment,
in which Thomas, J., joined, post, p. 474. Kennedy, J., ﬁled an opinion
concurring in part and concurring in the judgment, post, p. 475.

=== PAGE 110 ===
                      Cite as: 561 U. S. 465 (2010)                467

                         Opinion of the Court

  Miguel A. Estrada argued the cause for petitioners.
With him on the briefs were David Debold, Richard A.
Greenberg, Gustave H. Newman, Steven Y. Yurowitz, Ron­
ald S. Safer, Patricia Brown Holmes, Neil Lloyd, and Mi­
chael E. Swartz.
  Deputy Solicitor General Dreeben argued the cause for
the United States. With him on the brief were Solicitor
General Kagan, Assistant Attorney General Breuer, Mat­
thew D. Roberts, and Joel M. Gershowitz.*

  Justice Ginsburg delivered the opinion of the Court.
   In Skilling v. United States, decided today, ante, p. 358,
we vacated the Court of Appeals judgment and remanded the
case because the indictment rested, in part, on an improper
construction of the “honest services” component of the fed­
eral ban on mail fraud, 18 U. S. C. §§ 1341, 1346. A similar
inﬁrmity is present in this case. Here, too, the Government
and trial court advanced an interpretation of § 1346 rejected
by the Court’s opinion in Skilling. Nevertheless, the Gov­
ernment urges, the convictions of the defendants below, peti­
tioners here, should be afﬁrmed for an independent reason.
At trial, the Government pursued alternative theories:
(1) money-or-property fraud; and (2) honest-services fraud.
To pinpoint whether the jury based its verdict on money-or­
property fraud, or honest-services fraud, or both, the Gov­
ernment proposed special interrogatories to accompany the

   *Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were ﬁled for the Chamber of
Commerce of the United States of America by Lawrence S. Robbins, Dan­
iel R. Walﬁsh, Robin S. Conrad, and Amar D. Sarwal; and for the Na­
tional Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers et al. by Jonathan L.
Marcus, Barbara E. Bergman, Barry A. Bohrer, and Alexandra A. E.
Shapiro.
   Briefs of amici curiae were ﬁled for Citizens for Responsibility and
Ethics in Washington by Anne L. Weismann and Melanie Sloan; and for
Jeffrey K. Skilling by Daniel M. Petrocelli, M. Randall Oppenheimer,
Walter Dellinger, Jonathan D. Hacker, and Irving L. Gornstein.

=== PAGE 111 ===
468                  BLACK v. UNITED STATES

                          Opinion of the Court

verdict. The defendants resisted, preferring an unelabo­
rated general verdict, and the Government ultimately acqui­
esced in that standard form of submission.
   The Court of Appeals held that the defendants, by op­
posing the Government-suggested special interrogatories,
forfeited their objection to the honest-services-fraud instruc­
tions given to the jury. 530 F. 3d 596, 603 (CA7 2008). We
reverse that ruling. A criminal defendant, we hold, need
not request special interrogatories, nor need he acquiesce in
the Government’s request for discrete ﬁndings by the jury,
in order to preserve in full a timely raised objection to jury
instructions on an alternative theory of guilt.

                                    I
   Petitioners Conrad Black, John Boultbee, and Mark Kipnis,
as well as Peter Atkinson,1 (collectively, Defendants) were
leading executives of Hollinger International, Inc. (Hol­
linger), a publicly held U. S. company that, through subsidi­
aries, owned newspapers here and abroad. In 2005, the
Government indicted Defendants on multiple counts, of
prime concern here, three counts of mail fraud in violation
of §§ 1341 and 1346.2 Two theories were pursued by the
Government on each mail-fraud count. The Government
charged that (1) Defendants stole millions from Hollinger
by fraudulently paying themselves bogus “noncompetition
fees”; and that (2) by failing to disclose their receipt of those
fees, Defendants deprived Hollinger of their honest services
as managers of the company. App. to Pet. for Cert. 24a–54a.

  1
    Peter Atkinson is a respondent in support of petitioners who qualiﬁes
for relief under this Court’s Rule 12.6. See Letter from Michael S.
Schachter to the Clerk of Court (July 29, 2009).
  2
    Section 1341 criminalizes use of the mails to further “any scheme or
artiﬁce to defraud, or for obtaining money or property by means of false
or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises.” Section 1346 de­
ﬁnes the § 1341 term “scheme or artiﬁce to defraud” to include “a scheme
or artiﬁce to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services.”

=== PAGE 112 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 465 (2010)                  469

                          Opinion of the Court

   At the close of the four-month trial, the U. S. District
Court for the Northern District of Illinois instructed the
jury, discretely, on the theft-of-money-or-property and
honest-services-deprivation theories advanced by the Gov­
ernment. Id., at 235a. As to the latter, the District Court
informed the jury, over Defendants’ objection, that a person
commits honest-services fraud if he “misuse[s] his position
for private gain for himself and/or a co-schemer” and “know­
ingly and intentionally breache[s] his duty of loyalty.” Id.,
at 235a–236a.
   Before jury deliberations began, the Government asked
the District Court to employ a special-verdict form, which
would reveal, in the event that the jury voted to convict
on a mail-fraud count, the theory or theories accounting
for the verdict—money-or-property fraud, honest-services
fraud, or both. See App. 430a.3 Defendants opposed the
Government-proposed special interrogatories and urged, in­
stead, standard general-verdict forms. Id., at 432a. Com­
prehending, however, that in the event of a guilty verdict,
“the jury’s speciﬁcation of the [mail-]fraud theory might [aid]
appellate review,” ibid., Defendants proposed an accommoda­
tion: Upon return of a guilty verdict on any mail-fraud count,
jurors could be asked to specify the theory on which they
relied, id., at 433a.
   The Government objected to special interrogatories pre­
sented to the jury postverdict, App. to Pet. for Cert. 222a,
and the District Court declined to adopt that procedure, id.,
  3
   The Government proposed this language for each defendant on each
mail-fraud count:
  “If you ﬁnd the defendant . . . Guilty with respect to [this Count], you
must answer the following question by checking the applicable lines.
  “With respect to [this Count], we, the jury, ﬁnd the following has been
proven beyond a reasonable doubt (check all that apply):
  “Defendant engaged in a scheme to defraud [Hollinger] and its share­
holders of money or property ——
  “Defendant engaged in a scheme to defraud [Hollinger] and its share­
holders of their intangible right to honest services ——.” App. 430a.

=== PAGE 113 ===
470                  BLACK v. UNITED STATES

                          Opinion of the Court

at 225a.4 When the court rejected postverdict interrogato­
ries, the Government represented that it would not object to
submission of the mail-fraud counts for jury decision by gen­
eral verdict. Id., at 228a. The jury returned general ver­
dicts of “guilty” on the three mail-fraud counts; 5 it also found
defendant Black guilty of obstruction of justice in violation
of 18 U. S. C. § 1512(c)(1), and it acquitted Defendants on all
other charges.
   On appeal, Defendants urged the invalidity of the jury
instructions on honest-services fraud. Under the rule de­
clared by this Court in Yates v. United States, 354 U. S. 298,
312 (1957), a general verdict may be set aside “where the
verdict is supportable on one ground, but not on another,
and it is impossible to tell which ground the jury selected.”
Relying on that rule, Defendants urged reversal of their
mail-fraud convictions. The Court of Appeals found no
inﬁrmity in the honest-services instructions, 530 F. 3d, at
600–602, but further determined that Defendants could not
prevail even if those instructions were wrong, id., at 602–
603. For this determination, the court homed in on the Gov­
ernment’s special-verdict proposal.
   The challenge to the honest-services instructions would
have become moot, the court observed, had the jury received
special-verdict forms separating money-or-property fraud
from honest-services fraud, and reported on the forms that
Defendants were not guilty of honest-services fraud. De­
fendants, the Court of Appeals reasoned, bore responsibility
for the obscurity of the jury’s verdict. True, the court ac­
knowledged, it was not incumbent on Defendants to request
special verdicts. But by resisting the Government’s pro­
posal for separate ﬁndings on money-or-property fraud and

  4
    In her years at the bar and on the bench, the trial judge commented,
she had “absolutely” never seen the postverdict procedure used. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 225a.
  5
    The District Court later granted Kipnis’ motion for judgment of acquit­
tal on one of these counts.

=== PAGE 114 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 465 (2010)                    471

                           Opinion of the Court

on honest-services fraud, and requesting general verdicts in­
stead, the Seventh Circuit concluded, Defendants had “for­
feited their objection to the [honest-services] instruction[s].”
Id., at 603. Defendants’ suggestion of postverdict interroga­
tories did not, in the Court of Appeals’ view, overcome the
forfeiture, for “[q]uestioning the jurors after they have
handed down their verdict is not a good procedure and cer­
tainly not one that a district judge is required to employ.”
Ibid.6
   We granted certiorari in this case, 556 U. S. 1234 (2009),
along with Skilling v. United States, 558 U. S. 945 (2009), and
Weyhrauch v. United States, 557 U. S. 934 (2009), to deter­
mine what conduct Congress rendered criminal by proscrib­
ing, in § 1346, fraudulent deprivation of “the intangible right
of honest services.” We also agreed to consider in this case
the question whether Defendants forfeited their objection to
the honest-services jury instructions by opposing the Gov­
ernment’s request for special verdicts.
                                    II
  We decided in Skilling that § 1346, properly conﬁned,
criminalizes only schemes to defraud that involve bribes or
kickbacks. See ante, p. 358. That holding renders the
honest-services instructions given in this case incorrect,7 and
brings squarely before us the question presented by the Sev­
enth Circuit’s forfeiture ruling: Did Defendants, by failing to
acquiesce in the Government’s request for special verdicts,
forfeit their objection, timely made at trial, to the honest-
services instructions?
   6
     See, e. g., Jacobs Mfg. Co. v. Sam Brown Co., 19 F. 3d 1259, 1267 (CA8
1994) (“Postverdict interrogatories may imply the jury’s verdict is unjusti­
ﬁed and cause the jury to answer the interrogatories in a manner incon­
sistent with the verdict.”); cf. Yeager v. United States, 557 U. S. 110, 122
(2009) (“Courts properly avoid . . . explorations into the jury’s sovereign
space.”).
   7
     The scheme to defraud alleged here did not involve any bribes or
kickbacks.

=== PAGE 115 ===
472                   BLACK v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of the Court

   In addressing this issue, we note ﬁrst the absence of any
provision in the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure for
submission of special questions to the jury. See Stein v.
New York, 346 U. S. 156, 178 (1953) (“Our own Rules of Crim­
inal Procedure make no provision for anything but a general
verdict.”), overruled on other grounds, Jackson v. Denno,
378 U. S. 368 (1964).8 The sole call for special ﬁndings in the
Criminal Rules concerns nonjury trials. Rule 23(c) pro­
vides: “If a party [in a case tried without a jury] requests
before the ﬁnding of guilty or not guilty, the court must state
its speciﬁc ﬁndings of fact in open court or in a written deci­
sion or opinion.”
   In contrast, the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provide
for jury interrogatories of two kinds: special verdicts, which
instruct the jury to return “a special written ﬁnding on each
issue of fact,” Rule 49(a); and general verdicts with answers
to “written questions on one or more issues of fact,” Rule
49(b).9 Although not dispositive,10 the absence of a Criminal
Rule authorizing special verdicts counsels caution.11

  8
    The absence of a special-verdict or interrogatory provision in the Crim­
inal Rules is hardly accidental. See Skidmore v. Baltimore & Ohio
R. Co., 167 F. 2d 54, 70 (CA2 1948) (L. Hand, J., concurring) (“I should like
to subject a verdict, as narrowly as was practical, to a review which should
make it in fact, what we very elaborately pretend that it should be: a
decision based upon law. In criminal prosecutions there may be, and in
my judgment there are, other considerations which intervene to make
such an attempt undesirable.”).
  9
    Although the special interrogatories requested by the Government in
this case have been called “special verdicts” by the parties and the courts
below, they more closely resemble what Civil Rule 49(b) describes as
“general verdict[s] with answers to written questions.” (Capitalization
omitted.)
  10
     See Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 57(b) (when there is no controlling law, “[a]
judge may regulate practice in any manner consistent with federal law,
these rules, and the local rules of the district”).
  11
     By calling for caution, we do not mean to suggest that special verdicts
in criminal cases are never appropriate. See United States v. Ruggiero,
726 F. 2d 913, 922–923 (CA2 1984) (in complex Racketeer Inﬂuenced and

=== PAGE 116 ===
                       Cite as: 561 U. S. 465 (2010)                    473

                           Opinion of the Court

  While the Criminal Rules are silent on special verdicts,
they are informative on objections to instructions. Rule
30(d) “clariﬁes what . . . counsel must do to preserve a claim
of error regarding an instruction.” Advisory Committee’s
Notes on 2002 Amendment on Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 30(d),
18 U. S. C. App., p. 915. The Rule provides: “A party who
objects to any portion of the instructions or to a failure to
give a requested instruction must inform the court of the
speciﬁc objection and the grounds for the objection before
the jury retires to deliberate.” Defendants here, it is undis­
puted, complied with that requirement.12
  The Court of Appeals, in essence, added a further require­
ment for preservation of a meaningful objection to jury in­
structions. It devised a forfeiture sanction unmoored to any
federal statute or criminal rule. And it placed in the prose­
cutor’s hands authority to trigger the sanction simply by re­
questing a special verdict. See 530 F. 3d, at 603.13 To boot,

Corrupt Organizations Act cases, “it can be extremely useful for a trial
judge to request the jury to record their speciﬁc dispositions of the sepa­
rate predicate acts charged, in addition to their verdict of guilt or inno­
cence”); id., at 927 (Newman, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part)
(“[A] District Court should have the discretion to use a jury interrogatory
in cases where risk of prejudice to the defendant is slight and the advan­
tage of securing particularized fact-ﬁnding is substantial.”).
   12
      The Government asserts that Defendants’ opposition to a special ver­
dict resulted in forfeiture not of their jury-instruction objection, but of
their “Yates argument” that any instructional error may “requir[e] rever­
sal.” Brief for United States 52, and n. 21 (internal quotation marks omit­
ted). The Government thus appears to concede that Defendants pre­
served their instructional challenge, but maintains that they are powerless
to ask a court to assess the prejudicial effect of any error they may be
able to demonstrate. See Reply Brief 29, n. 10 (on Government’s view,
“[Defendants] could still ‘claim’ they were wrongly convicted, they just
could not ask a court to do anything about it”). We see little merit in the
Government’s attempt to divorce preservation of a claim from preserva­
tion of the right to redress should the claim succeed.
   13
      Rendering the Seventh Circuit’s forfeiture ruling all the more anoma­
lous, at the time the trial court settled on the general-verdict form, the
Government was no longer pressing its special-verdict request. See App.
to Pet. for Cert. 228a.

=== PAGE 117 ===
474                   BLACK v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of Scalia, J.

the Court of Appeals applied the sanction to Defendants, al­
though they lacked any notice that forfeiture would attend
their resistance to the Government’s special-verdict request.
There is a Rule designed to ward off judicial invention of
the kind present here. Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure
57(b) admonishes: “No sanction or other disadvantage may
be imposed for noncompliance with any requirement not in
federal law [or] federal rules . . . unless the alleged violator
was furnished with actual notice of the requirement before
the noncompliance.”
   We hold, in short, that, by properly objecting to the
honest-services jury instructions at trial, Defendants se­
cured their right to challenge those instructions on appeal.
They did not forfeit that right by declining to acquiesce in
the Government-proposed special-verdict forms. Our deci­
sion in Skilling makes it plain that the honest-services in­
structions in this case were indeed incorrect. As in Skil­
ling, ante, at 414, we express no opinion on the question
whether the error was ultimately harmless, but leave that
matter for consideration on remand.14

                              *      *      *
  For the reasons stated, we vacate the judgment of the
Court of Appeals and remand the case for further proceed­
ings consistent with this opinion.
                                          It is so ordered.

  Justice Scalia, with whom Justice Thomas joins, con­
curring in part and concurring in the judgment.
  I join the Court’s opinion with two exceptions. First, I do
not join in its reliance, ante, at 473, on the Notes of the Advi­

   14
      Black contends that spillover prejudice from evidence introduced on
the mail-fraud counts requires reversal of his obstruction-of-justice convic­
tion. Brief for Petitioners 47–49. That question, too, is one on which we
express no opinion.

=== PAGE 118 ===
                   Cite as: 561 U. S. 465 (2010)            475

                     Opinion of Kennedy, J.

sory Committee in determining the meaning of Federal Rule
of Criminal Procedure 30(d). The Committee’s view is not
authoritative. See Krupski v. Costa Crociere S. p. A., 560
U. S. 538, 557 (2010) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and con­
curring in judgment). The Court accurately quotes the text
of the Rule, see ante, at 473, the meaning of which is obvious.
No more should be said.
   Second, I agree with the Court, ante, at 471, 474, that the
District Court’s honest-services-fraud instructions to the
jury were erroneous, but for a quite different reason. In my
view, the error lay not in instructing inconsistently with
the theory of honest-services fraud set forth in Skilling v.
United States, ante, p. 358, but in instructing the jury on
honest-services fraud at all. For the reasons set forth in
my opinion in that case, 18 U. S. C. § 1346 is unconstitution­
ally vague. Ante, p. 415 (opinion concurring in part and con­
curring in judgment).
   Justice Kennedy, concurring in part and concurring in
the judgment.
   I join the Court’s opinion except for those parts stating
that 18 U. S. C. § 1346 “criminalizes only schemes to defraud
that involve bribes or kickbacks.” Ante, at 471. For the
reasons set forth in Justice Scalia’s separate opinion in
Skilling v. United States, ante, p. 415 (opinion concurring in
part and concurring in judgment), § 1346 is unconstitution­
ally vague. To convict a defendant based on an honest-
services-fraud theory, even one limited to bribes or kick­
backs, would violate his or her rights under the Due Process
Clause of the Fifth Amendment.
