
=== PAGE 1 ===
                                      107TH CONGRESS                                                                                              REPORT
                                                     " HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES                                                           !
                                         2d Session                                                                                               107–414




                                                 CORPORATE AND AUDITING ACCOUNTABILITY,
                                               RESPONSIBILITY, AND TRANSPARENCY ACT OF 2002



                                           APRIL 22, 2002.—Committed to the Committee of the Whole House on the State of
                                                               the Union and ordered to be printed




                                                  Mr. OXLEY, from the Committee on Financial Services,
                                                                submitted the following


                                                                                       R E P O R T
                                                                                           together with

                                                 MINORITY, ADDITIONAL, AND DISSENTING VIEWS

                                                                                   [To accompany H.R. 3763]

                                        The Committee on Financial Services, to whom was referred the
                                      bill (H.R. 3763) to protect investors by improving the accuracy and
                                      reliability of corporate disclosures made pursuant to the securities
                                      laws, and for other purposes, having considered the same, report
                                      favorably thereon with an amendment and recommend that the bill
                                      as amended do pass.
                                                                                              CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                                                     Page
                                      Amendment ..............................................................................................................         2
                                      Purpose and Summary ............................................................................................                16
                                      Background and Need for Legislation ....................................................................                        18
                                      Hearings ...................................................................................................................    19
                                      Committee Consideration ........................................................................................                20
                                      Committee Votes ......................................................................................................          20
                                      Committee Oversight Findings ...............................................................................                    34
                                      Performance Goals and Objectives .........................................................................                      34
                                      New Budget Authority, Entitlement Authority, and Tax Expenditures .............                                                 35
                                      Committee Cost Estimate .......................................................................................                 35
                                      Congressional Budget Office Estimate ...................................................................                        35
                                      Federal Mandates Statement .................................................................................                    35
                                      Advisory Committee Statement ..............................................................................                     35
                                      Constitutional Authority Statement ......................................................................                       35
                                      Applicability to Legislative Branch ........................................................................                    35
                                      Section-by-Section Analysis of the Legislation ......................................................                           36
                                      Changes in Existing Law Made by the Bill, as Reported .....................................                                     48
                                      Minority, Additional, and Dissenting Views .........................................................                            49
                                             99–006




VerDate Apr 19 2002   06:16 Apr 23, 2002    Jkt 099006    PO 00000       Frm 00001       Fmt 6659       Sfmt 6646      E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX            pfrm17      PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 2 ===
                                                                                              2

                                                                                    AMENDMENT
                                           The amendment is as follows:
                                           Strike all after the enacting clause and insert the following:
                                      SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
                                        (a) SHORT TITLE.—This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Corporate and Auditing Account-
                                      ability, Responsibility, and Transparency Act of 2002’’.
                                        (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS.—
                                      Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
                                      Sec. 2. Auditor oversight.
                                      Sec. 3. Improper influence on conduct of audits.
                                      Sec. 4. Real-time disclosure of financial information.
                                      Sec. 5. Insider trades during pension fund blackout periods prohibited.
                                      Sec. 6. Improved transparency of corporate disclosures.
                                      Sec. 7. Improvements in reporting on insider transactions and relationships.
                                      Sec. 8. Codes of conduct.
                                      Sec. 9. Enhanced oversight of periodic disclosures by issuers.
                                      Sec. 10. Retention of records.
                                      Sec. 11. Commission authority to bar persons from serving as officers or directors.
                                      Sec. 12. Disgorging insiders profits from trades prior to correction of erroneous financial statements.
                                      Sec. 13. Securities and Exchange Commission authority to provide relief.
                                      Sec. 14. Study of rules relating to analyst conflicts of interest.
                                      Sec. 15. Review of corporate governance practices.
                                      Sec. 16. Study of enforcement actions.
                                      Sec. 17. Study of credit rating agencies.
                                      Sec. 18. Study of investment banks and other financial institutions.
                                      Sec. 19. Study of model rules for attorneys of issuers.
                                      Sec. 20. Enforcement authority.
                                      Sec. 21. Exclusion for investment companies.
                                      Sec. 22. Definitions.
                                      SEC. 2. AUDITOR OVERSIGHT.
                                        (a) CERTIFIED FINANCIAL STATEMENT REQUIREMENTS.—If a financial statement is
                                      required by the securities laws or any rule or regulation thereunder to be certified
                                      by an independent public or certified accountant, an accountant shall not be consid-
                                      ered to be qualified to certify such financial statement, and the Securities and Ex-
                                      change Commission shall not accept a financial statement certified by an account-
                                      ant, unless such accountant—
                                             (1) is subject to a system of review by a public regulatory organization that
                                           complies with the requirements of this section and the rules prescribed by the
                                           Commission under this section; and
                                             (2) has not been determined in the most recent review completed under such
                                           system to be not qualified to certify such a statement.
                                        (b) ESTABLISHMENT OF PRO.—The Commission shall by rule establish the criteria
                                      by which a public regulatory organization may be recognized for purposes of this
                                      section. Such criteria shall include the following requirements:
                                             (1)(A) The board of such organization shall be comprised of five members,
                                           three of whom shall be public members who are not members of the accounting
                                           profession and two of whom shall be persons licensed to practice public account-
                                           ing and who have recent experience in auditing public companies.
                                             (B) Each member of the board of such organization shall be a person who
                                           meets such standards of financial literacy as are determined by the Commis-
                                           sion.
                                             (C) For purposes of this paragraph, a person shall not be considered a mem-
                                           ber of the accounting profession if such person has not worked in such profes-
                                           sion for any of the last two years prior to the date of such person’s appointment
                                           to the board.
                                             (2) Such organization is so organized and has the capacity—
                                                   (A) to be able to carry out the purposes of this section and to comply, and
                                                to enforce compliance by accountants and persons associated with account-
                                                ants, with the provisions of this Act, professional ethics and competency
                                                standards, and the rules of the organization;
                                                   (B) to perform a review of the work product (including the quality there-
                                                of) of an accountant or a person associated with an accountant; and
                                                   (C) to perform a review of any potential conflicts of interest between an
                                                accountant (or a person associated with an accountant) and the issuer, the
                                                issuer’s board of directors and committees thereof, officers, and affiliates of
                                                such issuer, that may result in an impairment of auditor independence.
                                             (3) Such organization shall have the authority to impose sanctions, which, if
                                           there is a finding of knowing or intentional misconduct, may include a deter-
                                           mination that an accountant is not qualified to certify a financial statement, or
                                           any categories of financial statements, required by the securities laws, or that
                                           a person associated with an accountant is not qualified to participate in such




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000    Frm 00002     Fmt 6659     Sfmt 6621    E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX        pfrm17    PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 3 ===
                                                                                          3
                                              certification, if, after conducting a review and providing fair procedures and an
                                              opportunity for a hearing, the organization finds that—
                                                      (A) such accountant or person associated with an accountant has violated
                                                   the standards of independence, ethics, or competency in the profession;
                                                      (B) such accountant or person associated with an accountant has been
                                                   found by the Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction to have vio-
                                                   lated the securities laws or a rule or regulation thereunder (provided in
                                                   both cases that any applicable time period for appeal has expired);
                                                      (C) an audit conducted by such accountant or any person associated with
                                                   an accountant has been materially affected by an impairment of auditor
                                                   independence;
                                                      (D) such accountant or person associated with an accountant has per-
                                                   formed both auditing services and consulting services in violation of the
                                                   rules prescribed by the Commission pursuant to subsection (c); or
                                                      (E) such accountant or any person associated with an accountant has im-
                                                   peded, obstructed, or otherwise not cooperated in such review.
                                                 (4) Any such organization shall disclose publicly, and make available for pub-
                                              lic comment, proposed procedures and methods for conducting such reviews.
                                                 (5) Any such organization shall have in place procedures to minimize and
                                              deter conflicts of interest involving the public members of such organization,
                                              and have in place procedures to resolve such conflicts.
                                                 (6) Any such organization shall have in place procedures for notifying the
                                              boards of accountancy of the States of the results of reviews and evidence under
                                              paragraphs (2) and (3).
                                                 (7) Any such organization shall have in place procedures for notifying the
                                              Commission of any findings of such reviews, including any findings regarding
                                              suspected violations of the securities laws.
                                                 (8) Any such organization shall consult with boards of accountancy of the
                                              States.
                                                 (9) Any such organization shall have in place a mechanism to allow the orga-
                                              nization to operate on a self-funded basis. Such funding mechanism shall ensure
                                              that such organization is not solely dependent upon members of the accounting
                                              profession for such funding and operations.
                                                 (10) Any such organization shall have the authority to request, in a manner
                                              established by the Commission, that the Commission, by subpoena or otherwise,
                                              compel the testimony of witnesses or the production of any books, papers, cor-
                                              respondence, memoranda, or other records relevant to any accountant review
                                              proceeding or necessary or appropriate for the organization to carry out its pur-
                                              poses. The Commission shall comply with any such request from such an orga-
                                              nization if the Commission determines that compliance with the request would
                                              assist the organization in its accountant review proceeding or in carrying out
                                              its purposes, unless the Commission determines that compliance would not be
                                              in the public interest. The issuance and enforcement of a subpoena requested
                                              under this paragraph shall be deemed to be made pursuant to, and shall be
                                              made in accordance with, the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of section 21
                                              of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78u(b)–(c)). For purposes
                                              of taking evidence, the Commission in its discretion may designate the Board,
                                              or any member thereof, as officers pursuant to section 21(b) of such Act.
                                           (c) PROHIBITION ON THE OFFER OF BOTH AUDIT AND CONSULTING SERVICES.—
                                                 (1) MODIFICATION OF REGULATIONS REQUIRED.—The Commission shall revise
                                              its regulations pertaining to auditor independence to require that an accountant
                                              shall not be considered independent with respect to an audit client if the ac-
                                              countant provides to the client the following nonaudit services, as such terms
                                              are defined in such regulations as in effect on the date of enactment of this Act,
                                              and subject to such conditions and exemptions as the Commission shall pre-
                                              scribe:
                                                      (A) financial information system design or implementation; or
                                                      (B) internal audit services.
                                                 (2) REVIEW OF PROHIBITED NONAUDIT SERVICES.—The Commission is author-
                                              ized to review the impact on the independence of auditors of the scope of serv-
                                              ices provided by auditors to issuers in order to determine whether the list of
                                              prohibited nonaudit services under paragraph (1) shall be modified. In con-
                                              ducting such review, the Commission shall consider the impact of the provision
                                              of a service on an auditor’s independence where provision of the service creates
                                              a conflict of interest with the audit client.
                                                 (3) ADDITIONS BY RULE.—After conducting the review required by paragraph
                                              (2) and at any other time, the Commission may, by rule consistent with the pro-
                                              tection of investors and the public interest, modify the list of prohibited
                                              nonaudit services under paragraph (1).




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00003   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 4 ===
                                                                                          4
                                                 (4) REPORT.—The Commission shall report to the Committee on Financial
                                              Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Hous-
                                              ing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate on its conduct of any reviews as required
                                              by this section. The report shall include a discussion of regulatory or legislative
                                              steps that are recommended or that may be necessary to address concerns iden-
                                              tified in the study.
                                                 (5) CONFORMING REVISION.—The Commission shall revise its regulations per-
                                              taining to accountant fee disclosure items, as set forth in paragraphs (e)(1)
                                              through (e)(3) of item 9 from Schedule 14A (17 CFR 240.14a–101), in light of
                                              paragraph (1) of this subsection and after making a determination as to wheth-
                                              er such disclosures are necessary.
                                                 (6) DEADLINE FOR RULEMAKING.—The Commission shall—
                                                      (A) within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, propose, and
                                                      (B) within 270 days after such date, prescribe,
                                              the revisions to its regulations required by this subsection.
                                           (d) PRO ACCOUNTANT REVIEW PROCEEDINGS.—
                                                 (1) REVIEW PROCEEDING FINDINGS.—Any findings made pursuant to an ac-
                                              countant review conducted under this section that a financial statement audited
                                              by such accountant and submitted to the Commission may have been materially
                                              affected by an impairment of auditor independence, or by a violation of profes-
                                              sional ethics and competency standards, shall be submitted to the Commission.
                                              The Commission shall promptly notify an issuer of any such finding that relates
                                              to the financial statements of such issuer.
                                                 (2) CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT OF PROCEEDINGS PENDING SEC REVIEW.—
                                                      (A) NO DISCLOSURE.—Except as otherwise provided in this section, but
                                                   notwithstanding any other provision of law, neither the Commission, a rec-
                                                   ognized public regulatory organization, nor any other person shall disclose
                                                   any information concerning any accountant review proceeding and the find-
                                                   ings therein.
                                                      (B) SPECIFIC WITHHOLDING NOT AUTHORIZED.—Nothing in this subsection
                                                   shall—
                                                           (i) authorize a recognized public regulatory organization to withhold
                                                        information from the Commission;
                                                           (ii) authorize such board or the Commission to withhold information
                                                        concerning an accountant review proceeding from an accountant or per-
                                                        son associated with an accountant that is the subject of such pro-
                                                        ceeding;
                                                           (iii) authorize the Commission to withhold information from Con-
                                                        gress; or
                                                           (iv) prevent the Commission from complying with a request for infor-
                                                        mation from any other Federal department or agency requesting infor-
                                                        mation for purposes within the scope of its jurisdiction, or complying
                                                        with an order of a court of the United States in an action brought by
                                                        the United States or the Commission.
                                                      (C) DURATION OF WITHHOLDING.—Neither the Commission nor the recog-
                                                   nized public regulatory organization shall disclose the results of any such
                                                   finding until the completion of any review by the Commission under sub-
                                                   sections (e) and (f), or the conclusion of the 30-day period for seeking review
                                                   if no motion seeking review is filed within such period.
                                                      (D) TREATMENT UNDER FOIA.—For purposes of section 552 of title 5,
                                                   United States Code, this subsection shall be considered a statute described
                                                   in subsection (b)(3)(B) of such section 552.
                                                 (3) NONPRECLUSIVE EFFECT OF PRO FINDINGS.—A finding by a recognized pub-
                                              lic regulatory organization that an individual audit of an issuer met or failed
                                              to meet any applicable standard with respect to the quality of such audit shall
                                              not be construed in any action arising out of the securities laws as indicative
                                              of compliance or noncompliance with the securities laws or with any standard
                                              of liability arising thereunder.
                                           (e) REVIEW OF SANCTIONS.—
                                                 (1) NOTICE.—If any recognized public regulatory organization—
                                                      (A) makes a finding with respect to or imposes any final disciplinary
                                                   sanction on any accountant;
                                                      (B) prohibits or limits any person in respect to access to services offered
                                                   by such organization; or
                                                      (C) makes a finding with respect to or imposes any final disciplinary
                                                   sanction on any person associated with an accountant or bars any person
                                                   from becoming associated with an accountant,
                                              the recognized public regulatory organization shall promptly submit notice
                                              thereof with the Commission. The notice shall be in such form and contain such




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00004   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 5 ===
                                                                                          5
                                              information as the Commission, by rule, may prescribe as necessary or appro-
                                              priate in furtherance of the purposes of this section.
                                                 (2) REVIEW BY COMMISSION.—Any action with respect to which a recognized
                                              public regulatory organization is required by paragraph (1) of this subsection
                                              to submit notice shall be subject to review by the Commission, on its own mo-
                                              tion, or upon application by any person aggrieved thereby filed within 30 days
                                              after the date such notice was filed with the Commission and received by such
                                              aggrieved person, or within such longer period as the Commission may deter-
                                              mine. Application to the Commission for review, or the institution of review by
                                              the Commission on its own motion, shall not operate as a stay of such action
                                              unless the Commission otherwise orders, summarily or after notice and oppor-
                                              tunity for hearing on the question of a stay (which hearing may consist solely
                                              of the submission of affidavits or presentation of oral arguments). The Commis-
                                              sion shall establish for appropriate cases an expedited procedure for consider-
                                              ation and determination of the question of a stay.
                                           (f) CONDUCT OF COMMISSION REVIEW.—
                                                 (1) BASIS FOR ACTION.—In any proceeding to review a final disciplinary sanc-
                                              tion imposed by a recognized public regulatory organization on an accountant
                                              or a person associated with such accountant, after notice and opportunity for
                                              hearing (which hearing may consist solely of consideration of the record before
                                              the recognized public regulatory organization and opportunity for the presen-
                                              tation of supporting reasons to affirm, modify, or set aside the sanction)—
                                                      (A) if the Commission finds that such accountant or person associated
                                                   with an accountant has engaged in such acts or practices, or has omitted
                                                   such acts, as the recognized public regulatory organization has found him
                                                   to have engaged in or omitted, that such acts or practices, or omissions to
                                                   act, are in violation of such provisions of this section, or of professional eth-
                                                   ics and competency standards, and that such provisions are, and were ap-
                                                   plied in a manner, consistent with the purposes of this section, the Commis-
                                                   sion, by order, shall so declare and, as appropriate, affirm the sanction im-
                                                   posed by the recognized public regulatory organization, modify the sanction
                                                   in accordance with paragraph (2) of this subsection, or remand to the recog-
                                                   nized public regulatory organization for further proceedings; or
                                                      (B) if the Commission does not make any such finding, it shall, by order,
                                                   set aside the sanction imposed by the recognized public regulatory organiza-
                                                   tion and, if appropriate, remand to the recognized public regulatory organi-
                                                   zation for further proceedings.
                                                 (2) REDUCTION OF SANCTIONS.—If the Commission, having due regard for the
                                              public interest and the protection of investors, finds after a proceeding in ac-
                                              cordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection that a sanction imposed by a rec-
                                              ognized public regulatory organization upon an accountant or person associated
                                              with an accountant imposes any burden on competition not necessary or appro-
                                              priate in furtherance of the purposes of this Act or is excessive or oppressive,
                                              the Commission may cancel, reduce, or require the remission of such sanction.
                                           (g) REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF RULES.—
                                                 (1) SUBMISSION, PUBLICATION, AND COMMENT.—Each recognized public regu-
                                              latory organization shall file with the Commission, in accordance with such
                                              rules as the Commission may prescribe, copies of any proposed rule or any pro-
                                              posed change in, addition to, or deletion from the rules of such recognized public
                                              regulatory organization (hereinafter in this subsection collectively referred to as
                                              a ‘‘proposed rule change’’) accompanied by a concise general statement of the
                                              basis and purpose of such proposed rule change. The Commission shall, upon
                                              the filing of any proposed rule change, publish notice thereof together with the
                                              terms of substance of the proposed rule change or a description of the subjects
                                              and issues involved. The Commission shall give interested persons an oppor-
                                              tunity to submit written data, views, and arguments concerning such proposed
                                              rule change. No proposed rule change shall take effect unless approved by the
                                              Commission or otherwise permitted in accordance with the provisions of this
                                              subsection.
                                                 (2) APPROVAL OR PROCEEDINGS.—Within 35 days of the date of publication of
                                              notice of the filing of a proposed rule change in accordance with paragraph (1)
                                              of this subsection, or within such longer period as the Commission may des-
                                              ignate up to 90 days of such date if it finds such longer period to be appropriate
                                              and publishes its reasons for so finding or as to which the recognized public reg-
                                              ulatory organization consents, the Commission shall—
                                                      (A) by order approve such proposed rule change; or
                                                      (B) institute proceedings to determine whether the proposed rule change
                                                   should be disapproved. Such proceedings shall include notice of the grounds
                                                   for disapproval under consideration and opportunity for hearing and be con-




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00005   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 6 ===
                                                                                          6
                                                cluded within 180 days of the date of publication of notice of the filing of
                                                the proposed rule change. At the conclusion of such proceedings the Com-
                                                mission, by order, shall approve or disapprove such proposed rule change.
                                                The Commission may extend the time for conclusion of such proceedings for
                                                up to 60 days if it finds good cause for such extension and publishes its rea-
                                                sons for so finding or for such longer period as to which the recognized pub-
                                                lic regulatory organization consents.
                                              (3) BASIS FOR APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL.—The Commission shall approve a
                                           proposed rule change of a recognized public regulatory organization if it finds
                                           that such proposed rule change is consistent with the requirements of this Act
                                           and the rules and regulations thereunder applicable to such organization. The
                                           Commission shall disapprove a proposed rule change of a recognized public reg-
                                           ulatory organization if it does not make such finding. The Commission shall not
                                           approve any proposed rule change prior to the 30th day after the date of publi-
                                           cation of notice of the filing thereof, unless the Commission finds good cause
                                           for so doing and publishes its reasons for so finding.
                                              (4) RULES EFFECTIVE UPON FILING.—
                                                   (A) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (2) of this subsection, a
                                                proposed rule change may take effect upon filing with the Commission if
                                                designated by the recognized public regulatory organization as (i) consti-
                                                tuting a stated policy, practice, or interpretation with respect to the mean-
                                                ing, administration, or enforcement of an existing rule of the recognized
                                                public regulatory organization, (ii) establishing or changing a due, fee, or
                                                other charge imposed by the recognized public regulatory organization, or
                                                (iii) concerned solely with the administration of the recognized public regu-
                                                latory organization or other matters which the Commission, by rule, con-
                                                sistent with the public interest and the purposes of this subsection, may
                                                specify as outside the provisions of such paragraph (2).
                                                   (B) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, a proposed
                                                rule change may be put into effect summarily if it appears to the Commis-
                                                sion that such action is necessary for the protection of investors, or other-
                                                wise in accordance with the purposes of this title. Any proposed rule change
                                                so put into effect shall be filed promptly thereafter in accordance with the
                                                provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection.
                                                   (C) Any proposed rule change of a recognized public regulatory organiza-
                                                tion which has taken effect pursuant to subparagraph (A) or (B) of this
                                                paragraph may be enforced by such organization to the extent it is not in-
                                                consistent with the provisions of this Act, the securities laws, the rules and
                                                regulations thereunder, and applicable Federal and State law. At any time
                                                within 60 days of the date of filing of such a proposed rule change in ac-
                                                cordance with the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Com-
                                                mission summarily may abrogate the change in the rules of the recognized
                                                public regulatory organization made thereby and require that the proposed
                                                rule change be refiled in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (1)
                                                of this subsection and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of para-
                                                graph (2) of this subsection, if it appears to the Commission that such ac-
                                                tion is necessary or appropriate in the public interest, for the protection of
                                                investors, or otherwise in furtherance of the purposes of this Act. Commis-
                                                sion action pursuant to the preceding sentence shall not affect the validity
                                                or force of the rule change during the period it was in effect, shall not be
                                                subject to court review, and shall not be deemed to be ‘‘final agency action’’
                                                for purposes of section 704 of title 5, United States Code.
                                        (h) COMMISSION ACTION TO CHANGE RULES.—The Commission, by rule, may abro-
                                      gate, add to, and delete from (hereinafter in this subsection collectively referred to
                                      as ‘‘amend’’) the rules of a recognized public regulatory organization as the Commis-
                                      sion deems necessary or appropriate to insure the fair administration of the recog-
                                      nized public regulatory organization, to conform its rules to requirements of this
                                      Act, the securities laws, and the rules and regulations thereunder applicable to such
                                      organization, or otherwise in furtherance of the purposes of this Act, in the following
                                      manner:
                                              (1) The Commission shall notify the recognized public regulatory organization
                                           and publish notice of the proposed rulemaking in the Federal Register. The no-
                                           tice shall include the text of the proposed amendment to the rules of the recog-
                                           nized public regulatory organization and a statement of the Commission’s rea-
                                           sons, including any pertinent facts, for commencing such proposed rulemaking.
                                              (2) The Commission shall give interested persons an opportunity for the oral
                                           presentation of data, views, and arguments, in addition to an opportunity to
                                           make written submissions. A transcript shall be kept of any oral presentation.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00006   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 7 ===
                                                                                          7
                                              (3) A rule adopted pursuant to this subsection shall incorporate the text of
                                           the amendment to the rules of the recognized public regulatory organization
                                           and a statement of the Commission’s basis for and purpose in so amending such
                                           rules. This statement shall include an identification of any facts on which the
                                           Commission considers its determination so to amend the rules of the recognized
                                           public regulatory agency to be based, including the reasons for the Commis-
                                           sion’s conclusions as to any of such facts which were disputed in the rule-
                                           making.
                                              (4)(A) Except as provided in paragraphs (1) through (3) of this subsection,
                                           rulemaking under this subsection shall be in accordance with the procedures
                                           specified in section 553 of title 5, United States Code, for rulemaking not on
                                           the record.
                                              (B) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to impair or limit the Com-
                                           mission’s power to make, or to modify or alter the procedures the Commission
                                           may follow in making, rules and regulations pursuant to any other authority
                                           under the securities laws.
                                              (C) Any amendment to the rules of a recognized public regulatory organiza-
                                           tion made by the Commission pursuant to this subsection shall be considered
                                           for all purposes to be part of the rules of such recognized public regulatory orga-
                                           nization and shall not be considered to be a rule of the Commission.
                                        (i) COMMISSION OVERSIGHT OF THE PRO.—
                                              (1) RECORDS AND EXAMINATIONS.—A public regulatory organization shall
                                           make and keep for prescribed periods such records, furnish such copies thereof,
                                           and make and disseminate such reports as the Commission, by rule, prescribes
                                           as necessary or appropriate in the public interest, for the protection of inves-
                                           tors, or otherwise in furtherance of the purposes of this Act or the securities
                                           laws.
                                              (2) ADDITIONAL DUTIES; SPECIAL REVIEWS.—A public regulatory organization
                                           shall perform such other duties or functions as the Commission, by rule or
                                           order, determines are necessary or appropriate in the public interest or for the
                                           protection of investors and to carry out the purposes of this Act and the securi-
                                           ties laws, including conducting a special review of a particular public accounting
                                           firm’s quality control system or a special review of a particular aspect of some
                                           or all public accounting firms’ quality control systems.
                                              (3) ANNUAL REPORT; PROPOSED BUDGET.—
                                                   (A) SUBMISSION OF ANNUAL REPORT AND BUDGET.—A public regulatory or-
                                                ganization shall submit an annual report and its proposed budget to the
                                                Commission for review and approval, by order, at such times and in such
                                                form as the Commission shall prescribe.
                                                   (B) CONTENTS OF ANNUAL REPORT.—Each annual report required by sub-
                                                paragraph (A) shall include—
                                                       (i) a detailed description of the activities of the public regulatory or-
                                                     ganization;
                                                       (ii) the audited financial statements of the public regulatory organi-
                                                     zation;
                                                       (iii) a detailed explanation of the fees and charges imposed by the
                                                     public regulatory organization under subsection (b)(9); and
                                                       (iv) such other matters as the public regulatory organization or the
                                                     Commission deems appropriate.
                                                   (C) TRANSMITTAL OF ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS.—The Commission
                                                shall transmit each approved annual report received under subparagraph
                                                (A) to the Committee on Financial Services of the United States House of
                                                Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Af-
                                                fairs of the United States Senate. At the same time it transmits a public
                                                regulatory organization’s annual report under this subparagraph, the Com-
                                                mission shall include a written statement of its views of the functioning and
                                                operations of the public regulatory organization.
                                                   (D) PUBLIC AVAILABILITY.—Following transmittal of each approved annual
                                                report under subparagraph (C), the Commission and the public regulatory
                                                organization shall make the approved annual report publicly available.
                                              (4) DISAPPROVAL OF ELECTION OF PRO MEMBER.—The Commission is author-
                                           ized, by order, if in its opinion such action is necessary or appropriate in the
                                           public interest, for the protection of investors, or otherwise in furtherance of the
                                           purposes of this Act or the securities laws, to disapprove the election of any
                                           member of a public regulatory organization if the Commission determines, after
                                           notice and opportunity for hearing, that the person elected is unfit to serve on
                                           the public regulatory organization.
                                        (j) CLARIFICATION OF APPLICATION OF PRO AUTHORITY.—The authority granted to
                                      any such organization in this section shall only apply to the actions of accountants




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00007   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 8 ===
                                                                                          8
                                      related to the certification of financial statements required by securities laws and
                                      not other actions or actions for other clients of the accounting firm or any account-
                                      ant that does not certify financial statements for publicly traded companies.
                                        (k) DEADLINE FOR RULEMAKING.—The Commission shall—
                                             (1) within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, propose, and
                                             (2) within 270 days after such date, prescribe,
                                      rules to implement this section.
                                        (l) EFFECTIVE DATE; TRANSITION PROVISIONS.—
                                             (1) EFFECTIVE DATE.—Except as provided in paragraph (2), subsection (a) of
                                           this section shall be effective with respect to any certified financial statement
                                           for any fiscal year that ends more than one year after the Commission recog-
                                           nizes a public regulatory organization pursuant to this section.
                                             (2) DELAY IN ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD.—If the Commission has failed to rec-
                                           ognize any public regulatory organization pursuant to this section within one
                                           year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall perform the
                                           duties of such organization with respect to any certified financial statement for
                                           any fiscal year that ends before one year after any such board is recognized by
                                           the Commission.
                                      SEC. 3. IMPROPER INFLUENCE ON CONDUCT OF AUDITS.
                                        (a) RULES TO PROHIBIT.—It shall be unlawful in contravention of such rules or
                                      regulations as the Commission shall prescribe as necessary and appropriate in the
                                      public interest or for the protection of investors for any officer, director, or affiliated
                                      person of an issuer of any security registered under section 12 of the Securities Ex-
                                      change Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78l) to take any action to fraudulently influence, co-
                                      erce, manipulate, or mislead any independent public or certified accountant engaged
                                      in the performance of an audit of the financial statements of such issuer for the pur-
                                      pose of rendering such financial statements materially misleading. In any civil pro-
                                      ceeding, the Commission shall have exclusive authority to enforce this section and
                                      any rule or regulation hereunder.
                                        (b) NO PREEMPTION OF OTHER LAW.—The provisions of subsection (a) shall be in
                                      addition to, and shall not supersede or preempt, any other provision of law or any
                                      rule or regulation thereunder.
                                        (c) DEADLINE FOR RULEMAKING.—The Commission shall—
                                             (1) within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, propose, and
                                             (2) within 270 days after such date, prescribe,
                                      the rules or regulations required by this section.
                                      SEC. 4. REAL-TIME DISCLOSURE OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION.
                                           (a) REAL-TIME ISSUER DISCLOSURES REQUIRED.—
                                                (1) OBLIGATIONS.—Every issuer of a security registered under section 12 of
                                             the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78l) shall file with the Commis-
                                             sion and disclose to the public, on a rapid and essentially contemporaneous
                                             basis, such information concerning the financial condition or operations of such
                                             issuer as the Commission determines by rule is necessary in the public interest
                                             and for the protection of investors. Such rule shall—
                                                     (A) specify the events or circumstances giving rise to the obligation to dis-
                                                  close or update a disclosure;
                                                     (B) establish requirements regarding the rapidity and timeliness of such
                                                  disclosure;
                                                     (C) identify the means whereby the disclosure required shall be made,
                                                  which shall ensure the broad, rapid, and accurate dissemination of the in-
                                                  formation to the public via electronic or other communications device;
                                                     (D) identify the content of the information to be disclosed; and
                                                     (E) without limiting the Commission’s general exemptive authority, speci-
                                                  fy any exemptions or exceptions from such requirements.
                                                (2) ENFORCEMENT.—The Commission shall have exclusive authority to enforce
                                             this section and any rule or regulation hereunder in civil proceedings.
                                           (b) ELECTRONIC DISCLOSURE OF INSIDER TRANSACTIONS.—
                                                (1) DISCLOSURES OF TRADING.—The Commission shall, by rule, require—
                                                     (A) that a disclosure required by section 16 of the Securities Exchange
                                                  Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78p) of the sale of any securities of an issuer, or any
                                                  security futures product (as defined in section 3(a)(56) of the Securities Ex-
                                                  change Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(56))) or any security-based swap agree-
                                                  ment (as defined in section 206B of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act) that is
                                                  based in whole or in part on the securities of such issuer, by an officer or
                                                  director of the issuer of those securities, or by a beneficial owner of such
                                                  securities, shall be made available electronically to the Commission and to
                                                  the issuer by such officer, director, or beneficial owner before the end of the
                                                  next business day after the day on which the transaction occurs;




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00008   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 9 ===
                                                                                          9
                                                   (B) that the information in such disclosure be made available electroni-
                                                cally to the public by the Commission, to the extent permitted under appli-
                                                cable law, upon receipt, but in no case later than the end of the next busi-
                                                ness day after the day on which the disclosure is received under subpara-
                                                graph (A); and
                                                   (C) that, in any case in which the issuer maintains a corporate website,
                                                such information shall be made available by such issuer on that website,
                                                before the end of the next business day after the day on which the disclo-
                                                sure is received by the Commission under subparagraph (A).
                                              (2) TRANSACTIONS INCLUDED.—The rule prescribed under paragraph (1) shall
                                            require the disclosure of the following transactions:
                                                   (A) Direct or indirect sales or other transfers of securities of the issuer
                                                (or any interest therein) to the issuer or an affiliate of the issuer.
                                                   (B) Loans or other extensions of credit extended to an officer, director, or
                                                other person affiliated with the issuer on terms or conditions not otherwise
                                                available to the public.
                                              (3) OTHER FORMATS; FORMS.—In the rule prescribed under paragraph (1), the
                                            Commission shall provide that electronic filing and disclosure shall be in lieu
                                            of any other format required for such disclosures on the day before the date of
                                            enactment of this subsection. The Commission shall revise such forms and
                                            schedules required to be filed with the Commission pursuant to paragraph (1)
                                            as necessary to facilitate such electronic filing and disclosure.
                                      SEC. 5. INSIDER TRADES DURING PENSION FUND BLACKOUT PERIODS PROHIBITED.
                                         (a) PROHIBITION.—It shall be unlawful for any person who is directly or indirectly
                                      the beneficial owner of more than 10 percent of any class of any equity security
                                      (other than an exempted security) which is registered under section 12 of the Secu-
                                      rities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78l) or who is a director or an officer of the
                                      issuer of such security, directly or indirectly, to purchase (or otherwise acquire) or
                                      sell (or otherwise transfer) any equity security of any issuer (other than an exempt-
                                      ed security), during any blackout period with respect to such equity security.
                                         (b) REMEDY.—Any profit realized by such beneficial owner, director, or officer from
                                      any purchase (or other acquisition) or sale (or other transfer) in violation of this sec-
                                      tion shall inure to and be recoverable by the issuer irrespective of any intention on
                                      the part of such beneficial owner, director, or officer in entering into the transaction.
                                      Suit to recover such profit may be instituted at law or in equity in any court of com-
                                      petent jurisdiction by the issuer, or by the owner of any security of the issuer in
                                      the name and in behalf of the issuer if the issuer shall fail or refuse to bring such
                                      suit within 60 days after request or shall fail diligently to prosecute the same there-
                                      after; but no such suit shall be brought more than 2 years after the date such profit
                                      was realized. This subsection shall not be construed to cover any transaction where
                                      such beneficial owner was not such both at the time of the purchase and sale, or
                                      the sale and purchase, of the security or security-based swap (as defined in section
                                      206B of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act) involved, or any transaction or transactions
                                      which the Commission by rules and regulations may exempt as not comprehended
                                      within the purposes of this subsection.
                                         (c) RULEMAKING PERMITTED.—The Commission may issue rules to clarify the ap-
                                      plication of this subsection, to ensure adequate notice to all persons affected by this
                                      subsection, and to prevent evasion thereof.
                                         (d) DEFINITION.—For purposes of this section, the term ‘‘beneficial owner’’ has the
                                      meaning provided such term in rules or regulations issued by the Securities and Ex-
                                      change Commission under section 16 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15
                                      U.S.C. 78p).
                                      SEC. 6. IMPROVED TRANSPARENCY OF CORPORATE DISCLOSURES.
                                        (a) MODIFICATION OF REGULATIONS REQUIRED.—The Commission shall revise its
                                      regulations under the securities laws pertaining to the disclosures required in peri-
                                      odic financial reports and registration statements to require such reports to include
                                      adequate and appropriate disclosure of—
                                             (1) the issuer’s off-balance sheet transactions and relationships with uncon-
                                          solidated entities or other persons, to the extent they are not disclosed in the
                                          financial statements and are reasonably likely to materially affect the liquidity
                                          or the availability of, or requirements for, capital resources, or the financial con-
                                          dition or results of operations of the issuer; and
                                             (2) loans extended to officers, directors, or other persons affiliated with the
                                          issuer on terms or conditions that are not otherwise available to the public.
                                        (b) DEADLINE FOR RULEMAKING.—The Commission shall—
                                             (1) within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, propose, and
                                             (2) within 270 days after such date, prescribe,
                                      the revisions to its regulations required by subsection (a).




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00009   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 10 ===
                                                                                          10
                                           (c) ANALYSIS REQUIRED.—
                                                 (1) TRANSPARENCY, COMPLETENESS, AND USEFULNESS OF FINANCIAL STATE-
                                              MENTS.—The Commission shall conduct an analysis of the extent to which, con-
                                              sistent with the protection of investors and the public interest, disclosure of ad-
                                              ditional or reorganized information may be required to improve the trans-
                                              parency, completeness, or usefulness of financial statements and other corporate
                                              disclosures filed under the securities laws.
                                                 (2) ALTERNATIVES TO BE CONSIDERED.—In conducting the analysis required by
                                              paragraph (1), the Commission shall consider—
                                                      (A) requiring the identification of the key accounting principles that are
                                                   most important to the issuer’s reported financial condition and results of
                                                   operation, and that require management’s most difficult, subjective, or com-
                                                   plex judgments;
                                                      (B) requiring an explanation, where material, of how different available
                                                   accounting principles applied, the judgments made in their application, and
                                                   the likelihood of materially different reported results if different assump-
                                                   tions or conditions were to prevail;
                                                      (C) in the case of any issuer engaged in the business of trading non-ex-
                                                   change traded contracts, requiring an explanation of such trading activities
                                                   when such activities require the issuer to account for contracts at fair
                                                   value, but for which a lack of market price quotations necessitates the use
                                                   of fair value estimation techniques;
                                                      (D) establishing requirements relating to the presentation of information
                                                   in clear and understandable format and language; and
                                                      (E) requiring such other disclosures, included in the financial statements
                                                   or in other disclosure by the issuer, as would in the Commission’s view im-
                                                   prove the transparency of such issuer’s financial statements and other re-
                                                   quired corporate disclosures.
                                                 (3) RULES REQUIRED.—If the Commission, on the basis of the analysis re-
                                              quired by this subsection, determines that it is necessary in the public interest
                                              or for the protection of investors and would improve the transparency of issuer
                                              financial statements, the Commission may prescribe rules reflecting the results
                                              of such analysis and the considerations required by paragraph (2). In pre-
                                              scribing such rules, the Commission may seek to minimize the paperwork and
                                              cost burden on the issuer consistent with achieving the public interest and in-
                                              vestor protection purposes of such rules.
                                      SEC. 7. IMPROVEMENTS IN REPORTING ON INSIDER TRANSACTIONS AND RELATIONSHIPS.
                                        (a) SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES.—The Commission shall initiate a proceeding to propose
                                      changes in its rules and regulations with respect to financial reporting to improve
                                      the transparency and clarity of the information available to investors and to require
                                      increased financial disclosure with respect to the following:
                                             (1) INSIDER RELATIONSHIPS AND TRANSACTIONS.—Relationships and trans-
                                          actions—
                                                  (A) between the issuer, affiliates of the issuer, and officers, directors, or
                                               employees of the issuer or such affiliates; and
                                                  (B) between officers, directors, employees, or affiliates of the issuer and
                                               entities that are not otherwise affiliated with the issuer,
                                          to the extent such arrangement or transaction creates a conflict of interest for
                                          such persons. Such disclosure shall provide a description of such elements of the
                                          transaction as are necessary for an understanding of the business purpose and
                                          economic substance of such transaction (including contingencies). The disclosure
                                          shall provide sufficient information to determine the effect on the issuer’s finan-
                                          cial statements and describe compensation arrangements of interested parties
                                          to such transactions.
                                             (2) RELATIONSHIPS WITH PHILANTHROPIC ORGANIZATIONS.—Relationships be-
                                          tween the registrant or any executive officer of the registrant and any not-for-
                                          profit organization on whose board a director or immediate family member
                                          serves or of which a director or immediate family member serves as an officer
                                          or in a similar capacity. Relationships that shall be disclosed include contribu-
                                          tions to the organization in excess of $10,000 made by the registrant or any ex-
                                          ecutive officer in the last five years and any other activity undertaken by the
                                          registrant or any executive officer that provides a material benefit to the organi-
                                          zation. Material benefit includes lobbying.
                                             (3) INSIDER-CONTROLLED AFFILIATES.—Relationships in which the registrant
                                          or any executive officer exercises significant control over an entity in which a
                                          director or immediate family member owns an equity interest or to which a di-
                                          rector or immediate family member has extended credit. Significant control
                                          should be defined with reference to the contractual and governance arrange-




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00010   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 11 ===
                                                                                          11
                                           ments between the registrant or executive officer, as the case may be, and the
                                           entity.
                                             (4) JOINT OWNERSHIP.—Joint ownership by a registrant or executive officer
                                           and a director or immediate family member of any real or personal property.
                                             (5) PROVISION OF SERVICES BY RELATED PERSONS.—The provision of any pro-
                                           fessional services, including legal, financial advisory or medical services, by a
                                           director or immediate family member to any executive officer of the registrant
                                           in the last five years.
                                        (b) DEADLINES.—The Commission shall complete the rulemaking required by this
                                      section within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
                                      SEC. 8. CODES OF CONDUCT.
                                         (a) RULES REQUIRED.—Within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act,
                                      the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq Stock
                                      Market (or any successor to such entities), shall file with the Commission proposed
                                      rule changes that would prohibit the listing of any security issued by an issuer that
                                      has not adopted a senior financial officers code of ethics applicable to its principal
                                      financial officer, its comptroller or principal accounting officer, or persons per-
                                      forming similar functions that establishes such standards as are reasonably nec-
                                      essary to promote honest and ethical conduct, the avoidance of conflicts of interest,
                                      full, fair, accurate, timely and understandable disclosure in the issuer’s periodic re-
                                      ports and compliance with applicable governmental rules and regulations. The Com-
                                      mission shall approve such proposed rule changes pursuant to the requirement of
                                      section 19(b)(2) of the Securities Act of 1934.
                                         (b) OTHER EXCHANGES.—The Commission, by rule or regulation, may require any
                                      other national securities exchange, to propose rule changes necessary to comply with
                                      the provisions of subsection (a) of this section if the Commission determines such
                                      action is necessary or appropriate in the public interest and consistent with the pro-
                                      tection of investors.
                                         (c) FURTHER STANDARDS.—In addition to the requirements of subsections (a) and
                                      (b), the Commission may, by rule or regulation, prescribe further standards of con-
                                      duct for senior financial officers as necessary or appropriate in the public interest
                                      and consistent with the protection of investors.
                                         (d) CHANGES IN CODES OF CONDUCT.—Within 180 days after the date of enact-
                                      ment of this Act, the Commission shall revise its regulations concerning matters re-
                                      quiring prompt disclosure on Form 8K to require the immediate disclosure, by
                                      means of such Form and by the Internet or other electronic means, by any issuer
                                      of any change in, or waiver of, the code of ethics of such issuer.
                                      SEC. 9. ENHANCED OVERSIGHT OF PERIODIC DISCLOSURES BY ISSUERS.
                                        (a) REGULAR AND SYSTEMATIC REVIEW.—The Securities and Exchange Commission
                                      shall review disclosures made by issuers pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act
                                      of 1934 (including reports filed on form 10–K) on a basis that is more regular and
                                      systematic than that in practice on the date of enactment on this Act. Such review
                                      shall include a review of an issuer’s financial statements.
                                        (b) RISK RATING SYSTEM.—For purposes of the reviews required by subsection (a),
                                      the Commission shall establish a risk rating system whereby issuers receive a risk
                                      rating by the Commission, which shall be used to determine the frequency of such
                                      reviews. In designing such a risk rating system the Commission shall consider,
                                      among other factors the following:
                                             (1) Emerging companies with disparities in price to earning ratios.
                                             (2) Issuers with the largest market capitalization.
                                             (3) Issuers whose operations significantly impact any material sector of the
                                           economy.
                                             (4) Systemic factors such as the effect on niche markets or important subsec-
                                           tors of the economy.
                                             (5) Issuers that experience significant volatility in their stock price as com-
                                           pared to other issuers.
                                             (6) Any other factor the Commission may consider relevant.
                                        (c) MINIMUM REVIEW PERIOD.—In no event shall an issuer be reviewed less than
                                      once every three years by the Commission.
                                        (d) PROHIBITION OF DISCLOSURE OF RISK RATING.—Notwithstanding any other
                                      provision of law, the Commission shall not disclose the risk rating of any issuer de-
                                      scribed in subsection (b).
                                      SEC. 10. RETENTION OF RECORDS.
                                        (a) DUTY TO RETAIN RECORDS.—Any independent public or certified accountant
                                      who certifies a financial statement as required by the securities laws or any rule
                                      or regulation thereunder shall prepare and maintain for a period of no less than
                                      7 years, final audit work papers and other information related to any accountants




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00011   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 12 ===
                                                                                          12
                                      report on such financial statements in sufficient detail to support the opinion or as-
                                      sertion reached in such accountants report. The Commission may prescribe rules
                                      specifying the application and requirements of this section.
                                        (b) ACCOUNTANT’S REPORT.—For purposes of subsection (a), the term ‘‘accountant’s
                                      report’’ means a document in which an accountant identifies a financial statement
                                      and sets forth his opinion regarding such financial statement or an assertion that
                                      an opinion cannot be expressed.
                                      SEC. 11. COMMISSION AUTHORITY TO BAR PERSONS FROM SERVING AS OFFICERS OR DIREC-
                                                 TORS.
                                         (a) COMMISSION AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT PERSONS FROM SERVING AS OFFICERS OR
                                      DIRECTORS.—Notwithstanding any other provision of the securities laws, in any
                                      cease-and-desist proceeding under section 8A(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 or sec-
                                      tion 21C(a) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, the Commission may issue
                                      an order to prohibit, conditionally or unconditionally, permanently or for such period
                                      of time as it shall determine, any person who has violated section 17(a)(1) of the
                                      Securities Act of 1933 or section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (or
                                      any rule or regulation thereunder) from acting as an officer or director of any issuer
                                      that has a class of securities registered pursuant to section 12 of the Securities Ex-
                                      change Act of 1934 or that is required to file reports pursuant to section 15(d) of
                                      such Act if the person’s conduct demonstrates substantial unfitness to serve as an
                                      officer or director of any such issuer.
                                         (b) FINDING OF SUBSTANTIAL UNFITNESS.—In making any determination that a
                                      person’s conduct demonstrates substantial unfitness to serve as an officer or director
                                      of any such issuer, the Commission shall consider—
                                              (1) the severity of the persons conduct giving rise to the violation, and the
                                            persons role or position when he engaged in the violation;
                                              (2) the person’s degree of scienter;
                                              (3) the person’s economic gain as a result of the violation; and
                                              (4) the likelihood that the conduct giving rise to the violation, or similar con-
                                            duct as defined in subsection (a), may recur if the person is not so prohibited.
                                         (c) AUTOMATIC STAY PENDING APPEAL.—The enforcement of any Commission order
                                      pursuant to subsection (a) shall be stayed—
                                              (1) for a period of at least 60 days after the entry of any such order or deci-
                                            sion; and
                                              (2) upon the filing of a timely application for judicial review of such order or
                                            decision, pending the entry of a final order resolving the application for judicial
                                            review.
                                      SEC. 12. DISGORGING INSIDERS PROFITS FROM TRADES PRIOR TO CORRECTION OF ERRO-
                                                 NEOUS FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
                                         (a) ANALYSIS REQUIRED.—The Commission shall conduct an analysis of whether,
                                      and under what conditions, any officer or director of an issuer should be required
                                      to disgorge profits gained, or losses avoided, in the sale of the securities of such
                                      issuer during the six month period immediately preceding the filing of a restated
                                      financial statement on the part of such issuer.
                                         (b) DISGORGEMENT RULES AUTHORIZED.—If the Commission determines that im-
                                      posing the requirement described in subsection (a) is necessary or appropriate in the
                                      public interest or for the protection investors, and would not unduly impair the op-
                                      erations of issuers or the orderly operation of the securities markets, the Commis-
                                      sion shall prescribe a rule requiring the disgorgement of all profits gained or losses
                                      avoided in the sale of the securities of the issuer by any officer or director thereof.
                                      Such rule shall—
                                               (1) describe the conditions under which any officer or director shall be re-
                                            quired to disgorge profits, including what constitutes a restatement for purposes
                                            of operation of the rule;
                                               (2) establish exceptions and exemptions from such rule as necessary to carry
                                            out the purposes of this section;
                                               (3) identify the scienter requirement that should be used in order to deter-
                                            mine to impose the requirement to disgorge; and
                                               (4) specify that the enforcement of such rule shall lie solely with the Commis-
                                            sion, and that any profits so disgorged shall inure to the issuer.
                                         (c) NO PREEMPTION OF OTHER LAW.—Unless otherwise specified by the Commis-
                                      sion, in the case of any rule promulgated pursuant to subsection (b), such rule shall
                                      be in addition to, and shall not supersede or preempt, the Commission’s authority
                                      to seek disgorgement under any other provision of law.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00012   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 13 ===
                                                                                          13
                                      SEC. 13. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE RELIEF.
                                         (a) PROCEEDS OF ENRON AND ANDERSEN ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.—If in any ad-
                                      ministrative or judicial proceeding brought by the Securities and Exchange Commis-
                                      sion against—
                                              (1) the Enron Corporation, any subsidiary or affiliate of such Corporation, or
                                            any officer, director, or principal shareholder of such Corporation, subsidiary, or
                                            affiliate for any violation of the securities laws; or
                                              (2) Arthur Andersen L.L.C., any subsidiary or affiliate of Arthur Andersen
                                            L.L.C., or any general or limited partner of Arthur Andersen L.L.C., or such
                                            subsidiary or affiliate, for any violation of the securities laws with respect to
                                            any services performed for or in relation to the Enron Corporation, any sub-
                                            sidiary or affiliate of such Corporation, or any officer, director, or principal
                                            shareholder of such Corporation, subsidiary, or affiliate;
                                      the Commission obtains an order providing for an accounting and disgorgement of
                                      funds, such disgorgement fund (including any addition to such fund required or per-
                                      mitted under this section) shall be allocated in accordance with the requirements
                                      of this section.
                                         (b) PRIORITY FOR FORMER ENRON EMPLOYEES.—The Commission shall, by order,
                                      establish an allocation system for the disgorgement fund. Such system shall provide
                                      that, in allocating the disgorgement fund amount the victims of the securities laws
                                      violations described in subsection (a), the first priority shall be given to individuals
                                      who were employed by the Enron Corporation, or a subsidiary or affiliate of such
                                      Corporation, and who were participants in an individual account plan established
                                      by such Corporation, subsidiary, or affiliate. Such allocations among such individ-
                                      uals shall be in proportion to the extent to which the nonforfeitable accrued benefit
                                      of each such individual under the plan was invested in the securities of such Cor-
                                      poration, subsidiary, or affiliate.
                                         (c) ADDITION OF CIVIL PENALTIES.—If, in any proceeding described in subsection
                                      (a), the Commission assesses and collects any civil penalty, the Commission shall,
                                      notwithstanding section 21(d)(3)(C)(i) or 21A(d)(1) of the Securities Exchange Act of
                                      1934, or any other provision of the securities laws, be payable to the disgorgement
                                      fund.
                                         (d) ACCEPTANCE OF ADDITIONAL DONATIONS.—The Commission is authorized to
                                      accept, hold, administer, and utilize gifts, bequests and devises of property, both
                                      real and personal, to the United States for the disgorgement fund. Gifts, bequests,
                                      and devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts,
                                      bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the disgorgement fund and shall be avail-
                                      able for allocation in accordance with subsection (b).
                                         (e) DEFINITIONS.—As used in this section:
                                              (1) DISGORGEMENT FUND.—The term ‘‘disgorgement fund’’ means a
                                            disgorgement fund established in any administrative or judicial proceeding de-
                                            scribed in subsection (a).
                                              (2) SUBSIDIARY OR AFFILIATE.—The term ‘‘subsidiary or affiliate’’ when used
                                            in relation to a person means any entity that controls, is controlled by, or is
                                            under common control with such person.
                                              (3) OFFICER, DIRECTOR, OR PRINCIPAL SHAREHOLDER.—The term ‘‘officer, direc-
                                            tor, or principal shareholder’’ when used in relation to the Enron Corporation,
                                            or any subsidiary or affiliate of such Corporation, means any person that is sub-
                                            ject to the requirements of section 16 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
                                            (15 U.S.C. 78p) in relation to the Enron Corporation, or any subsidiary or affil-
                                            iate of such Corporation.
                                              (4) NONFORFEITABLE; ACCRUED BENEFIT; INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNT PLAN.—The
                                            terms ‘‘nonforfeitable’’, ‘‘accrued benefit’’, and ‘‘individual account plan’’ have the
                                            meanings provided such terms, respectively, in paragraphs (19), (23), and (34)
                                            of section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C.
                                            1002(19), (23), (34)).
                                      SEC. 14. STUDY OF RULES RELATING TO ANALYST CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
                                         (a) STUDY AND REVIEW REQUIRED.—The Commission shall conduct a study and re-
                                      view of any final rules by any self-regulatory organization registered with the Com-
                                      mission related to matters involving equity research analysts conflicts of interest.
                                      Such study and report shall include a review of the effectiveness of such final rules
                                      in addressing matters relating to the objectivity and integrity of equity research an-
                                      alyst reports and recommendations.
                                         (b) REPORT REQUIRED.—The Commission shall submit a report to the Committee
                                      on Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Bank-
                                      ing, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate on such study and review no later
                                      than 180 days after any such final rules by any self-regulatory organization reg-
                                      istered with the Commission are delivered to the Commission. Such report shall in-




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00013   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 14 ===
                                                                                          14
                                      clude recommendations to the Congress, including any recommendations for addi-
                                      tional self-regulatory organization rulemaking regarding matters involving equity
                                      research analysts. The Commission shall annually submit an update on such review.
                                      SEC. 15. REVIEW OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE PRACTICES.
                                        (a) STUDY OF CORPORATE PRACTICES.—The Commission shall conduct a study and
                                      review of current corporate governance standards and practices to determine wheth-
                                      er such standards and practices are serving the best interests of shareholders. Such
                                      study and review shall include an analysis of—
                                              (1) whether current standards and practices promote full disclosure of rel-
                                           evant information to shareholders;
                                              (2) whether corporate codes of ethics are adequate to protect shareholders,
                                           and to what extent deviations from such codes are tolerated;
                                              (3) to what extent conflicts of interests are aggressively reviewed, and wheth-
                                           er adequate means for redressing such conflicts exist;
                                              (4) to what extent sufficient legal protections exist or should be adopted to
                                           ensure that any manager who attempts to manipulate or unduly influence an
                                           audit will be subject to appropriate sanction and liability, including liability to
                                           investors or shareholders pursuing a private cause of action for such manipula-
                                           tion or undue influence;
                                              (5) whether rules, standards, and practices relating to determining whether
                                           independent directors are in fact independent are adequate;
                                              (6) whether rules, standards, and practices relating to the independence of di-
                                           rectors serving on audit committees are uniformly applied and adequate to pro-
                                           tect investor interests;
                                              (7) whether the duties and responsibilities of audit committees should be es-
                                           tablished by the Commission; and
                                              (8) what further or additional practices or standards might best protect inves-
                                           tors and promote the interests of shareholders.
                                        (b) PARTICIPATION OF STATE REGULATORS.—In conducting the study required
                                      under subsection (a), the Commission shall seek the views of the securities and cor-
                                      porate regulators of the various States.
                                        (c) REPORT REQUIRED.—The Commission shall submit a report on the analysis re-
                                      quired under subsection (a) as a part of the Commission’s next annual report sub-
                                      mitted after the date of enactment of this Act.
                                      SEC. 16. STUDY OF ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
                                         (a) STUDY REQUIRED.—The Commission shall review and analyze all enforcement
                                      actions by the Commission involving violations of reporting requirements imposed
                                      under the securities laws, and restatements of financial statements, over the last
                                      five years to identify areas of reporting that are most susceptible to fraud, inappro-
                                      priate manipulation, or inappropriate earnings management, such as revenue rec-
                                      ognition and the accounting treatment of off-balance sheet special purpose entities.
                                         (b) REPORT REQUIRED.—The Commission shall report its findings to the Com-
                                      mittee on Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on
                                      Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate within 180 days of the date of
                                      enactment of this Act and shall use such findings to revise its rules and regulations,
                                      as necessary. The report shall include a discussion of regulatory or legislative steps
                                      that are recommended or that may be necessary to address concerns identified in
                                      the study.
                                      SEC. 17. STUDY OF CREDIT RATING AGENCIES.
                                         (a) STUDY REQUIRED.—The Commission shall conduct a study of the role and func-
                                      tion of credit rating agencies in the operation of the securities market. Such study
                                      shall examine—
                                              (1) the role of the credit rating agencies in the evaluation of issuers of securi-
                                           ties;
                                              (2) the importance of that role to investors and the functioning of the securi-
                                           ties markets;
                                              (3) any impediments to the accurate appraisal by credit rating agencies of the
                                           financial resources and risks of issuers of securities;
                                              (4) any measures which may be required to improve the dissemination of in-
                                           formation concerning such resources and risks when credit rating agencies an-
                                           nounce credit ratings;
                                              (5) any barriers to entry into the business of acting as a credit rating agency,
                                           and any measures needed to remove such barriers; and
                                              (6) any conflicts of interest in the operation of credit rating agencies and
                                           measures to prevent such conflicts or ameliorate the consequences of such con-
                                           flicts.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00014   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 15 ===
                                                                                          15
                                        (b) REPORT REQUIRED.—The Commission shall submit a report on the analysis re-
                                      quired by subsection (a) to the President, the Committee on Financial Services of
                                      the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
                                      Affairs of the Senate within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act. The
                                      report shall include a discussion of regulatory or legislative steps that are rec-
                                      ommended or that may be necessary to address concerns identified in the study.
                                      SEC. 18. STUDY OF INVESTMENT BANKS
                                        (a) GAO STUDY.—The Comptroller General shall conduct a study on the role
                                      played by investment banks and financial advisors in assisting public companies in
                                      manipulating their earnings and obfuscating their true financial condition. The
                                      study should address the role of the investment banks—
                                              (1) in the collapse of the Enron Corporation, including with respect to the de-
                                           sign and implementation of derivatives transactions, transactions involving spe-
                                           cial purpose vehicles, and other financing arrangements that may have had the
                                           effect of altering the company’s reported financial statements in ways that ob-
                                           scured the true financial picture of the company;
                                              (2) in the failure of Global Crossing, including with respect to transactions in-
                                           volving swaps of fiber optic cable capacity, in designing transactions that may
                                           have had the effect of altering the company’s reported financial statements in
                                           ways that obscured the true financial picture of the company; and
                                              (3) generally, in creating and marketing transactions designed solely to en-
                                           able companies to manipulate revenue streams, obtain loans, or move liabilities
                                           off balance sheets without altering the economic and business risks faced by the
                                           companies or any other mechanism to obscure a company’s financial picture.
                                        (b) REPORT.—The General Accounting Office shall report to the Congress within
                                      180 days after the date of enactment of this Act on the results of the study required
                                      by this section. The report shall include a discussion of regulatory or legislative
                                      steps that are recommended or that may be necessary to address concerns identified
                                      in the study.
                                      SEC. 19. STUDY OF MODEL RULES FOR ATTORNEYS OF ISSUERS.
                                        (a) IN GENERAL.—The Comptroller General shall conduct a study of the Model
                                      Rules of Professional Conduct promulgated by the American Bar Association and
                                      rules of professional conduct applicable to attorneys established by the Commission
                                      to determine—
                                              (1) whether such rules provide sufficient guidance to attorneys representing
                                           corporate clients who are issuers required to file periodic disclosures under sec-
                                           tion 13 or 15 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m, 78o), as
                                           to the ethical responsibilities of such attorneys to—
                                                   (A) warn clients of possible fraudulent or illegal activities of such clients
                                                and possible consequences of such activities;
                                                   (B) disclose such fraudulent or illegal activities to appropriate regulatory
                                                or law enforcement authorities; and
                                                   (C) manage potential conflicts of interests with clients; and
                                              (2) whether such rules provide sufficient protection to corporate shareholders,
                                           especially with regards to conflicts of interest between attorneys and their cor-
                                           porate clients.
                                        (b) REPORT REQUIRED.—The Comptroller General shall report to the Committee
                                      on Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Bank-
                                      ing, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate on the results of the study required
                                      by this section. Such report shall include any recommendations of the General Ac-
                                      counting Office with regards to—
                                              (1) possible changes to the Model Rules and the rules of professional conduct
                                           applicable to attorneys established by the Commission to provide increased pro-
                                           tection to shareholders;
                                              (2) whether restrictions should be imposed to require that an attorney, having
                                           represented a corporation or having been employed by a firm which represented
                                           a corporation, may not be employed as general counsel to that corporation until
                                           a certain period of time has expired; and
                                              (3) regulatory or legislative steps that are recommended or that may be nec-
                                           essary to address concerns identified in the study.
                                      SEC. 20. ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
                                         For the purposes of enforcing and carrying out this Act, the Commission shall
                                      have all of the authorities granted to the Commission under the securities laws. Ac-
                                      tions of the Commission under this Act, including actions on rules or regulations,
                                      shall be subject to review in the same manner as actions under the securities laws.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00015   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6621   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 16 ===
                                                                                          16
                                      SEC. 21. EXCLUSION FOR INVESTMENT COMPANIES.
                                         Sections 4, 6, 9, and 15 of this Act shall not apply to an investment company reg-
                                      istered under section 8 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a–8).
                                      SEC. 22. DEFINITIONS.
                                           As used in this Act:
                                               (1) BLACKOUT PERIOD.—The term ‘‘blackout period’’ with respect to the equity
                                             securities of any issuer—
                                                    (A) means any period during which the ability of at least fifty percent of
                                                  the participants or beneficiaries under all applicable individual account
                                                  plans maintained by the issuer to purchase (or otherwise acquire) or sell
                                                  (or otherwise transfer) an interest in any equity of such issuer is suspended
                                                  by the issuer or a fiduciary of the plan; but
                                                    (B) does not include—
                                                          (i) a period in which the employees of an issuer may not allocate
                                                       their interests in the individual account plan due to an express invest-
                                                       ment restriction—
                                                               (I) incorporated into the individual account plan; and
                                                               (II) timely disclosed to employees before joining the individual
                                                             account plan or as a subsequent amendment to the plan; or
                                                          (ii) any suspension described in subparagraph (A) that is imposed
                                                       solely in connection with persons becoming participants or bene-
                                                       ficiaries, or ceasing to be participants or beneficiaries, in an applicable
                                                       individual account plan by reason of a corporate merger, acquisition, di-
                                                       vestiture, or similar transaction.
                                               (2) BOARDS OF ACCOUNTANCY OF THE STATES.—The term ‘‘boards of account-
                                             ancy of the States’’ means any organization or association chartered or approved
                                             under the law of any State with responsibility for the registration, supervision,
                                             or regulation of accountants.
                                               (3) COMMISSION.—The term ‘‘Commission’’ means the Securities and Ex-
                                             change Commission.
                                               (4) INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNT PLAN.—The term ‘‘individual account plan’’ has the
                                             meaning provided such term in section 3(34) of the Employee Retirement In-
                                             come Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(34)).
                                               (5) ISSUER.—The term ‘‘issuer’’ shall have the meaning set forth in section
                                             2(a)(4) of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77b(a)(4)).
                                               (6) PERSON ASSOCIATED WITH AN ACCOUNTANT.—The term ‘‘person associated
                                             with an accountant’’ means any partner, officer, director, or manager of such
                                             accountant (or any person occupying a similar status or performing similar
                                             functions), any person directly or indirectly controlling, controlled by, or under
                                             common control with such accountant, or any employee of such accountant who
                                             performs a supervisory role in the auditing process.
                                               (7) RECOGNIZED PUBLIC REGULATORY ORGANIZATION.—The term ‘‘recognized
                                             public regulatory organization’’ means a public regulatory organization that the
                                             Commission has recognized as meeting the criteria established by the Commis-
                                             sion under subsection (b) of section 2.
                                               (8) SECURITIES LAWS.—The term ‘‘securities laws’’ means the Securities Act of
                                             1933 (15 U.S.C. 77a et seq.), the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78a
                                             et seq.), the Trust Indenture Act of 1939 (15 U.S.C. 77aaa et seq.), the Invest-
                                             ment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a–1 et seq.), the Investment Advisers
                                             Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b et seq.), and the Securities Investor Protection Act
                                             of 1970 (15 U.S.C. 78aaa et seq.), notwithstanding any contrary provision of any
                                             such Act.

                                                                        PURPOSE AND SUMMARY
                                        H.R. 3763, the Corporate and Auditing Accountability, Responsi-
                                      bility, and Transparency Act of 2002, will protect investors by im-
                                      proving the accuracy and reliability of corporate disclosures made
                                      pursuant to the securities laws. The bill achieves this goal through
                                      increased supervision of accountants that audit public companies,
                                      strengthened corporate responsibility, increased transparency of
                                      corporate financial statements, and protections for employee access
                                      to retirement accounts.
                                        With regard to increasing the supervision of accountants, the
                                      purpose of the legislation is to allow for the creation of a public reg-
                                      ulatory organization or organizations, comprised of persons skilled




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00016   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 17 ===
                                                                                          17

                                      and knowledgeable in issues related to the audit of public compa-
                                      nies, to perform quality or other reviews of the activities of certified
                                      public accountants who report on financial statements that are re-
                                      quired to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
                                      (SEC). The legislation envisions that such an organization will en-
                                      force compliance by accountants with professional ethics and com-
                                      petency standards applicable to audits of such financial statements
                                      and establish such rules as are deemed necessary to provide for
                                      their review and enforcement, and provides for the oversight of
                                      such organizations by the Commission.
                                         The legislation also requires that the SEC promulgate rules that
                                      would bar the provision by auditors of certain nonaudit services to
                                      their audit clients. The Committee heard testimony that two
                                      nonaudit services—financial systems design and implementation
                                      and internal audit outsourcing—were perceived to raise issues
                                      about auditor independence. Because of the importance of public
                                      perceptions in this area, the Committee believes these services
                                      should be prohibited. The SEC had proposed to prohibit them dur-
                                      ing a rulemaking in 2000, but ultimately decided to allow them,
                                      subject to certain conditions.
                                         Although financial systems and internal audit work are the two
                                      nonaudit services that have raised significant investor concerns,
                                      the SEC is also authorized to modify its rules if auditing firms
                                      begin to offer other services that raise similarly significant inde-
                                      pendence concerns. Indeed, it is appropriate that these issues be
                                      considered carefully by an entity with the Commission’s resources
                                      and expertise, and that whatever standards are established apply
                                      uniformly to public companies throughout the markets. A non-fed-
                                      eral approach would lead to uncertainty in our capital markets,
                                      particularly if the standards applicable to public companies and
                                      audit firms varied by jurisdiction. The Committee believes that it
                                      is appropriate to continue dealing with nonaudit services by having
                                      the Commission proscribe specific services rather than casting
                                      doubt on a broad range of nonaudit services. In this regard, the
                                      Committee heard testimony that a broader ban on nonaudit serv-
                                      ices could undermine rather than improve audit quality, since cer-
                                      tain such services can improve the auditor’s understanding of the
                                      audit client’s business activities. Likewise, a broader ban could re-
                                      duce corporate efficiencies and impair auditing firms’ ability to at-
                                      tract and retain tax and other nonaudit personnel who are essen-
                                      tial to the audit process.
                                         The legislation will also ensure that the SEC has sufficient au-
                                      thority to bar individuals from serving as officers or directors of
                                      public companies if they demonstrate they are substantially unfit
                                      to serve and that company officials disgorge any profits they re-
                                      ceive from selling their own shares of their company’s stock prior
                                      to a restatement of the company’s financial statements. The bill
                                      also prohibits any company official from fraudulently misleading an
                                      auditor and requires the SEC to conduct studies of several areas
                                      related to corporate responsibility in order to evaluate other areas
                                      of corporate conduct and disclosure which may need reform.
                                         The legislation requires the SEC to issue rules increasing the ac-
                                      curacy and transparency of company disclosures and will strength-
                                      en the SEC’s procedures for reviewing the financial statements of
                                      issuers that play a significant role in the economy. Further, the bill




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00017   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 18 ===
                                                                                          18

                                      will require that the SEC explore the effectiveness of SRO rules re-
                                      lating to analysts, and report on the role and function of credit rat-
                                      ing agencies.
                                         Finally, the legislation will protect employee access to their re-
                                      tirement accounts by preventing company insiders from trading
                                      their own shares in a company when their employees cannot do so
                                      because of a ‘‘blackout’’ in a company sponsored employee retire-
                                      ment account.
                                         The legislation is also designed to strengthen the SEC’s proce-
                                      dures for reviewing the financial statements of issuers that play a
                                      significant role in the economy, explore the effectiveness of SRO
                                      rules relating to analysts, and report on the role and function of
                                      credit rating agencies.
                                                           BACKGROUND AND NEED FOR LEGISLATION
                                         The Federal securities laws are designed to ensure that public
                                      companies provide investors with full and accurate disclosure of the
                                      true financial condition of the company. Following the bankruptcies
                                      of Enron Corporation and Global Crossing LLC, and restatements
                                      of earnings by several prominent market participants, regulators,
                                      investors and others expressed concern about the adequacy of the
                                      current disclosure regime for public companies.
                                         Additionally, they expressed concerns about the role of auditors
                                      in approving corporate financial statements. Questions regarding
                                      the independence of auditors of public companies led to calls for
                                      greater supervision of the profession. The SEC raised the need for
                                      the creation of a new oversight body to review compliance of public
                                      auditors with the profession’s standards of ethics and competency;
                                      this suggestion received widespread support.
                                         The bankruptcy of Enron Corporation also raised issues relating
                                      to the security of employee retirement accounts. When allegations
                                      arose that some Enron insiders were able to sell their company
                                      stock even as Enron employees were prohibited from doing so be-
                                      cause of an administrative lockdown in the company’s retirement
                                      plan, new calls arose for protecting the access of employees to their
                                      accounts to the same degree as insiders.
                                         The securities laws, and in particular the Securities Exchange
                                      Act of 1934, provide a host of protections for investors with regard
                                      to their access to company information. Reflecting the technology
                                      available to public companies and investors at that time, the secu-
                                      rities laws largely reflect the paper-based system of reporting infor-
                                      mation that was prevalent up until the advent of the electronic
                                      age. With the creation of the internet and continuous televised cov-
                                      erage of the capital markets, the regulatory regime for speeding the
                                      availability of company information has been unable to keep pace
                                      with the nearly instantaneous demand for investor access to that
                                      information. On-line trading of securities broadly expanded both
                                      the number of participants in the securities markets and the vol-
                                      ume of trading in those markets. This development also heightened
                                      the need for more rapid disclosure of company news.
                                         The increased public participation in the securities markets and
                                      the broader coverage of those markets also raised the profile of se-
                                      curities analysts that provide recommendations regarding equity
                                      securities. Responding to the concerns of some that analysts for
                                      companies that also underwrite and trade in the securities mar-




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00018   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 19 ===
                                                                                          19

                                      kets, the Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance and Govern-
                                      ment Sponsored Enterprises held a series of hearings on the role
                                      of analysts in reporting on equity securities. Following these hear-
                                      ings, the securities industry developed a statement of best practices
                                      guiding analysts and their employers in avoiding conflicts of inter-
                                      est. This statement was later followed by a proposed rule by the
                                      self regulatory organizations (SROs) establishing guidelines for an-
                                      alysts and their employers to ensure that analyst recommendations
                                      are fair and unbiased. This proposal is currently under review by
                                      the SEC.
                                         The Committee’s hearings on the Enron matter, the collapse of
                                      Global Crossing LLC, and the operations of the Nation’s capital
                                      markets all indicated that reforms were necessary both for the reg-
                                      ulators and the regulated. Further, the President’s Plan to Improve
                                      Corporate Responsibility and Protect America’s Investors, an-
                                      nounced on March 7, 2002, outlined a path by which corporations
                                      and their investors can continue their partnership in growing the
                                      Nation’s economy, and do so on fair and equal footing. This legisla-
                                      tion responds to the problems of the marketplace through a fair
                                      and balanced approach that ensures that the Nation’s capital mar-
                                      kets continue to be the strongest in the world.
                                                                                  HEARINGS
                                        On March 13 and March 20, 2002, the Committee held legislative
                                      hearings on H.R. 3763. The following witnesses testified on March
                                      13: former SEC Chairman Roderick Hills; Mr. Marc Lackritz, Presi-
                                      dent, Securities Industry Association; Mr. Barry Melancon, Presi-
                                      dent and CEO, American Institute of Certified Public Accountants;
                                      Mr. James Glassman, American Enterprise Institute; Mr. Ted
                                      White, California Public Employees’ Retirement System; Mr. Lynn
                                      Turner, former Chief Accountant, Securities and Exchange Com-
                                      mission; and Ms. Barbara Roper, Director of Investor Protection for
                                      the Consumer Federation of America.
                                        On March 20, the following witnesses testified: SEC Chairman
                                      Harvey Pitt; Mr. Franklin Raines, appearing on behalf of the Busi-
                                      ness Roundtable; Mr. Phillip Livingston, President and CEO, Fi-
                                      nancial Executives International; Mr. H. Carl McCall, Comptroller,
                                      State of New York; Mr. Joseph V. DelRaso, Pepper Hamilton LLP;
                                      Mr. Jerry Jasinowski, President, National Association of Manufac-
                                      turers; and Mr. Peter Chapman, TIAA–CREF. The Committee also
                                      received the written testimony of Deputy Undersecretary of the
                                      Treasury Mr. Peter Fisher.
                                        Pursuant to clause 2(j)(1) of rule XI of the Rules of the House of
                                      Representatives and rule 3(d) of the rules of the Committee on Fi-
                                      nancial Services, the Committee held another day of hearings at
                                      the request of the minority on April 9, 2002. The following wit-
                                      nesses testified: Mr. David Walker, Comptroller General of the
                                      United States, General Accounting Office; Mr. Richard Breeden,
                                      former Chairman, Securities and Exchange Commission; Mr. Don-
                                      ald Langevoort, Professor of Law, Georgetown University Law Cen-
                                      ter; and Mr. Damon Silvers, Associate General Counsel, AFL–CIO.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00019   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 20 ===
                                                                                          20

                                                                     COMMITTEE CONSIDERATION
                                        The Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance, and Govern-
                                      ment Sponsored Enterprises was discharged from the further con-
                                      sideration of H.R. 3763 on April 8, 2002.
                                        The Committee on Financial Services met in open session on
                                      April 11 and April 16, 2002 and ordered H.R. 3763 reported to the
                                      House with a favorable recommendation by a record vote of 49 yeas
                                      and 12 nays, a quorum being present.
                                                                           COMMITTEE VOTES
                                         Clause 3(b) of rule XIII of the Rules of the House of Representa-
                                      tives requires the Committee to list the record votes on the motion
                                      to report legislation and amendments thereto. A motion by Mr.
                                      Oxley to report the bill to the House with a favorable recommenda-
                                      tion was agreed to by a record vote of 49 yeas and 12 nays (Record
                                      vote no. 37), a quorum being present. The names of members vot-
                                      ing for and against follow:
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. Oxley                                    Mr. LaFalce
                                              Mr. Leach                                    Mr. Frank
                                              Mrs. Roukema                                 Mr. Kanjorski
                                              Mr. Bereuter                                 Ms. Waters
                                              Mr. Baker                                    Mr. Sanders
                                              Mr. Bachus                                   Mrs. Maloney of New York
                                              Mr. Castle                                   Mr. Ackerman
                                              Mr. King                                     Ms. Lee
                                              Mr. Royce                                    Mr. Inslee
                                              Mr. Ney                                      Ms. Schakowsky
                                              Mr. Barr of Georgia                          Mr. Capuano
                                              Mrs. Kelly                                   Mr. Clay
                                              Mr. Gillmor
                                              Mr. Cox
                                              Mr. Weldon of Florida
                                              Mr. Ryun of Kansas
                                              Mr. LaTourette
                                              Mr. Manzullo
                                              Mr. Ose
                                              Mrs. Biggert
                                              Mr. Green of Wisconsin
                                              Mr. Toomey
                                              Mr. Shays
                                              Mr. Shadegg
                                              Mr. Fossella
                                              Mr. Gary G. Miller of
                                               California
                                              Mr. Cantor
                                              Mr. Grucci
                                              Ms. Hart
                                              Mrs. Capito
                                              Mr. Ferguson
                                              Mr. Rogers of Michigan
                                              Mr. Tiberi
                                              Mr. Watt of North Carolina




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00020   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 21 ===
                                                                                          21

                                         Mr. Bentsen
                                         Mr. Maloney of Connecticut
                                         Ms. Hooley of Oregon
                                         Ms. Carson of Indiana
                                         Mr. Sherman
                                         Mr. Sandlin
                                         Mr. Moore
                                         Mr. Gonzalez
                                         Mr. Ford
                                         Mr. Hinojosa
                                         Mr. Lucas of Kentucky
                                         Mr. Shows
                                         Mr. Crowley
                                         Mr. Israel
                                         Mr. Ross
                                       Record votes were held on the adoption of the following amend-
                                      ments. The names of members voting for and against follow:
                                            An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                         substitute by Mr. LaFalce (as modified by unanimous con-
                                         sent), no. 1a, establishing the Public Accounting Regu-
                                         latory Board, was not agreed to by a record vote of 26 yeas
                                         and 33 nays (Record vote no. 25).
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. LaFalce                                  Mr. Oxley
                                              Mr. Frank                                    Mr. Leach
                                              Mr. Kanjorski                                Mr. Bereuter
                                              Ms. Waters                                   Mr. Baker
                                              Mr. Sanders                                  Mr. Castle
                                              Mrs. Maloney of New York                     Mr. King
                                              Mr. Gutierrez                                Mr. Royce
                                              Mr. Watt of North Carolina                   Mr. Ney
                                              Mr. Ackerman                                 Mr. Barr of Georgia
                                              Ms. Hooley of Oregon                         Mrs. Kelly
                                              Ms. Carson of Indiana                        Mr. Weldon of Florida
                                              Mr. Sherman                                  Mr. Ryun of Kansas
                                              Mr. Sandlin                                  Mr. Riley
                                              Mr. Meeks of New York                        Mr. LaTourette
                                              Ms. Lee                                      Mr. Manzullo
                                              Mr. Mascara                                  Mr. Ose
                                              Mr. Inslee                                   Mrs. Biggert
                                              Ms. Schakowsky                               Mr. Green of Wisconsin
                                              Mr. Moore                                    Mr. Toomey
                                              Mr. Gonzalez                                 Mr. Shadegg
                                              Mrs. Jones of Ohio                           Mr. Fossella
                                              Mr. Capuano                                  Mr. Gary G. Miller of
                                              Mr. Hinojosa                                  California
                                              Mr. Clay                                     Mr. Cantor
                                              Mr. Israel                                   Mr. Grucci
                                              Mr. Ross                                     Ms. Hart
                                                                                           Mrs. Capito
                                                                                           Mr. Ferguson
                                                                                           Mr. Rogers of Michigan
                                                                                           Mr. Tiberi
                                                                                           Mr. Bentsen




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00021   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 22 ===
                                                                                          22

                                                                           Mr. Maloney of Connecticut
                                                                           Mr. Lucas of Kentucky
                                                                           Mr. Shows
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mrs. Biggert, no. 1b, disgorgement of bo-
                                              nuses and other incentives, as amended, part 1 (page 1,
                                              line 1 through page 3, line 13) was agreed to by a voice
                                              vote and part 2 (page 3, line 14 through page 5, line 2),
                                              was agreed to by a record vote 36 yeas and 25 nays
                                              (Record vote no. 28).
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. Oxley                      Mr. LaFalce
                                              Mr. Leach                      Mr. Frank
                                              Mr. Bereuter                   Mr. Kanjorski
                                              Mr. Baker                      Ms. Waters
                                              Mr. Bachus                     Mr. Sanders
                                              Mr. Castle                     Mrs. Maloney of New York
                                              Mr. King                       Mr. Watt of North Carolina
                                              Mr. Royce                      Mr. Ackerman
                                              Mr. Lucas of Oklahoma          Mr. Bentsen
                                              Mr. Ney                        Mr. Maloney of Connecticut
                                              Mr. Barr of Georgia            Ms. Hooley of Oregon
                                              Mrs. Kelly                     Ms. Carson of Indiana
                                              Mr. Paul                       Mr. Sherman
                                              Mr. Gillmor                    Mr. Meeks of New York
                                              Mr. Cox                        Ms. Lee
                                              Mr. Weldon of Florida          Mr. Mascara
                                              Mr. Ryun of Kansas             Mr. Inslee
                                              Mr. LaTourette                 Ms. Schakowsky
                                              Mr. Manzullo                   Mr. Moore
                                              Mr. Jones of North Carolina Mr. Gonzalez
                                              Mr. Ose                        Mrs. Jones of Ohio
                                              Mrs. Biggert                   Mr. Capuano
                                              Mr. Green of Wisconsin         Mr. Shows
                                              Mr. Toomey                     Mr. Crowley
                                              Mr. Shays                      Mr. Ross
                                              Mr. Shadegg
                                              Mr. Fossella
                                              Mr. Gary G. Miller of
                                                California
                                              Mr. Cantor
                                              Mr. Grucci
                                              Ms. Hart
                                              Mrs. Capito
                                              Mr. Ferguson
                                              Mr. Rogers of Michigan
                                              Mr. Tiberi
                                              Mr. Lucas of Kentucky
                                                An amendment by Mr. LaFalce to the amendment by
                                              Mrs. Biggert, no. 1b(2), addressing the disgorgement of bo-
                                              nuses and other incentives, was not agreed to by a record
                                              vote of 25 yeas and 30 nays (Record vote no. 26).




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00022   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 23 ===
                                                                                          23
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. LaFalce                     Mr. Oxley
                                              Mr. Frank                       Mr. Bereuter
                                              Mr. Kanjorski                   Mr. Baker
                                              Ms. Waters                      Mr. Bachus
                                              Mrs. Maloney of New York        Mr. Castle
                                              Mr. Watt of North Carolina      Mr. King
                                              Mr. Bentsen                     Mr. Royce
                                              Mr. Maloney of Connecticut      Mr. Ney
                                              Ms. Hooley of Oregon            Mrs. Kelly
                                              Ms. Carson of Indiana           Mr. Paul
                                              Mr. Sherman                     Mr. Weldon of Florida
                                              Mr. Sandlin                     Mr. Ryun of Kansas
                                              Mr. Meeks of New York           Mr. Riley
                                              Ms. Lee                         Mr. LaTourette
                                              Mr. Mascara                     Mr. Manzullo
                                              Mr. Inslee                      Mr. Ose
                                              Mr. Moore                       Mrs. Biggert
                                              Mr. Gonzalez                    Mr. Green of Wisconsin
                                              Mrs. Jones of Ohio              Mr. Toomey
                                              Mr. Capuano                     Mr. Shadegg
                                              Mr. Hinojosa                    Mr. Fossella
                                              Mr. Shows                       Mr. Gary G. Miller of
                                              Mr. Crowley                       California
                                              Mr. Clay                        Mr. Cantor
                                              Mr. Israel                      Mr. Grucci
                                                                              Ms. Hart
                                                                              Mrs. Capito
                                                                              Mr. Ferguson
                                                                              Mr. Rogers of Michigan
                                                                              Mr. Tiberi
                                                                              Mr. Lucas of Kentucky
                                                An amendment by Mr. LaFalce to the amendment by
                                              Mrs. Biggert, no. 1b(4), allowing for the removal of unfit
                                              corporate officers or directors and prohibiting unfit persons
                                              from serving as an officer or director, was not agreed to by
                                              a record vote for 24 yeas and 25 nays (Record vote no. 27).
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. LaFalce                                  Mr. Oxley
                                              Mr. Frank                                    Mr. Leach
                                              Mr. Kanjorski                                Mr. Bereuter
                                              Ms. Waters                                   Mr. Baker
                                              Mr. Sanders                                  Mr. Castle
                                              Mrs. Maloney of New York                     Mr. King
                                              Mr. Gutierrez                                Mr. Ney
                                              Mr. Watt of North Carolina                   Mr. Barr of Georgia
                                              Mr. Ackerman                                 Mrs. Kelly
                                              Mr. Bentsen                                  Mr. Weldon of Florida
                                              Mr. Maloney of Connecticut                   Mr. Ryun of Kansas
                                              Ms. Hooley of Oregon                         Mr. LaTourette
                                              Ms. Carson of Indiana                        Mr. Jones of North Carolina
                                              Mr. Sherman                                  Mrs. Biggert
                                              Mr. Mascara                                  Mr. Green of Wisconsin
                                              Mr. Inslee                                   Mr. Toomey




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00023   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 24 ===
                                                                                          24

                                              Ms. Schakowsky                Mr. Shays
                                              Mr. Gonzalez                  Mr. Fossella
                                              Mr. Capuano                   Mr. Gary G. Miller of
                                              Mr. Lucas of Kentucky           California
                                              Mr. Shows                     Mr. Cantor
                                              Mr. Crowley                   Mr. Grucci
                                              Mr. Israel                    Ms. Hart
                                              Mr. Ross                      Mr. Ferguson
                                                                            Mr. Rogers of Michigan
                                                                            Mr. Tiberi
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. Sherman, no. 1k, providing for auditor
                                              capital requirements, was not agreed to by a record vote
                                              of 9 yeas and 49 nays (Record vote no. 29).
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. LaFalce                                  Mr. Oxley
                                              Mr. Sanders                                  Mr. Leach
                                              Mr. Gutierrez                                Mr. Bereuter
                                              Mr. Sherman                                  Mr. Baker
                                              Mr. Sandlin                                  Mr. Bachus
                                              Mr. Meeks of New York                        Mr. Castle
                                              Ms. Lee                                      Mr. King
                                              Ms. Schakowsky                               Mr. Royce
                                              Mr. Clay                                     Mr. Ney
                                                                                           Mr. Barr of Georgia
                                                                                           Mrs. Kelly
                                                                                           Mr. Paul
                                                                                           Mr. Gillmor
                                                                                           Mr. Weldon of Florida
                                                                                           Mr. Ryun of Kansas
                                                                                           Mr. LaTourette
                                                                                           Mr. Manzullo
                                                                                           Mrs. Biggert
                                                                                           Mr. Green of Wisconsin
                                                                                           Mr. Toomey
                                                                                           Mr. Shays
                                                                                           Mr. Shadegg
                                                                                           Mr. Fossella
                                                                                           Mr. Gary G. Miller of
                                                                                            California
                                                                                           Mr. Cantor
                                                                                           Mr. Grucci
                                                                                           Ms. Hart
                                                                                           Mrs. Capito
                                                                                           Mr. Ferguson
                                                                                           Mr. Tiberi
                                                                                           Mr. Frank
                                                                                           Mr. Kanjorski
                                                                                           Ms. Waters
                                                                                           Mrs. Maloney of New York
                                                                                           Mr. Watt of North Carolina
                                                                                           Mr. Bentsen
                                                                                           Mr. Maloney of Connecticut
                                                                                           Ms. Hooley of Oregon




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00024   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 25 ===
                                                                                          25

                                                                             Ms. Carson of Indiana
                                                                             Mr. Mascara
                                                                             Mr. Inslee
                                                                             Mr. Moore
                                                                             Mrs. Jones of Ohio
                                                                             Mr. Capuano
                                                                             Mr. Lucas of Kentucky
                                                                             Mr. Shows
                                                                             Mr. Crowley
                                                                             Mr. Israel
                                                                             Mr. Ross
                                                An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. LaFalce, no. 1l, requiring that the CEO
                                              or CFO must certify financial statements, was not agreed
                                              to by a record vote of 29 yeas and 30 nays (Record vote no.
                                              30).
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. LaFalce                   Mr. Oxley
                                              Mr. Frank                     Mr. Leach
                                              Mr. Kanjorski                 Mr. Bereuter
                                              Ms. Waters                    Mr. Baker
                                              Mr. Sanders                   Mr. Castle
                                              Mrs. Maloney of New York      Mr. King
                                              Mr. Gutierrez                 Mr. Royce
                                              Mr. Watt of North Carolina    Mr. Ney
                                              Mr. Bentsen                   Mr. Barr of Georgia
                                              Mr. Maloney of Connecticut    Mrs. Kelly
                                              Ms. Hooley of Oregon          Mr. Paul
                                              Ms. Carson of Indiana         Mr. Gillmor
                                              Mr. Sherman                   Mr. Weldon of Florida
                                              Mr. Sandlin                   Mr. Ryun of Kansas
                                              Mr. Meeks of New York         Mr. LaTourette
                                              Ms. Lee                       Mr. Manzullo
                                              Mr. Mascara                   Mrs. Biggert
                                              Mr. Inslee                    Mr. Green of Wisconsin
                                              Ms. Schakowsky                Mr. Toomey
                                              Mr. Moore                     Mr. Shays
                                              Mr. Gonzalez                  Mr. Shadegg
                                              Mrs. Jones of Ohio            Mr. Fossella
                                              Mr. Capuano                   Mr. Cantor
                                              Mr. Hinojosa                  Mr. Grucci
                                              Mr. Shows                     Ms. Hart
                                              Mr. Crowley                   Mrs. Capito
                                              Mr. Clay                      Mr. Ferguson
                                              Mr. Israel                    Mr. Rogers of Michigan
                                              Mr. Ross                      Mr. Tiberi
                                                                            Mr. Lucas of Kentucky
                                                An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. LaFalce (as modified by unanimous con-
                                              sent), no. 1m, addressing analysts conflicts of interest, was
                                              not agreed to by a record vote of 25 yeas and 37 nays
                                              (Record vote no. 31).




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00025   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 26 ===
                                                                                          26
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. Leach                     Mr. Oxley
                                              Mr. Bachus                    Mr. Bereuter
                                              Mr. Castle                    Mr. Baker
                                              Mr. LaFalce                   Mr. King
                                              Mr. Frank                     Mr. Royce
                                              Mr. Kanjorski                 Mr. Ney
                                              Ms. Waters                    Mr. Barr of Georgia
                                              Mr. Sanders                   Mrs. Kelly
                                              Mrs. Maloney of New York      Mr. Paul
                                              Mr. Gutierrez                 Mr. Gillmor
                                              Mr. Watt of North Carolina    Mr. Cox
                                              Ms. Carson of Indiana         Mr. Weldon of Florida
                                              Mr. Sherman                   Mr. Ryun of Kansas
                                              Mr. Sandlin                   Mr. LaTourette
                                              Mr. Meeks of New York         Mr. Manzullo
                                              Ms. Lee                       Mr. Ose
                                              Mr. Mascara                   Mrs. Biggert
                                              Mr. Inslee                    Mr. Toomey
                                              Ms. Schakowsky                Mr. Shays
                                              Mr. Gonzalez                  Mr. Shadegg
                                              Mrs. Jones of Ohio            Mr. Fossella
                                              Mr. Capuano                   Mr. Gary G. Miller of
                                              Mr. Hinojosa                    California
                                              Mr. Clay                      Mr. Cantor
                                              Mr. Israel                    Mr. Grucci
                                                                            Ms. Hart
                                                                            Mrs. Capito
                                                                            Mr. Ferguson
                                                                            Mr. Rogers of Michigan
                                                                            Mr. Tiberi
                                                                            Mr. Bentsen
                                                                            Mr. Maloney of Connecticut
                                                                            Ms. Hooley of Oregon
                                                                            Mr. Moore
                                                                            Mr. Lucas of Kentucky
                                                                            Mr. Shows
                                                                            Mr. Crowley
                                                                            Mr. Ross
                                                An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. Sherman, no. 1n, addressing attestation
                                              authority, was not agreed to by a record vote of 16 yeas
                                              and 46 nays (Record vote no. 32).
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. Bereuter                                 Mr. Oxley
                                              Mr. LaFalce                                  Mr. Leach
                                              Mr. Frank                                    Mr. Baker
                                              Ms. Waters                                   Mr. Bachus
                                              Mr. Sanders                                  Mr. Castle
                                              Mr. Gutierrez                                Mr. King
                                              Mr. Sherman                                  Mr. Royce
                                              Mr. Sandlin                                  Mr. Lucas of Oklahoma
                                              Mr. Meeks of New York                        Mr. Ney
                                              Ms. Lee                                      Mr. Barr of Georgia




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00026   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 27 ===
                                                                                          27

                                              Mr. Mascara                  Mrs. Kelly
                                              Ms. Schakowsky               Mr. Paul
                                              Mr. Gonzalez                 Mr. Gillmor
                                              Mrs. Jones of Ohio           Mr. Weldon of Florida
                                              Mr. Hinojosa                 Mr. Ryun of Kansas
                                              Mr. Clay                     Mr. Riley
                                                                           Mr. LaTourette
                                                                           Mr. Manzullo
                                                                           Mr. Ose
                                                                           Mrs. Biggert
                                                                           Mr. Shays
                                                                           Mr. Shadegg
                                                                           Mr. Fossella
                                                                           Mr. Gary G. Miller of
                                                                             California
                                                                           Mr. Cantor
                                                                           Mr. Grucci
                                                                           Ms. Hart
                                                                           Mrs. Capito
                                                                           Mr. Ferguson
                                                                           Mr. Rogers of Michigan
                                                                           Mr. Tiberi
                                                                           Mr. Kanjorski
                                                                           Mrs. Maloney of New York
                                                                           Mr. Watt of North Carolina
                                                                           Mr. Bentsen
                                                                           Mr. Maloney of Connecticut
                                                                           Ms. Hooley of Oregon
                                                                           Ms. Carson of Indiana
                                                                           Mr. Inslee
                                                                           Mr. Moore
                                                                           Mr. Capuano
                                                                           Mr. Lucas of Kentucky
                                                                           Mr. Shows
                                                                           Mr. Crowley
                                                                           Mr. Israel
                                                                           Mr. Ross
                                                An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. LaFalce, no. 1v, requiring audit com-
                                              mittee approval of nonaudit services, was not agreed to by
                                              a record vote of 19 yeas and 31 nays (Record vote no. 33).
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. LaFalce                                  Mr. Oxley
                                              Mr. Frank                                    Mr. Bereuter
                                              Mr. Kanjorski                                Mr. Baker
                                              Mr. Sanders                                  Mr. Bachus
                                              Mrs. Maloney of New York                     Mr. Castle
                                              Mr. Watt of North Carolina                   Mr. King
                                              Mr. Ackerman                                 Mr. Royce
                                              Mr. Bentsen                                  Mr. Lucas of Oklahoma
                                              Ms. Hooley of Oregon                         Mr. Ney
                                              Ms. Carson of Indiana                        Mrs. Kelly
                                              Mr. Sherman                                  Mr. Gillmor
                                              Mr. Inslee                                   Mr. Weldon of Florida




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00027   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 28 ===
                                                                                          28

                                              Ms. Schakowsky                Mr. Ryun of Kansas
                                              Mr. Gonzalez                  Mr. LaTourette
                                              Mr. Capuano                   Mr. Manzullo
                                              Mr. Ford                      Mr. Jones of North Carolina
                                              Mr. Hinojosa                  Mr. Ose
                                              Mr. Crowley                   Mrs. Biggert
                                              Mr. Israel                    Mr. Green of Wisconsin
                                                                            Mr. Shays
                                                                            Mr. Fossella
                                                                            Mr. Cantor
                                                                            Mr. Grucci
                                                                            Ms. Hart
                                                                            Mr. Ferguson
                                                                            Mr. Rogers of Michigan
                                                                            Mr. Tiberi
                                                                            Mr. Maloney of Connecticut
                                                                            Mr. Moore
                                                                            Mr. Lucas of Kentucky
                                                                            Mr. Shows
                                                An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. LaFalce, 1cc, prohibiting independent di-
                                              rectors from serving as consultants, was not agreed to by
                                              a record vote of 20 yeas and 38 nays (Record vote no. 34).
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. LaFalce                                  Mr. Oxley
                                              Mr. Frank                                    Mr. Leach
                                              Mr. Kanjorski                                Mrs. Roukema
                                              Ms. Waters                                   Mr. Bereuter
                                              Mr. Sanders                                  Mr. Baker
                                              Mrs. Maloney of New York                     Mr. Bachus
                                              Mr. Ackerman                                 Mr. Castle
                                              Mr. Maloney of Connecticut                   Mr. King
                                              Ms. Hooley of Oregon                         Mr. Ney
                                              Ms. Carson of Indiana                        Mr. Barr of Georgia
                                              Mr. Sherman                                  Mrs. Kelly
                                              Mr. Inslee                                   Mr. Gillmor
                                              Ms. Schakowsky                               Mr. Cox
                                              Mr. Moore                                    Mr. Weldon of Florida
                                              Mr. Gonzalez                                 Mr. Ryun of Kansas
                                              Mr. Capuano                                  Mr. LaTourette
                                              Mr. Hinojosa                                 Mr. Manzullo
                                              Mr. Clay                                     Mr. Jones of North Carolina
                                              Mr. Israel                                   Mr. Ose
                                              Mr. Ross                                     Mrs. Biggert
                                                                                           Mr. Green of Wisconsin
                                                                                           Mr. Toomey
                                                                                           Mr. Shays
                                                                                           Mr. Shadegg
                                                                                           Mr. Fossella
                                                                                           Mr. Gary G. Miller of
                                                                                            California
                                                                                           Mr. Cantor
                                                                                           Mr. Grucci
                                                                                           Ms. Hart




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00028   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 29 ===
                                                                                          29

                                                                            Mrs. Capito
                                                                            Mr. Ferguson
                                                                            Mr. Rogers of Michigan
                                                                            Mr. Tiberi
                                                                            Mr. Watt of North Carolina
                                                                            Mr. Bentsen
                                                                            Mr. Lucas of Kentucky
                                                                            Mr. Shows
                                                                            Mr. Crowley
                                                An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. LaFalce, no. 1dd, providing for share-
                                              holder approval executive stock option plans, was not
                                              agreed to by a record vote of 22 yeas and 34 nays (Record
                                              vote no. 35).
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. Leach                     Mr. Oxley
                                              Mrs. Roukema                  Mr. Baker
                                              Mr. Bereuter                  Mr. Bachus
                                              Mr. Castle                    Mr. King
                                              Mr. Gillmor                   Mr. Royce
                                              Mr. LaFalce                   Mr. Ney
                                              Mr. Kanjorski                 Mr. Barr of Georgia
                                              Ms. Waters                    Mrs. Kelly
                                              Mr. Sanders                   Mr. Cox
                                              Mrs. Maloney of New York      Mr. Weldon of Florida
                                              Mr. Watt of North Carolina    Mr. Ryun of Kansas
                                              Mr. Ackerman                  Mr. LaTourette
                                              Mr. Bentsen                   Mr. Manzullo
                                              Ms. Hooley of Oregon          Mr. Jones of North Carolina
                                              Ms. Carson of Indiana         Mr. Ose
                                              Mr. Sherman                   Mrs. Biggert
                                              Mr. Moore                     Mr. Green of Wisconsin
                                              Mr. Gonzalez                  Mr. Toomey
                                              Mr. Capuano                   Mr. Shays
                                              Mr. Ford                      Mr. Shadegg
                                              Mr. Hinojosa                  Mr. Fossella
                                              Mr. Shows                     Mr. Cantor
                                                                            Mr. Grucci
                                                                            Ms. Hart
                                                                            Mrs. Capito
                                                                            Mr. Ferguson
                                                                            Mr. Rogers of Michigan
                                                                            Mr. Tiberi
                                                                            Mr. Maloney of Connecticut
                                                                            Mr. Inslee
                                                                            Mr. Lucas of Kentucky
                                                                            Mr. Crowley
                                                                            Mr. Israel
                                                                            Mr. Ross
                                                An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. Ackerman, no. 1hh, auditor independ-
                                              ence, was not agreed to by a record vote of 18 yeas and 40
                                              nays (record vote no. 36).




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00029   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 30 ===
                                                                                          30
                                                   YEAS                                         NAYS
                                              Mr. LaFalce                Mr. Oxley
                                              Mr. Frank                  Mr. Leach
                                              Mr. Kanjorski              Mrs. Roukema
                                              Ms. Waters                 Mr. Bereuter
                                              Mr. Sanders                Mr. Baker
                                              Mrs. Maloney of New York   Mr. Bachus
                                              Mr. Watt of North Carolina Mr. Castle
                                              Mr. Ackerman               Mr. King
                                              Ms. Carson of Indiana      Mr. Royce
                                              Mr. Sherman                Mr. Barr of Georgia
                                              Ms. Lee                    Mrs. Kelly
                                              Mr. Inslee                 Mr. Gillmor
                                              Mr. Capuano                Mr. Cox
                                              Mr. Ford                   Mr. Weldon of Florida
                                              Mr. Hinojosa               Mr. Ryun of Kansas
                                              Mr. Crowley                Mr. LaTourette
                                              Mr. Clay                   Mr. Manzullo
                                              Mr. Israel                 Mr. Ose
                                                                         Mrs. Biggert
                                                                         Mr. Green of Wisconsin
                                                                         Mr. Toomey
                                                                         Mr. Shays
                                                                         Mr. Shadegg
                                                                         Mr. Fossella
                                                                         Mr. Gary G. Miller of
                                                                           California
                                                                         Mr. Cantor
                                                                         Mr. Grucci
                                                                         Ms. Hart
                                                                         Mrs. Capito
                                                                         Mr. Ferguson
                                                                         Mr. Rogers of Michigan
                                                                         Mr. Tiberi
                                                                         Mr. Bentsen
                                                                         Mr. Maloney of Connecticut
                                                                         Ms. Hooley of Oregon
                                                                         Mr. Moore
                                                                         Mr. Gonzalez
                                                                         Mr. Lucas of Kentucky
                                                                         Mr. Shows
                                                                         Mr. Ross
                                        The following other amendments were also considered by the
                                      Committee:
                                             An amendment in the nature of a substitute by Mr.
                                          Oxley, no. 1, making various technical and substantive
                                          changes to the bill, was agreed to by a voice vote.
                                             An amendment by Mr. Lucas of Kentucky to the amend-
                                          ment by Mrs. Biggert, no. 1b(1), addressing the composi-
                                          tion of the PRO, was agreed to by a voice vote.
                                             An amendment by Mr. Watt to the amendment by Mrs.
                                          Biggert, no. 1b(3), striking the scienter requirement, was
                                          NOT AGREED TO by a voice vote.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00030   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 31 ===
                                                                                          31

                                                 An amendment by Ms. Hooley of Indiana and Mr.
                                              Maloney of Connecticut to the amendment by Mrs.
                                              Biggert, no. 1b(5), requiring that any independent public
                                              or certified accountant who certifies a financial statement
                                              to maintain the audit work papers and other related infor-
                                              mation for a minimum of 7 years, was agreed to by a voice
                                              vote.
                                                 An amendment by Mr. Watt to the amendment by Mrs.
                                              Biggert, no. 1b(6), striking certain language from the
                                              amendment, was not agreed to by a voice vote.
                                                 An amendment by Mr. Capuano to the amendment by
                                              Mrs. Biggert, no. 1b(7), addressing the qualification time of
                                              public members of the PRO, was not agreed to by a voice
                                              vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mrs. Maloney of New York, no. 1c, making
                                              changes in the code of ethics, was agreed to by a voice
                                              vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. Watt, no. 1d, striking a requirement to
                                              consult with State regulators, an amendment to the
                                              amendment in the nature of a substitute by Mr. Watt, no.
                                              1e, addressing the filing of disclosures in other formats, an
                                              amendment to the amendment in the nature of a sub-
                                              stitute by Mr. Bentsen, no. 1f, addressing transactions in-
                                              volving real time disclosure, an amendment to the amend-
                                              ment in the nature of a substitute by Mr. Bentsen, no. 1g,
                                              calling for improved transparency of loans to officers and
                                              directors, an amendment to the amendment in the nature
                                              of a substitute by Ms. Waters, no. 1h, providing that
                                              disgorgement funds be distributed to pension fund victims,
                                              an amendment to the amendment in the nature of a sub-
                                              stitute by Mr. LaFalce, no. 1i, addressing enhanced over-
                                              sight of periodic disclosures by issuers, and an amendment
                                              to the amendment in the nature of a substitute by Mr. La-
                                              Falce, no. 1j, addressing disclosure of insider and director
                                              relationships, were agreed to en bloc by unanimous con-
                                              sent.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute, by Mr. Gonzalez, (as amended by unanimous
                                              consent), no. 1o, requiring a GAO study of certain stand-
                                              ards of professional conduct for attorneys and their protec-
                                              tion of investors, was agreed to by a voice vote.
                                                 An amendment by Mr. Watt to the amendment by Mr.
                                              Gonzales, no. 1o(1), requiring the report to identify perti-
                                              nent regulatory or legislative steps, was AGREED TO by
                                              a voice vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. LaFalce, no. 1p, addressing real time
                                              disclosure of financial information, was agreed to by a
                                              voice vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. Watt, no. 1q, requiring recommendations
                                              for regulatory and statutory changes to studies, and an
                                              amendment to the amendment in the nature of a sub-




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00031   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 32 ===
                                                                                          32

                                              stitute by Mr. Watt, no. 1r, addressing regulations for pen-
                                              alties for manipulation of auditors, were offered en bloc
                                              and were agreed to by a voice vote
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. Watt, (as modified by unanimous con-
                                              sent), no. 1s, minimizing burdensome rules on issuers for
                                              disclosures required under the bill, was agreed to by a
                                              voice vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mrs. Maloney, no. 1t, restoring oversight of
                                              energy derivatives to the Commodity Futures Trading
                                              Commission, was withdrawn.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. LaFalce, no. 1u, addressing auditor inde-
                                              pendence, was not agreed to by a voice vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. Sherman, no. 1w, addressing the scope
                                              of non-audit practice, was withdrawn.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. LaFalce (as modified by unanimous con-
                                              sent), no. 1x, addressing auditor/issuer employment re-
                                              strictions (cooling-off period), was not agreed to by a voice
                                              vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. LaFalce, no. 1y, addressing the role of
                                              audit committee, was not agreed to by a voice vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. Bentsen and Mr. Watt (as modified by
                                              unanimous consent), no. 1z, providing authority to bar ad-
                                              ditional nonaudit services, was agreed to by a voice vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. Kanjorski (as modified by unanimous
                                              consent), no. 1aa, lengthening the statute of limitations for
                                              certain private rights of action, was not agreed to by a
                                              voice vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. LaFalce, no. 1bb, addressing the removal
                                              of unfit corporate officers, was not agreed to by a voice
                                              vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. LaFalce (as modified by unanimous con-
                                              sent), no. 1ee, requesting a GAO study of investment
                                              banks, was AGREED TO by a voice vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. LaFalce, no. 1ff, requiring the manda-
                                              tory rotation of auditors every 8 years, was withdrawn.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. Kanjorski, no. 1gg, restoring aiding and
                                              abetting liability, was withdrawn.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. Capuano and Mr. Lucas of Kentucky, no.
                                              1ii, clarifying PRO activity, was agreed to by a voice vote.
                                                 An amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
                                              substitute by Mr. Inslee, no. 1jj, addressing energy pricing
                                              disclosure, was withdrawn.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00032   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6969   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 33 ===
                                                                                          33

                                                Substitute amendment to the amendment in the nature
                                              of a substitute offered by Mr. LaFalce, no. 1kk, was not
                                              agreed to by a voice vote.
                                                                   COMMITTEE OVERSIGHT FINDINGS
                                        Pursuant to clause 3(c)(1) of rule XIII of the Rules of the House
                                      of Representatives, the Committee held a hearing and made find-
                                      ings that are reflected in this report.
                                                             PERFORMANCE GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
                                         Pursuant to clause 3(c)(4) of rule XIII of the Rules of the House
                                      of Representatives, the Committee establishes the following per-
                                      formance related goals and objectives for this legislation:
                                         H.R. 3763 authorizes the Commission to take steps designed to
                                      increase the oversight of accountants that certify financial state-
                                      ments required under the securities laws, increase transparency of
                                      financial statements filed with the Commission, and increase the
                                      accountability of officers and directors of public companies. The leg-
                                      islation promotes these goals and objectives by directing the Com-
                                      mission to undertake rule makings and studies in areas related to
                                      the above goals.
                                            NEW BUDGET AUTHORITY, ENTITLEMENT AUTHORITY, AND TAX
                                                               EXPENDITURES
                                        In compliance with clause 3(c)(2) of rule XIII of the Rules of the
                                      House of Representatives, the Committee finds that this legislation
                                      would result in no new budget authority, entitlement authority, or
                                      tax expenditures or revenues.
                                                                     COMMITTEE COST ESTIMATE
                                        A cost estimate prepared by the Director of the Congressional
                                      Budget Office pursuant to section 402 of the Congressional Budget
                                      Act of 1974 was not available in time for the filing of this report.
                                      The Committee estimates that budget authority will be made avail-
                                      able to the SEC at approximately the levels authorized in the legis-
                                      lation.
                                                          CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE ESTIMATE
                                         Pursuant to clause 3(c)(3) of rule XIII of the Rules of the House
                                      of Representatives, a cost estimate provided by the Congressional
                                      Budget Office pursuant to section 402 of the Congressional Budget
                                      Act of 1974 was not made available to the Committee in time for
                                      the filing of this report. The Chairman of the Committee shall
                                      cause such estimate to be printed in the Congressional Record upon
                                      its receipt by the Committee.
                                                                   FEDERAL MANDATES STATEMENT
                                        An estimate of Federal mandates prepared by the Director of the
                                      Congressional Budget Office pursuant to section 423 of the Un-
                                      funded Mandates Reform Act was not made available to the Com-
                                      mittee in time for the filing of this report. The Chairman of the
                                      Committee shall cause such estimate to be printed in the Congres-
                                      sional Record upon its receipt by the Committee.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   06:16 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00033   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 34 ===
                                                                                           34

                                                                   ADVISORY COMMITTEE STATEMENT
                                        No advisory committees within the meaning of section 5(b) of the
                                      Federal Advisory Committee Act were created by this legislation.
                                                            CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY STATEMENT
                                        Pursuant to clause 3(d)(1) of rule XIII of the Rules of the House
                                      of Representatives, the Committee finds that the Constitutional
                                      Authority of Congress to enact this legislation is provided by Arti-
                                      cle 1, section 8, clause 1 (relating to the general welfare of the
                                      United States) and clause 3 (relating to the power to regulate inter-
                                      state commerce).
                                                            APPLICABILITY TO LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
                                        The Committee finds that the legislation does not relate to the
                                      terms and conditions of employment or access to public services or
                                      accommodations within the meaning of section 102(b)(3) of the Con-
                                      gressional Accountability Act.
                                                   SECTION-BY-SECTION ANALYSIS OF THE LEGISLATION
                                      Section 1. Short Title
                                        Designates this title as the ‘‘Corporate and Auditing Account-
                                      ability, Responsibility and Transparency Act of 2002.’’
                                      Section 2. Auditor Oversight
                                         Subsection 2(a). The Federal securities laws, and the rules and
                                      regulations thereunder, require that certain financial statements of
                                      public companies be audited by an independent public or certified
                                      public accountant and filed with the Securities and Exchange Com-
                                      mission. The legislation requires the establishment of a public reg-
                                      ulatory organization (PRO) to perform certain review and discipli-
                                      nary functions with respect to accountants who audit those finan-
                                      cial statements. Subsection 2(a) provides that the Commission may
                                      not accept any financial statement unless the certifying accountant
                                      (1) is subject to a system of review by a PRO established in accord-
                                      ance with the section and (2) has not been determined in the most
                                      recent such review to be not qualified to audit the statements.
                                         Subsection 2(b). Subsection 2(b) requires the Commission to
                                      adopt rules establishing criteria by which an organization may be-
                                      come a ‘‘recognized PRO.’’ Subsection 2(b) specifies certain criteria
                                      that must be included. The board of any PRO must include mem-
                                      bers of the accounting profession and ‘‘public members’’ who are
                                      not members of the accounting profession. The board must be com-
                                      posed of five members, at least three of whom are ‘‘public mem-
                                      bers’’ and two of whom are members of the accounting profession
                                      with recent experience in auditing public companies. The Board
                                      will often be faced with complex and specialized issues related to
                                      financial reporting and the application of professional and other
                                      competency standards in real-world settings. Board members who
                                      are licensed, practicing accountants and who understand the issues
                                      involved in audits of public companies will bring a valuable per-
                                      spective and needed expertise to the Board’s deliberations.
                                         Paragraph 2(b)(1) further provides that each member of the
                                      Board shall meet such standards of financial literacy as determined




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000    Frm 00034   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 35 ===
                                                                                          35

                                      by the Commission. This requirement is intended to ensure that
                                      only individuals whose background demonstrates a solid under-
                                      standing of the purposes and methods of financial reporting, and
                                      the auditing of financial statements, shall serve on the Board.
                                         The details of the Board’s specific operations, such as the fre-
                                      quency of Board meetings, staffing levels, and the full- or part-time
                                      nature of service on the Board, are left to the discretion of the
                                      Commission.
                                         Subsection 2(b) also makes clear that a PRO must have the ca-
                                      pacity to enforce compliance by accountants, and persons associ-
                                      ated with accountants, with the provisions of the bill, professional
                                      ethics and competency standards, and the PRO’s own rules. A PRO
                                      must have the authority to impose sanctions, including the power
                                      to bar accountants temporarily or permanently from reviewing fi-
                                      nancial statements of public companies if the PRO finds that the
                                      accountant acted knowingly or intentionally. A PRO must also be
                                      organized, and have the capacity, to review accountants’ work prod-
                                      uct and to review potential conflicts of interest involving account-
                                      ants. As subsection 2(j) further clarifies, such reviews are not in-
                                      tended to include work performed for non-public companies or any
                                      nonaudit work.
                                         A PRO must also have in place procedures to minimize, deter,
                                      and resolve conflicts of interest involving its board members. A
                                      PRO must also publicly disclose, and make available for public
                                      comment, its proposed review procedures and methods. A PRO
                                      must consult with State boards of accountancy and must have in
                                      place procedures for notifying those boards and the Commission of
                                      the results and findings of the PRO’s reviews. Paragraph 2(b)(9)
                                      provides that the PRO have a mechanism to allow the organization
                                      to operate on a self-funded basis and to ensure that the organiza-
                                      tion is not solely dependent upon members of the accounting pro-
                                      fession for funding. The phrase ‘‘not solely dependent’’ is intended
                                      to require that the PRO have a mechanism to obtain funding from
                                      other users of audited financial statements who will benefit from
                                      the PRO’s oversight of accountants and persons associated with ac-
                                      countants.
                                         An organization that satisfies the criteria to be a recognized PRO
                                      is granted the authority to impose sanctions against the account-
                                      ants it reviews. Sanctions may be imposed only after the PRO has
                                      conducted a review and provided an opportunity for a fair hearing
                                      and has made any of the following findings: that the accountant or
                                      associated person (1) violated professional standards of independ-
                                      ence, ethics, or competency; (2) has been found by the Commission
                                      or a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated the Federal se-
                                      curities laws or a rule or regulation thereunder; (3) conducted an
                                      audit under circumstances in which independence standards were
                                      violated, (including new independence standards which section 2
                                      requires the Commission to adopt, as discussed below) or (4) im-
                                      peded, obstructed, or failed to cooperate with the PRO’s review. By
                                      referring to the profession’s standards of independence, ethics, or
                                      competency, subparagraph 2(b)(3)(A) authorizes the PRO to sanc-
                                      tion violations of the Code of Professional Conduct, U.S. Auditing
                                      Standards, and the profession’s Statements on Quality Control
                                      Standards as they exist today or may be modified in the future.
                                      The PRO will have the authority to enforce these standards, but




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00035   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 36 ===
                                                                                          36

                                      standard-setting powers will remain with the SEC and/or the pro-
                                      fession as is the case today.
                                         Subparagraph 2(b)(3)(C) empowers the PRO to impose sanctions
                                      on an accountant when the PRO finds that the accountant (or an
                                      associated person) has conducted an audit that was materially af-
                                      fected by an impairment of auditor independence. Subparagraph
                                      2(b)(3)(C), which requires a determination of material impact on
                                      the audit, should govern most instances of alleged violations of
                                      independence, although there may be certain serious violations
                                      that could result in sanctions under subparagraph 2(b)(3)(A) even
                                      though a material impact is lacking.
                                         The PRO’s sanctions may include a determination that an ac-
                                      countant is not qualified to certify a financial statement, or certain
                                      categories of financial statements, or that a particular person asso-
                                      ciated with an accountant is not qualified to participate in the cer-
                                      tification of a financial statement or certain categories of financial
                                      statements. Paragraph 2(b)(3) is not intended to require the PRO
                                      to conclude, in all cases of knowing or intentional misconduct, that
                                      a particular person or audit firm is not qualified to participate in
                                      the certification of financial statements. Moreover, as subsection
                                      2(j) states expressly, because the PRO’s jurisdiction runs to the
                                      qualification of accountants to perform audit services for public
                                      companies, disqualification by the PRO does not preclude an ac-
                                      countant or a person associated with an accountant from per-
                                      forming audit services for non-public companies or from performing
                                      any nonaudit services.
                                         The PRO is given the authority to request the SEC subpoena or
                                      otherwise compel the testimony of witnesses or the production of
                                      documents for purposes of conducting auditor reviews. This sub-
                                      poena power should be exercised in order to ensure that relevant
                                      information is obtained from persons or entities not otherwise with-
                                      in the PRO’s sanctioning authority. The taking of evidence referred
                                      to in the last sentence of this subsection includes both the taking
                                      of testimony and the production of documentary evidence.
                                         Subsection 2(c). Paragraph 2(c)(1) requires the Commission to re-
                                      vise its regulations to provide that, for financial statements re-
                                      quired to be certified by an independent public or certified public
                                      accountant, an accountant will not be considered independent of its
                                      audit client if it provides that client with financial information sys-
                                      tem design or implementation services or internal audit services.
                                      Paragraph 2(c)(2) authorizes the Commission to review the impact
                                      of nonaudit services on auditor independence in the event services
                                      that have not previously been the subject of Commission or con-
                                      gressional scrutiny are offered by accounting firms, in order to de-
                                      termine whether the list of prohibited nonaudit services should be
                                      modified. Subsection 2(c) does not mandate that the Commission
                                      prescribe new rules relating to nonaudit services and is intended
                                      only to clarify that the Commission must report the results of any
                                      such review to the Committee. Paragraph 2(c)(5) requires that the
                                      Commission revise its regulations regarding disclosures of audit
                                      and other services if such disclosures are still deemed necessary in
                                      light of the new prohibitions on financial systems design and im-
                                      plementation and internal audit outsourcing, and to ensure that
                                      audit services, services provided in connection with an audit, and
                                      all other services are appropriately categorized. Under Paragraph




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00036   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 37 ===
                                                                                          37

                                      2(c)(6), the Commission is required to propose and make final such
                                      revisions within 90 and 270 days, respectively, of the enactment of
                                      the bill.
                                         Subsection 2(d). Subsection 2(d) sets out certain procedures to
                                      govern the PRO review and hearing process. Paragraph 2(d)(1) pro-
                                      vides that any finding made pursuant to an accountant review that
                                      a financial statement audited by an accountant and submitted to
                                      the Commission may have been materially affected by an impair-
                                      ment of auditor independence, or by a violation of professional eth-
                                      ics and competency standards, must be submitted to the Commis-
                                      sion, and that the Commission must promptly notify an issuer of
                                      any such finding that relates to the issuer’s financial statements.
                                      The Board should act in all instances with regard for fairness and
                                      due process. For this reason, the notifications required by this sub-
                                      section should be made only after the accountant or audit firm is
                                      formally notified of the Board’s finding and provided a meaningful
                                      opportunity to contest it, pursuant to procedures to be established
                                      by the Board.
                                         Neither the Commission, the PRO, nor any other person shall
                                      disclose any information concerning an accountant review pro-
                                      ceeding or the findings therein except as is authorized by the Act,
                                      and are exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information
                                      Act. Paragraph 2(d)(2) provides for protection against disclosure,
                                      whether voluntarily or through discovery, compulsory process, or
                                      any other rule, statute, or law, of information developed by or sub-
                                      mitted to the PRO during its review and investigatory activity and
                                      its review proceedings, subject to the provisions of subparagraphs
                                      (2)(B) and (2)(C). These confidentiality provisions govern with re-
                                      gard to other provisions of this legislation, including any provisions
                                      relating to any notifications required by this section. Neither the
                                      Commission nor the PRO may disclose the results of any finding
                                      until the completion of Commission review, or the conclusion of the
                                      30–day period for seeking review, if no motion for review is filed
                                      within the period. This provision does not authorize the Commis-
                                      sion to withhold information from Congress, or prevent the Com-
                                      mission from complying with a request from another Federal agen-
                                      cy, or a Federal court order in an action brought by the United
                                      States, or the Commission. If the PRO provides information to a
                                      Federal department or agency other than the SEC, such informa-
                                      tion remains subject to the protections against disclosure otherwise
                                      provided for by this subsection. Paragraph (d)(3) provides that the
                                      findings of the PRO are made inadmissible in any civil proceeding
                                      as evidence of any alleged violation of the securities laws, and are
                                      not to be accorded collateral estoppel effect as to compliance or
                                      noncompliance with the law or any standard of liability, in any ju-
                                      dicial or administrative proceeding.
                                         Subsection 2(e). Subsection 2(e) sets out certain procedures for
                                      Commission review of PRO proceedings. The Commission is author-
                                      ized to review PRO findings and sanctions and is authorized to af-
                                      firm, modify, or set aside the sanctions. The reference to the sub-
                                      mission of affidavits and the presentation of oral arguments in
                                      paragraph 2(e)(2) is not meant to preclude the submission of legal
                                      briefs or memoranda on the issues before the Commission.
                                         Subsection 2(f). Commission review must include an opportunity
                                      for a hearing, though the Commission may limit the hearing solely




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00037   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 38 ===
                                                                                          38

                                      to consideration of the record before the PRO and the opportunity
                                      for the presentation of supporting reasons to affirm, modify, or set
                                      aside the sanction. While the hearing before the Commission must
                                      consist of the record before the PRO and arguments for or against
                                      affirmation, modification, or rejection of the PRO’s findings and
                                      conclusions, this limitation is not meant to preclude the Commis-
                                      sion from considering newly discovered evidence for which there is
                                      a reasonable explanation as to why it was not available or pre-
                                      sented in the PRO’s proceeding, nor is it meant to preclude the
                                      Commission from taking into account evidence that the Commis-
                                      sion concludes that the PRO improperly failed to consider.
                                         Subsection 2(g). A recognized PRO is required to file with the
                                      Commission any proposed rule or rule change. The Commission
                                      shall publish notice of the proposed rule and give interested per-
                                      sons an opportunity to comment. The Commission must approve
                                      any such proposed rule if the Commission finds that the proposal
                                      is consistent with the requirements of this bill and the relevant
                                      rules and regulations thereunder. Certain categories of rules may
                                      be given effect immediately upon being filed with the Commission,
                                      though the Commission has authority summarily to abrogate any
                                      such rule and require that it be filed as a proposed rule for notice
                                      and comment.
                                         Subsection 2(h). Subsection 2(h) authorizes the Commission to
                                      abrogate, add to, or delete from the rules of a PRO on the Commis-
                                      sion’s own initiative after publishing notice and giving interested
                                      persons an opportunity to submit data, views, and arguments on
                                      the proposal.
                                         Subsection 2(i). Subsection 2(i) provides that a PRO shall make
                                      and keep for prescribed periods such records and reports as the
                                      Commission by rule requires. Paragraph 2(i)(2) authorizes the
                                      Commission, by rule or order, to enable a PRO to perform duties
                                      and functions that the Commission determines are necessary and
                                      appropriate for the public interest or the protection of investors,
                                      and to carry out the purposes of this bill and the securities laws.
                                         Consistent with other provisions throughout this section, a PRO
                                      cannot be authorized under this subsection to enforce the securities
                                      laws or to promulgate accounting, audit or other professional
                                      standards. A PRO has power to make rules for its internal proc-
                                      esses and for its enforcement activities. The Commission may not
                                      delegate any substantive rulemaking power that it has to a PRO.
                                         Subsection 2(j). Subsection 2(j) confirms that the authority of any
                                      PRO reaches only the actions of accountants related to the review
                                      or audit of public companies.
                                         Subsection 2(k). Subsection 2(k) provides that the Commission
                                      must propose rules to implement section 2 within 90 days and shall
                                      implement such rules within 270 days of prescribing them.
                                         Subsection 2(l). Subsection 2(l) establishes effective dates and
                                      transition periods. Paragraph 2(l)(2) provides that if the Commis-
                                      sion has failed to recognize any PRO within one year after the date
                                      of enactment of the Act, the Commission must perform the duties
                                      of the PRO with respect to any certified financial statement for any
                                      fiscal year that ends before one year after any PRO is recognized
                                      by the Commission. This subsection is not intended to expand the
                                      powers of the Commission or the size of the federal bureaucracy
                                      but rather to have the specified functions performed by a PRO. The




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00038   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 39 ===
                                                                                          39

                                      Commission should devote the resources necessary to ensure that
                                      a qualified PRO is recognized within one year after the date of en-
                                      actment of the bill and should recognize any qualified PRO on a
                                      timely basis. In the event that it is not possible to recognize a PRO
                                      within one year, the Commission should ensure that a PRO is ap-
                                      proved as soon as possible after that one-year deadline, and in the
                                      interim the Commission should not act to assume or to exercise the
                                      functions of the PRO beyond the degree necessary for investor pro-
                                      tection.
                                      Section 3. Improper Influence on Conduct of Audits
                                        Section 3 makes it unlawful for any officer, director, or affiliated
                                      person of an issuer to take any action, in contravention of a rule
                                      adopted by the Commission, to fraudulently influence, coerce, ma-
                                      nipulate, or mislead any independent public or certified accountant
                                      engaged in auditing that issuer’s financial statements, for the pur-
                                      pose of rendering such financial statements materially misleading.
                                      The Commission has exclusive civil authority to enforce section 3
                                      and any rule or regulation thereunder. The authority conferred by
                                      this section is in addition to, and does not preempt, any other au-
                                      thority of the Commission with respect to this area, such as the
                                      Commission’s current authority under Exchange Act Rule 13b2–2,
                                      which prohibits making materially false or misleading statements
                                      to auditors, and the Commission’s cease-and-desist authority under
                                      Section 21C of the Exchange Act or its injunctive powers under
                                      Section 21 of the Act with respect to third parties who cause others
                                      to violate, or aid and abet violations of, the securities laws and
                                      rules and regulations thereunder.
                                      Section 4. Real-Time Disclosure of Financial Information
                                         Section 4 amends section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of
                                      1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m), to require the Commission to adopt rules re-
                                      quiring issuers of securities registered under section 12 of that Act
                                      to make public disclosure, on a rapid and essentially contempora-
                                      neous basis, of information concerning the issuer’s financial condi-
                                      tion and operations. The Commission has exclusive civil authority
                                      to enforce this provision and any rule or regulation thereunder.
                                         Section 4 also provides that the Commission must adopt rules
                                      providing that any disclosure required by the Federal securities
                                      laws, or rules or regulations thereunder, concerning any sale of se-
                                      curities by an officer, director, or other affiliated person of the
                                      issuer of the securities must be made electronically to the Commis-
                                      sion before the end of the business day following the day of the
                                      transaction, and must be made available electronically by the Com-
                                      mission before the end of the business day following the day re-
                                      ceived by the Commission. Any issuer that maintains a corporate
                                      web site is also required to publish the disclosure, by any of its offi-
                                      cers, directors, or affiliated persons, on its web site by the end of
                                      the day following the day the disclosure is received by the Commis-
                                      sion. The Commission must also revise its forms and schedules as
                                      necessary to facilitate compliance with these requirements.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00039   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 40 ===
                                                                                          40

                                      Section 5. Insider Trades During Pension Fund Blackout Periods
                                            Prohibited
                                         Section 5 makes it unlawful for any person who holds, directly
                                      or indirectly, beneficial ownership of more than 10 percent of any
                                      class of equity securities (other than exempted securities) reg-
                                      istered pursuant to section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of
                                      1934 (15 U.S.C. 78l), or is a director or officer of the issuer of those
                                      securities, to purchase or sell, directly or indirectly, any equity se-
                                      curities of the issuer (other than exempted securities) during a
                                      blackout period. A ‘‘blackout period’’ is defined in section 22 of this
                                      bill.
                                         Section 5 also provides for recovery, by the issuer, of any profit
                                      resulting from a trade made in violation of this provision. If the
                                      issuer fails to bring a suit within 60 days of a request to do so, or
                                      fails to prosecute the suit diligently, an owner of any security of the
                                      issuer may bring a suit in the issuer’s name. No suit may be
                                      brought after 2 years from the date the profit was realized. Section
                                      5 does not govern transactions where the beneficial owner was not
                                      such at both the time of the purchase and sale, or any transaction
                                      exempted by the Commission as not within the purposes of section
                                      5. Section 5 permits the Commission to issue rules clarifying the
                                      application of this provision, to ensure adequate notice to all per-
                                      sons affected, and to prevent evasion of this provision.
                                      Section 6. Improved Transparency of Corporate Disclosures
                                         Section 6 requires the Commission to revise its regulations under
                                      the securities laws to expand the disclosure requirements for the
                                      financial reports and registration statements of public companies,
                                      so that they provide adequate and appropriate disclosure of certain
                                      of an issuer’s off-balance sheet transactions and relationships. Sec-
                                      tion 6 requires these new disclosures to the extent that the trans-
                                      actions or relationships are not otherwise reported in the issuer’s
                                      financial statements at fair value, and are reasonably likely to ma-
                                      terially affect the issuer’s liquidity or availability of, or require-
                                      ments for, capital resources, or the financial condition or results of
                                      operations of the issuer. The Committee intends that these disclo-
                                      sures would be made on a fair value basis. Issuers must also dis-
                                      close loans extended to officers, directors or other persons affiliated
                                      with the issuer on terms or conditions that are not otherwise avail-
                                      able to the public.
                                         Section 6 also requires the Commission to conduct an analysis of
                                      the extent to which disclosure of additional or reorganized informa-
                                      tion may be required to improve the transparency, completeness or
                                      usefulness of financial statements and other disclosures. In its
                                      analysis, the Commission must consider requiring the identification
                                      of the key accounting principles that are most important to the
                                      issuer’s reported financial condition or results of operation, and
                                      that require the most difficult, complex or subjective judgments by
                                      management. The Commission must also consider requiring an ex-
                                      planation, where material, of how different available accounting
                                      principles applied, along with the judgments made in their applica-
                                      tion and the likelihood of materially different reported results if
                                      different assumptions were to prevail. In addition, the Commission
                                      must consider requiring an explanation of trading activities where
                                      an issuer engages in the business of trading non-exchange traded




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00040   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 41 ===
                                                                                          41

                                      contracts, accounted for at fair value, but where a lack of market
                                      price quotations necessitates the use of fair value estimation tech-
                                      niques. Finally, the Commission must consider establishing re-
                                      quirements relating to the presentation of information in plain lan-
                                      guage, and requiring any other disclosures in financial statements
                                      or other disclosure documents that would improve transparency.
                                      Section 7. Improvements in Reporting on Insider Transactions and
                                           Relationships
                                         Section 7 requires the Commission to initiate a proceeding to
                                      propose changes in its rules and regulations with respect to finan-
                                      cial reporting to require increased disclosure of relationships be-
                                      tween the issuer and affiliates of the issuer and officers, directors
                                      or employees of the issuer; and officers, directors or employees of
                                      the affiliate and unrelated other entities to the extent such rela-
                                      tionships create a conflict of interest for those individuals. The pro-
                                      ceeding must examine relationships with philanthropic organiza-
                                      tions, insider controlled affiliates, joint ownership interests in real
                                      property, and the provision of services by related persons. If a rule-
                                      making is initiated pursuant to this section, the Commission is di-
                                      rected to do so within 180 days of the enactment of the bill.
                                      Section 8. Codes of Conduct
                                         Section 8 directs the New York Stock Exchange, the American
                                      Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq stock market to file with the Com-
                                      mission proposed rules that would prohibit their listing any secu-
                                      rity for a company that has not adopted a code of ethics for the
                                      company’s senior officials. The Commission is given the authority
                                      to impose this requirement on any other national securities ex-
                                      change.
                                         Section 8 requires that the Commission revise its regulations
                                      pertaining to disclosures on form 8K to require the immediate dis-
                                      closure of any change or waiver of such code of ethics of an issuer.
                                      Section 9. Enhanced Oversight of Periodic Disclosures by Issuers
                                         Section 9 directs the Commission to review disclosures of issuers
                                      required to file statements under the securities laws on a more reg-
                                      ular and systematic basis. The Commission is directed to create a
                                      risk rating system to determine the frequency of such reviews. The
                                      Commission is directed to ensure that no issuer shall be reviewed
                                      less than once every three years. The section provides that the
                                      Commission may not disclose the risk rating of any issuer.
                                      Section 10. Retention of Records
                                        Subsection 10(a) requires CPAs who certify financial statements
                                      under the securities laws to prepare and maintain final audit work
                                      papers and other information that are necessary to support an ac-
                                      countants report on such financial statements for a period of no
                                      less than 7 years. The term ‘‘work papers’’ was used as a term of
                                      art, to be defined with reference to the professional standards gov-
                                      erning the subject.
                                        Subsection 10(b) defines the term ‘‘accountants report’’ to mean
                                      a document in which an accountant identifies a financial statement
                                      and sets forth his opinion regarding that financial statement or an
                                      assertion that an opinion cannot be expressed.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00041   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 42 ===
                                                                                          42

                                        The purpose of this section is to ensure that necessary auditing
                                      documents are retained in the event that a CPA’s conclusions are
                                      subsequently reviewed. At the same time, the legislation is not in-
                                      tended to impose unnecessary or excessively costly burdens on ac-
                                      countants, or to require that every document, or every iteration of
                                      a document, be preserved. The requirements of this section may be
                                      satisfied through the use of electronic records.
                                      Section 11. Commission Authority to Bar Persons from Serving as
                                           Officers or Directors
                                         Section 11 gives the Commission authority to issue an order in
                                      connection with a cease-and-desist proceeding to bar a person who
                                      has violated section 17(a)(1) of the Securities Act of 1933 (Securi-
                                      ties Act) or section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
                                      (Exchange Act) from acting as an officer or director of a company
                                      that is registered with or required to file reports with the Commis-
                                      sion (public company), if that person’s conduct demonstrates sub-
                                      stantial unfitness to serve as an officer or director of a public com-
                                      pany. Under current law, section 20(e) of the Securities Act and
                                      section 21(d)(2) of the Exchange Act, the Commission can only ob-
                                      tain such a bar in a Federal court proceeding.
                                         The administrative bar authority granted in section 11 is an ex-
                                      traordinary remedy, allowing the Commission effectively to deprive
                                      a person of his or her livelihood. In other circumstances where the
                                      Commission or other Federal agencies have similar authority, the
                                      agency generally has plenary regulatory authority over the indus-
                                      try in which the individual is employed and the bar extends only
                                      to that industry. For example, under section 15(b)(6) of the Ex-
                                      change Act, the Commission has the authority to bar an individual
                                      from being associated with a broker or dealer, and section 203(f)
                                      of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 gives the Commission au-
                                      thority to bar an individual from being associated with an invest-
                                      ment adviser. Brokers, dealers and investment advisers are all sub-
                                      ject to comprehensive regulatory schemes overseen by the Commis-
                                      sion. See also 12 U.S.C. 1818(e)(1) (2002) (permitting debarment of
                                      banking officials); 15 U.S.C. 80a–35 (2002) (permitting debarment
                                      of officers, directors or members of investment company advisory
                                      boards). On the other hand, while the securities laws require dis-
                                      closure by public companies, there has been no legislative mandate
                                      to the Commission to create a comprehensive regulatory scheme
                                      applicable to public companies or their employees and directors.
                                      Such a mandate would be antithetical to the disclosure philosophy
                                      of our securities laws, which has been the basis for the develop-
                                      ment of our strong securities markets. Moreover, while an indi-
                                      vidual barred from the securities industry may seek employment in
                                      many other industries, an individual barred from serving as an of-
                                      ficer or director of a public company is prohibited from employment
                                      in such capacity by over 17,000 companies.
                                         The Committee has therefore included several protections in sec-
                                      tion 11 to make clear that the standard for the Commission to
                                      apply in issuing a bar order is high, and to ensure that the Com-
                                      mission exercises this authority with care and only in cir-
                                      cumstances where it is justified by the magnitude of the individ-
                                      ual’s offense and the need to protect investors from potential recidi-
                                      vism by the individual.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00042   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 43 ===
                                                                                          43

                                         The first protection is the requirement in paragraph (a) that the
                                      Commission must find that a person’s conduct demonstrates ‘‘sub-
                                      stantial unfitness’’ to serve as an officer or director of a public com-
                                      pany before he or she can be barred. This is the same standard
                                      that is applicable to Federal court proceedings in which the Com-
                                      mission seeks to bar an individual from serving as an officer or di-
                                      rector of a public company.
                                         The Committee also believes it is appropriate to set forth factors
                                      for the Commission to consider in making a determination whether
                                      an individual’s conduct demonstrates substantial unfitness. These
                                      factors are derived from case law interpreting this standard under
                                      section 20(e) of the Securities Act and section 21(d)(2) of the Ex-
                                      change Act. See, e.g., SEC v. McCaskey, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS
                                      13571 (S.D.N.Y. 2001); SEC v. Farrell, 1996 U.S. Dist. LEXIS
                                      22681 (W.D.N.Y. 1996); SEC v. Patel, 61 F.3d 137 (2d Cir. 1995);
                                      SEC v. Shah, 1993 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 10347 (S.D.N.Y. 1993); see
                                      also Jayne W. Barnard, When is a Corporate Executive ‘‘Substan-
                                      tially Unfit to Serve,’’ 70 N.C.L. Rev. 1489 (1992). They are: (1) the
                                      severity of the person’s conduct giving rise to the violation, and the
                                      person’s role or position when engaged in the violation; (2) the per-
                                      son’s degree of scienter; (3) the person’s economic gain as a result
                                      of the violation; and (4) the likelihood that the conduct giving rise
                                      to the violation, or similar conduct as defined in subsection (a),
                                      may recur if the person is not so prohibited. Paragraph (b) omits
                                      one of the factors considered by the courts, whether the person is
                                      a ‘‘repeat offender.’’ The Committee believes that repeat offender
                                      status is an implicit consideration in the fourth factor, the likeli-
                                      hood that similar conduct will recur.
                                         An additional protection is provided in paragraph (c), which stays
                                      the enforcement of a Commission bar order during the period in
                                      which application may be made for judicial review of the bar order
                                      and, if a timely application for judicial review is made, pending the
                                      entry of a final order resolving the application. This will prevent
                                      an individual from losing his or her position while exercising the
                                      right of appeal to a Federal court. Without this stay provision, the
                                      Committee is concerned that an administrative bar would have its
                                      intended effect even if ultimately deemed by a court to have been
                                      inappropriate, in that the individual would have been deprived of
                                      his or her livelihood in the intervening period and might have a
                                      difficult time attaining a comparable position to that lost due to the
                                      improper bar.
                                         Finally, the Committee notes that section 11 provides, as does
                                      section 20(e) of the Securities Act and section 21(d)(2) of the Ex-
                                      change Act, that the Commission may issue an order to bar an in-
                                      dividual conditionally or unconditionally, and permanently or for
                                      such period of time as it shall determine (emphasis added). Accord-
                                      ingly, the Committee expects that the Commission will, as the
                                      courts have done, issue orders tailored to the individuals and facts
                                      before it. See SEC v. McCaskey, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 13571
                                      (S.D.N.Y. 2001) (rejecting permanent bar order in favor of six-year
                                      bar); SEC v. Farrell, 1996 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 22681 (W.D.N.Y 1996)
                                      (rejecting comprehensive bar order in favor of industry specific
                                      bar).




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00043   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 44 ===
                                                                                          44

                                      Section 12. Disgorging Insiders Profits From Trades Prior to Cor-
                                           rection of Erroneous Financial Statements
                                         Section 12 directs the Commission to conduct an analysis of
                                      whether any officer or director of an issuer should be required to
                                      disgorge profits gained or losses avoided from the sale of the securi-
                                      ties of such issuer during the six month period preceding the filing
                                      of a restated financial statement. The Commission is authorized to
                                      issue rules requiring disgorgement under those circumstances. The
                                      Committee intends that, if the Commission chooses to issue rules
                                      pursuant to this section, it do so only after providing safeguards
                                      and exemptions to ensure that such disgorgement is required only
                                      in cases where the Commission can prove extreme misconduct on
                                      the part of that officer or director. The Committee intends that the
                                      Commission would, in establishing any such rules, ensure fair and
                                      impartial procedures, with a right to appeal, for the adjudication
                                      of any action to require disgorgement.
                                      Section 13. Securities and Exchange Commission Authority To Pro-
                                           vide Relief
                                         Section 13 provides that, if the Commission obtains funds pursu-
                                      ant to a disgorgement proceeding from Enron Corporation, Arthur
                                      Andersen LLC, or any affiliate, subsidiary, officer, director or prin-
                                      cipal shareholder thereof, the Commission will establish an alloca-
                                      tion system for those funds that will give priority to former employ-
                                      ees of Enron Corporation who were participants in its employee re-
                                      tirement plan. The section directs that any monies in payment of
                                      a civil penalty against Enron or Arthur Andersen must be paid into
                                      the disgorgement fund. The section also authorizes the Commission
                                      to accept donations for the disgorgement fund.
                                      Section 14. Study of Rules Relating to Analyst Conflicts of Interest
                                         Section 14 requires the Commission to conduct a study and re-
                                      view of any final rules by any self-regulatory organization reg-
                                      istered with the Commission, related to matters involving equity
                                      research analyst conflicts of interest. The study must include a re-
                                      view of the effectiveness of the final rules in addressing matters of
                                      objectivity and integrity of equity research analyst reports and rec-
                                      ommendations. Section 14 also requires the Commission to submit
                                      a report on its study and review to Congress within 180 days of the
                                      delivery of the final rules to the Commission, with annual updates
                                      thereafter. The report to Congress must include recommendations,
                                      including any recommendations for additional self-regulatory orga-
                                      nization rulemakings regarding equity research analysts.
                                      Section 15. Review of Corporate Governance Practices
                                        Section 15 requires the Commission to conduct a study and re-
                                      view of corporate governance standards and practices, to determine
                                      whether they serve the best interests of shareholders. In con-
                                      ducting the study, the Commission must seek the views of State se-
                                      curities and corporate regulators, and must report on its analysis
                                      in its next annual report to Congress.
                                        The study must include an analysis of whether current standards
                                      and practices promote full disclosure to shareholders of relevant in-
                                      formation; whether corporate codes of ethics are adequate for
                                      shareholder protection; the extent to which conflicts of interest are




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00044   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 45 ===
                                                                                          45

                                      aggressively reviewed; the extent to which sufficient legal protec-
                                      tion exists to ensure that any manager who attempts to manipulate
                                      or unduly influence an audit is subject to appropriate sanctions and
                                      liability; whether the rules, standards and practices relating to de-
                                      termining whether independent directors are in fact independent
                                      are adequate; whether rules relating to the independence of direc-
                                      tors serving on audit committees are adequate to protect investors
                                      and are uniformly applied; whether the duties and responsibilities
                                      of audit committees should be established by the Commission; and
                                      what further or additional practices or standards might best pro-
                                      tect investors and promote the interests of shareholders.
                                      Section 16. Study of Enforcement Actions
                                         Section 16 requires the Commission to review and analyze all of
                                      its enforcement actions involving violations of securities law report-
                                      ing requirements and all restatements of financial statements over
                                      the past five years. The purpose of the review is to identify the
                                      areas of reporting most susceptible to fraud, inappropriate manipu-
                                      lation or inappropriate earnings management, such as revenue rec-
                                      ognition and the accounting treatment of off-balance sheet special
                                      purpose entities. The Commission must report its findings to Con-
                                      gress within 180 days of enactment, and use its findings to revise
                                      rules and regulations as necessary.
                                      Section 17. Study of Credit Rating Agencies
                                         Section 17 requires the Commission to conduct a study of the
                                      role and function of credit rating agencies in the operation of the
                                      securities markets, and report on the analysis to the President and
                                      Congress within 180 days of enactment. In conducting the study,
                                      the Commission must examine the role of credit rating agencies in
                                      the evaluation of securities issuers, and the importance of that role
                                      to investors and the functioning of the securities markets; any im-
                                      pediments to the accurate appraisal by credit rating agencies of the
                                      financial resources and risks of issuers; any measures which may
                                      be required to improve the dissemination of information concerning
                                      such resources and risks when credit rating agencies announce
                                      credit ratings; any barriers to entry into the business of acting as
                                      a credit rating agency and measures needed to remove such bar-
                                      riers; and any conflicts of interests in the operation of credit rating
                                      agencies and measures to prevent those conflicts or ameliorate
                                      their consequences.
                                      Section 18. Study of Investment Banks
                                        Section 18 directs the General Accounting Office (GAO) to con-
                                      duct a study on the role of investment banks and financial advisors
                                      in assisting public companies in manipulating their earnings and
                                      obfuscating their true financial condition. The section directs the
                                      GAO to address the role of investment banks in the bankruptcy of
                                      Enron Corporation, the failure of Global Crossing, and in the cre-
                                      ation and marketing of transactions designed to obfuscate a com-
                                      pany’s financial picture. The GAO is directed to report to Congress
                                      within 180 days of enactment of the bill.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00045   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 46 ===
                                                                                          46

                                      Section 19. Study of Model Rules for Attorneys of Issuers
                                        Section 19 directs the Comptroller General to conduct a study of
                                      the Model Rules of Professional Conduct promulgated by the Amer-
                                      ican Bar Association and rules of professional conduct applicable to
                                      attorneys established by the Commission to determine whether
                                      such rules provide adequate guidance to attorneys with respect to
                                      their ethical obligations. The Comptroller General is ordered to re-
                                      port to the House Financial Services Committee and the Senate
                                      Banking Committee.
                                      Section 20. Enforcement Authority
                                        Section 20 grants the Commission all of the authorities granted
                                      to it under the securities laws in order to enforce the bill. Commis-
                                      sion actions under the legislation, including actions on rules and
                                      regulations, are subject to review in the same manner as actions
                                      under the securities laws.
                                      Section 21. Exclusion for Investment Companies
                                        Section 21 clarifies that certain provisions of the bill are not
                                      meant to apply to investment companies registered with the Com-
                                      mission under the Investment Company Act of 1940. Because those
                                      companies are already subject to a thorough regulatory regime, the
                                      application of these provisions would be inappropriate.
                                      Section 22. Definitions
                                        Section 22 defines terms used in the bill.
                                             CHANGES IN EXISTING LAW MADE BY THE BILL, AS REPORTED
                                           The bill does not amend existing law.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00046   Fmt 6659   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 47 ===
                                                                          MINORITY VIEWS
                                        The collapse of the Enron Corporation provided irrefutable evi-
                                      dence of serious, systemic problems in our financial reporting sys-
                                      tem and our capital markets. Far from being an isolated instance,
                                      Enron was only the most spectacular example of what has become
                                      a common phenomenon—earnings manipulation and deceptive ac-
                                      counting by our largest companies. Before Enron, company after
                                      company—Waste Management, Sunbeam, Cendant, W.R. Grace,
                                      and many others—were found to have manipulated their account-
                                      ing to present a picture to investors that did not match reality. As
                                      evidenced by the record number of investigations opened by the
                                      SEC thus far this year, the problem has only become more acute.
                                        The safeguards that should protect investors from such practices
                                      have failed at every level in company after company, overwhelmed
                                      by the temptation for companies to cheat, overstate, or obscure
                                      their financial disclosure to improve short-term results and meet
                                      analyst or investor expectations. The stock prices of many compa-
                                      nies have been whipsawed by any suggestion of possible accounting
                                      problems, indicating a clear decline in confidence in our financial
                                      reporting system. While this system has long been viewed as the
                                      best in the world, its reputation has suffered from a string of
                                      record financial restatements and prosecutions of some of our larg-
                                      est companies.
                                        Virtually all of the witnesses heard by the Committee spoke of
                                      the need for auditors to be willing to stand up to management and
                                      for audit committees to take real responsibility for audits and audi-
                                      tors. To do this, we must significantly alter the relationship of the
                                      auditor to its client, strengthen the functioning of audit commit-
                                      tees, and provide meaningful ongoing oversight of the auditing pro-
                                      fession. We should use this opportunity to restore the vitality of
                                      critical investor safeguards by ensuring that auditors and audit
                                      committees can once again act as the first line of defense in pro-
                                      tecting investors. The market alone cannot provide an effective or
                                      lasting solution to these problems.
                                        To restore confidence in the integrity of our markets, this Con-
                                      gress should enact tough and credible legislation to address the se-
                                      rious and growing problem of earnings management and account-
                                      ing fraud. There are a number of important areas in which the bill
                                      reported out of the Financial Services Committee should be im-
                                      proved:
                                        Oversight of the accounting industry. In spite of the critical role
                                      that auditors play in the financial reporting system for publicly
                                      traded companies under our securities laws, oversight of the indus-
                                      try has been left entirely to the industry itself, with little input
                                      from either the SEC or the public. While a broad consensus has
                                      formed on the need for a new public oversight body for the account-
                                      ing profession, there are major differences on the attributes such
                                                                                          (47)




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00047   Fmt 6604    Sfmt 6604   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 48 ===
                                                                                          48

                                      a regulator must have to be credible and effective. The bill reported
                                      out of committee leaves these matters to SEC rulemaking, effec-
                                      tively allowing these issues to remain open to debate even after
                                      Congress has acted.
                                         Given the importance of these decisions to the effectiveness of
                                      the new regulator, Congress should not delegate this task. Without
                                      a clear mandate from Congress, the structure and role of the new
                                      regulator will be the subject of continued debate and will be more
                                      limited than needed to effectively oversee the auditing industry.
                                      Delegating decisions on its duties and powers to the SEC provide
                                      an opportunity for the authority of the new regulator to be weak-
                                      ened.
                                         The new regulator should have authority to set audit quality and
                                      independence standards, rather than just enforcing the standards
                                      set by industry bodies. While the regulator could chose to rely on
                                      existing industry standards if it determines they are adequate to
                                      ensure high-quality audits, the regulator should be able to use the
                                      results of the experience gained from reviewing auditors and audits
                                      to determine where new or more explicit standards are needed in
                                      problematic areas. Congress should strengthen the bill reported by
                                      Committee to provide this authority.
                                         The new regulator also should have clear disciplinary and inves-
                                      tigative powers. Unlike the tangled jumble of existing industry or-
                                      ganizations, the new regulator must be given the tools to provide
                                      meaningful quality control and to conduct timely investigations and
                                      disciplinary actions. It must have the ability to draw on its experi-
                                      ences to strengthen the industry standards as necessary to provide
                                      the high level of quality and independence that we expect of audi-
                                      tors of public companies. Clarifying the authority of the regulator
                                      will enable it to better coordinate with the SEC, rather than wait-
                                      ing years until after SEC actions are completed. The provisions of
                                      the bill reported out by the committee should be significantly im-
                                      proved in this regard.
                                         Auditor independence. While an auditor’s first duty should be to
                                      the public, auditors currently are beholden to their audit clients for
                                      fees for non-audit services that may far exceed the audit fees they
                                      receive. Data now available under the Security and Exchange Com-
                                      mission’s disclosure rule on non-audit fees makes clear that, for the
                                      auditors of many large public companies, audit fees are a minute
                                      percentage of the fees they receive. The non-audit services that
                                      auditors provide to the public companies they audit must be lim-
                                      ited and must be made subject to real oversight by the audit com-
                                      mittees.
                                         The bill reported out of committee includes no real limits on the
                                      non-audit services that auditors provide to their audit clients.
                                      While H.R. 3763 includes a provision that purports to prohibit
                                      auditors from providing audit clients with two non-audit services,
                                      financial information design and implementation and internal
                                      audit outsourcing. The language of the provision references the ex-
                                      isting SEC rules in a way that includes only the limited restric-
                                      tions that the SEC currently places on these services. By codifying
                                      existing regulatory carve-outs, the provision effectively makes no
                                      change in existing law, not even going as far as the accounting in-
                                      dustry has announced it is willing to go voluntarily.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00048   Fmt 6604   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 49 ===
                                                                                          49

                                         The bill reported out of committee should have included real lim-
                                      its on the non-audit services that auditors provide to their audit
                                      clients where those services create conflicts for auditors, such as
                                      services that result in the auditor auditing its own work. Addition-
                                      ally, while some non-audit services do not create conflicts for audi-
                                      tors or are difficult to separate from audit work, the provision of
                                      such services by an auditor to its audit client should be carefully
                                      examined to ensure that the full scope of services provided are in
                                      the best interests of shareholders, rather than auditors or manage-
                                      ment.
                                         Congress should strengthen the bill reported by the committee to
                                      include provisions to ensure that the full scope of the relationship
                                      between an auditor and its audit client are subject to the control
                                      of the audit committee in order to enable the audit committee to
                                      effectively oversee the auditor. A requirement for audit committee
                                      approval of non-audit services would promote the independence of
                                      the audit by ensuring that it is responsible to the audit committee
                                      and shareholders, rather than to management. Such a provision
                                      would enable an audit committee to determine what makes sense
                                      for the individual company and its auditor in light of the full range
                                      of services and activities of its auditor.
                                         The role of the audit committee. The bill reported out of com-
                                      mittee calls for a study of corporate governance, but does not in
                                      any meaningful way address to whom the outsider auditors report.
                                      In our view, the bill should have included a provision that would
                                      have required an issuer’s auditor to be appointed by and report to
                                      the audit committee of the board of directors. In addition, it is vital
                                      that the audit committee has an ongoing dialogue with the outside
                                      auditor as a critical check on the veracity of the financial state-
                                      ments and internal controls of the company.
                                         The record before this Committee demonstrates that the audit
                                      committee has the responsibility to shareholders to make sure that
                                      their auditors are doing their job, raise the tough questions, and
                                      ensure that the financial picture of the company is accurate and
                                      portrays the true nature of the financial condition of the company.
                                      It is clear from the Enron case, as the special committee of the
                                      board of directors of Enron concluded, that at every level corporate
                                      oversight failed, including and perhaps most acutely at the audit
                                      committee level. It is important to vest the audit committee with
                                      the clear authority to closely oversee the work of the auditors and
                                      take seriously their oversight responsibilities.
                                         Mr. Harvey Pitt, Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Com-
                                      mission, said in a recent speech, ‘‘while shareholder approval of
                                      outside auditors is now a well established aspect of corporate gov-
                                      ernance, I believe we should also explore whether the audit com-
                                      mittee should be vested with the initial decision about which firm
                                      is recommended to the shareholders. I also believe that audit com-
                                      mittees should have the authority to fire outside auditors (or pre-
                                      vent management from firing them).’’
                                         Independent directors serving as consultants. The bill reported
                                      out of the Committee does not include provisions to ensure that
                                      independent directors are truly independent. The bill should have
                                      included a provision that would prevent the practice of paying inde-
                                      pendent directors as ‘‘consultants’’ while they serve on the board.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00049   Fmt 6604   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 50 ===
                                                                                          50

                                      Lynn Turner, former Chief Accountant of the SEC, among others,
                                      have argued that paying directors as consultants is back door com-
                                      pensation that fundamentally undermines their independence. The
                                      critical question is whether ‘‘independent’’ directors who are receiv-
                                      ing significant consulting compensation would challenge the same
                                      management that is paying them to serve as consultants. Such a
                                      provision is a simple step in ensuring that directors act in the best
                                      interests of shareholders.
                                         Analysts conflicts. The role of many securities analysts in con-
                                      tinuing to push Enron’s stock even as the company was collapsing
                                      is well recognized. In spite of the evidence before us, the committee
                                      failed to address the core issues that undermine securities analysts’
                                      independence. That is, compensation arrangements of analysts at
                                      investment banks provide incentives to win and retain business,
                                      rather than provide investors with high-quality unbiased research.
                                         To ensure securities analyst independence Congress should have
                                      adopted a provision that would require:
                                              • That the self regulatory organizations adopt rules to ban
                                           equity research analysts from holding equity interests in the
                                           companies that they cover;
                                              • That analyst compensation not be based on investment
                                           banking revenue, but permit compensation to be based on the
                                           overall success of the firm;
                                              • That the investment banking department have no input
                                           into the compensation, hiring, firing and promotion of securi-
                                           ties analysts.
                                              • That SROs establish criteria for evaluating analyst re-
                                           search quality and require that analyst compensation be prin-
                                           cipally based on the quality of an analyst’s research.
                                         Disgorgement of bonuses and other incentives. In an attempt to
                                      restore accountability among corporate officers, the President un-
                                      veiled a 10 point plan. One of the meritorious items in that plan
                                      was a call to require disgorgement of incentive-based compensation
                                      from officers and directors in cases of false or misleading state-
                                      ments made by such officers that required an accounting restate-
                                      ment. Instead of attempting to implement this straightforward and
                                      common sense proposal, the Committee simply tasked the SEC to
                                      study the question of disgorgement. Additionally, the report lan-
                                      guage attempts to raise the bar to use of this remedy by stating
                                      that it should be used only where the Commission can prove ‘‘ex-
                                      treme misconduct’’. Establishing such a high standard will make it
                                      very difficult, if not impossible, for the Commission to obtain
                                      disgorgement of millions of dollars that executives have earned
                                      from stock sales at the same time they were committing securities
                                      fraud.
                                         We, however, believe that Congress should act quickly to provide
                                      the SEC with the power to require disgorgement of compensation
                                      in an administrative proceeding. Congress should have adopted a
                                      provision that requires the SEC to prescribe regulations to require
                                      disgorgement in certain proceedings to seek disgorgement of sala-
                                      ries, commissions, fees, bonuses and other incentive-based com-
                                      pensation obtained by an officer or director of an issuer who made
                                      or caused to be made the filing of financial statements that were
                                      at the time false or misleading.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00050   Fmt 6604   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 51 ===
                                                                                          51

                                         In addition, the bill should have included a provision that pro-
                                      vides in any action or proceeding brought or instituted by the Com-
                                      mission under the securities laws against any person who made or
                                      caused to be made the filing of financial statements that were at
                                      the time false or misleading or for causing, or aiding and abetting
                                      any other violation of the securities laws may be required to dis-
                                      gorge salaries, commissions, fees, bonuses and other incentive-
                                      based compensation.
                                         CEO and CFO certification of financial statements. Another im-
                                      portant policy initiative advanced by the President was a rec-
                                      ommendation that the principal executive officer or officers and the
                                      principal financial officer or officers (CEO and CFO), or persons
                                      performing similar functions, certify to the accuracy of the financial
                                      statements included in each annual or quarterly report filed or sub-
                                      mitted to the SEC. It reasonable to expect that corporate officers
                                      stand behind the company’s public disclosure and be subject to
                                      sanction should they violate that certification. Regrettably, the bill
                                      reported out of the Committee did not include this worthwhile pol-
                                      icy initiative. Congress should implement this initiative by includ-
                                      ing provisions to require the CEO and the CFO to certify that:
                                         1. Such officer has reviewed the report.
                                         2. To the officer’s knowledge, the report does not contain any un-
                                      true statement of material fact or omit to state a material fact to
                                      make the statements made, not misleading.
                                         3. Based on the officer’s knowledge, the financial statements, and
                                      other financial information fairly present the financial condition
                                      and results of the company as of, and for, the periods presented in
                                      the report.
                                         4. Such officers have created and maintained internal procedures
                                      to ensure that material information relating to the company is
                                      made known to them by others within the company.
                                         5. The company has evaluated its internal controls including the
                                      fact that the singing officers have disclosed to the auditors and the
                                      audit committee that: (a) all significant deficiencies in such controls
                                      and (b) any fraud, whether or not material, that involves manage-
                                      ment or other employees who have a significant role in the com-
                                      pany’s internal controls. In addition, the signing officers have indi-
                                      cated in the report to shareholders whether or not there were sig-
                                      nificant changes in internal controls subsequent to the date of the
                                      evaluation of internal controls and whether any corrective actions
                                      have been taken.
                                         If such provisions are adopted, the SEC would have available to
                                      it civil money penalties and injunctive power to enforce these provi-
                                      sions as provided in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Morever,
                                      a willful violation of these certifications would carry criminal sanc-
                                      tions under Section 32 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
                                         Officer and director bars. An amendment sponsored by the ma-
                                      jority that was ultimately adopted has made it more difficult rather
                                      than less for the SEC in an administrative proceeding to seek an
                                      officer and director bar against individuals who are guilty of mis-
                                      conduct. The bill purports to authorize the SEC to bar officers and
                                      directors from serving as an officer or director in proceedings
                                      brought by the Commission under Section 21(c) of the Securities
                                      and Exchange Act of 1934. Such a bar would be permitted if the




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00051   Fmt 6604   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 52 ===
                                                                                          52

                                      ‘‘person’s conduct demonstrates substantial unfitness to serve as an
                                      officer or director of any issuer.’’ In determining unfitness the Com-
                                      mission shall consider several factors including ‘‘the likelihood that
                                      the conduct giving rise to the violation, or similar conduct * * *
                                      may recur if the person is not so prohibited.’’
                                         Congress provided the SEC with explicit authority to seek officer
                                      and director bars in 1990. Current statutory authority provides the
                                      Commission the power to seek an officer and director bar against
                                      any individual who violates Section 10(b) of the Securities Ex-
                                      change Act or Section 17(a)(1) of the Securities Act, and whose
                                      ‘‘conduct demonstrates substantial unfitness to serve as an officer
                                      or director’’ of a public company. Unfortunately, the Commission’s
                                      ability to obtain officer and director bars, however, has been lim-
                                      ited by judicial interpretations of the phrase ‘‘substantial unfitness’’
                                      that have created a very high standard for obtaining a bar. Several
                                      courts apply a six-part test which require, among other factors, a
                                      showing that the misconduct is likely to recur. This is precisely the
                                      same test that the bill reported out by this Committee codified. The
                                      Director of Enforcement of the SEC has said in a recent speech,
                                      ‘‘the result has been, unbelievably, that in some cases courts have
                                      refused to impose permanent officer and director bars on individ-
                                      uals who have engaged in egregious—even criminal—misconduct.’’
                                      The argument that this bill facilitates officer and director bars for
                                      those guilty of serious misconduct is an illusion. It codifies exactly
                                      the barriers that the SEC says are the problem.
                                         The bill should have included legislative modifications to existing
                                      law that facilitate officer and director removal in either a court pro-
                                      ceeding or in an administrative action. For example, the Committee
                                      should have adopted a sensible and real approach to the problem
                                      by deleting the word ‘‘substantial’’ before unfitness in Section
                                      21(d)(2) of the Exchange Act. The effect would have been to lessen
                                      the unreasonable barriers imposed by some courts on the SEC to
                                      obtain such bars. In addition, the Committee should have been em-
                                      powered as a remedy in its own administrative proceeding to seek
                                      an officer and director bar without going to district court to seek
                                      such a bar, without imposing unreasonable factors that serve only
                                      to frustrate their efforts.
                                         These provisions, had they been adopted, would have given effect
                                      to the President’s plan to make it easier for the SEC to bar officers
                                      and directors who have been determined to have committed serious
                                      misconduct. The majority amendment approved by the Committee
                                      on a party-line vote has only succeeded in making much more dif-
                                      ficult, while claiming that they have enacted real reform.
                                         Shareholder approval of stock option plans. SEC Chairman Pitt
                                      has expressed his concern that stock options no longer serve to
                                      align the interests of management with those of shareholders and
                                      described specific measures that he felt were needed to make op-
                                      tion plans work as intended. He stated that all stock option plans
                                      that allow a director or officer to acquire stock should be approved
                                      by shareholders, that decisions on granting options to senior man-
                                      agement should be entrusted to a committee of independent direc-
                                      tors, and that corporate boards should consider whether officers
                                      demonstrate sustained, long-term growth before options can be ex-
                                      ercised.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00052   Fmt 6604   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 53 ===
                                                                                          53

                                         The growing evidence that many executives have reaped signifi-
                                      cant rewards from stock option plans even as their companies’
                                      earnings and stock prices have plummented calls for measures to
                                      realign shareholder and executive interests. The bill reported out
                                      of committee failed to include such provisions. Institutional inves-
                                      tors, pension plans, and others have urged that shareholders be
                                      permitted to vote on stock option plans that are used to provide ex-
                                      ecutive compensation. The manner in which stock options and
                                      other compensation is provided to executives is an important factor
                                      in aligning the interests of shareholders and executives, and should
                                      be subject to shareholder approval.
                                         Private litigants’ rights. The Committee bill fails to address very
                                      serious problems that confront pension funds and other investors
                                      who seek compensation for securities fraud. In the 1991 Lampf
                                      case, in a 5–to–4 decision, the Supreme Court significantly short-
                                      ened the period of time in which investors may bring securities
                                      fraud action. The decision requires the victims of fraud to bring
                                      suit by the earlier of 1 year from the discovery of the fraud or 3
                                      years from the fraudulent act.
                                         Securities fraud is very difficult to detect because the guilty par-
                                      ties often hide or destroy incriminating evidence. The shorter pe-
                                      riod provide by Lampf does not allow individual investors adequate
                                      time to discover and pursue violations of securities laws. Moreover
                                      as the dissenting Justices in Lampf argued, the case’s strict statute
                                      of limitations runs counter to the almost uniform rule in the
                                      United States rejecting short statutes of limitations for fraud-based
                                      causes of action.
                                         The unreasonably brief statue of limitations has already had an
                                      adverse impact in the Enron debacle. In February of this year, in
                                      testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Christine O.
                                      Gregorie, the Attorney General for the State of Washington, testi-
                                      fied that Washington State Pension fund suffered over $100 million
                                      in losses because of the misleading financial statements issued by
                                      Enron and audited by Andersen, but, was only able to make a
                                      claim for approximately $50 million because of the restricted stat-
                                      ute of limitations that applies to securities fraud cases.
                                         Both Democratic and Republican past-SEC Chairman have
                                      stressed the integral role of private lawsuits in maintaining inves-
                                      tor confidence. However, since the Supreme Court’s 1994 decision
                                      in the Central Bank of Denver case, the victims of fraud have not
                                      been able to bring claims against the accountants, lawyers, invest-
                                      ment banks and others who aid and abet issuers in misleading the
                                      public about the real state of company balance sheets.
                                         Our market regulatory system depends on the independent pro-
                                      fessionals who verify and analyze the disclosures of publicly held
                                      companies. The reduced threat of legal liability for these ‘‘gate-
                                      keepers’’ that has existed since 1994 has helped to create an envi-
                                      ronment of laxity, where gatekeepers do not do all that they rea-
                                      sonably can to protect the investing public.
                                         Although the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act partially
                                      overturned the Central Bank of Denver decision by restoring some
                                      of the SEC’s authority to pursue aiders and abettors of securities
                                      fraud, that legislation failed to give the victims of fraud the right
                                      to sue those who aid issuers in misleading and defrauding the pub-




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00053   Fmt 6604   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 54 ===
                                                                                          54

                                      lic. Moreover, the 1995 legislation made it harder for the SEC to
                                      prove the complicity of aiders and abettors. The 1995 law requires
                                      the SEC to prove that a defendant had actual knowledge of the
                                      fraud. The 1995 law does not permit the SEC to prosecute aiders
                                      and abettors who acted recklessly with regard to their client’s
                                      fraud, which was the standard prior to the 1994 Supreme Court
                                      case.
                                         In 1995, both Federal and State securities regulators, academics
                                      and others (including a principal sponsor of the 1995 legislation),
                                      urged Congress to overturn the Lampf and the Central Bank of
                                      Denver decisions. We should now heed these recommendations and
                                      provide investors a fairer system of redress in the courts.
                                         First, Congress should now enact a statute of limitations that
                                      provides that a private securities fraud case may be brought not
                                      later than the earlier of five years after the date on which the al-
                                      leged violation occurred or three years after the date in which the
                                      alleged violation was discovered. Such a provision would provide a
                                      reasonable period of time in which to uncover and investigate fraud
                                      and, then, bring meritorious claims.
                                         Second, Congress should reverse the trend toward laxity by re-
                                      storing a private right of action against those gatekeepers who are
                                      guilty of aiding securities fraud and by restoring the pre-1994 li-
                                      ability standards for the professionals who are supposed to protect
                                      the public.
                                                                         JOHN J. LAFALCE.
                                                                         PAUL E. KANJORSKI.
                                                                         BERNARD SANDERS.
                                                                         LUIS V. GUTIERREZ.
                                                                         JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00054   Fmt 6604   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 55 ===
                                                           ADDITIONAL VIEWS OF MR. LAFALCE
                                        Auditor Rotation. The bill reported out by the Committee does
                                      not contain a provision relating to auditor rotation. Moreover, the
                                      bill does not provide for rotation of the audit partner as suggested
                                      by Chairman Pitt in his testimony before the Committee. Enron’s
                                      failure heightened concerns about the sufficiency of the current
                                      rules and independence standards for auditors, particularly con-
                                      cerning the scope of non-audit services that auditors perform for
                                      their audit clients. Enron’s auditor, for instance, received a very
                                      significant portion of its fees from Enron for services that were not
                                      related to its audit responsibilities. It also raised the real concern
                                      that auditors’ were more interested in the client than their duty to
                                      the public.
                                        The bill should have included a provision to mandate rotation.
                                      Auditor rotation would provide a number of important benefits in-
                                      cluding:
                                             1. A new audit firm would bring to bear a skepticism and
                                           fresh perspective that a long-term auditor may lack;
                                             2. Second, auditors tend to rely excessively on prior years’
                                           working papers, including prior tests of client’s internal control
                                           structure, particularly if fees are concerned;
                                             3. Long-time auditors may come to believe that they under-
                                           stand the totality of the client’s issues, and may look for those
                                           issues in the next audit rather than staying open to the other
                                           possibilities; and
                                             4. An auditor may place less emphasis on retaining a client
                                           relationship even at the cost of a compromised audit if it
                                           knows the engagement will end after several years.
                                        Auditor/Issuer Employment Restrictions. The bill reported out by
                                      the Committee does not provide for any restrictions on hiring of
                                      audit firm partners and other employees of an audit client. It
                                      therefore fails to address a critical issue that compromises the
                                      independence of an audit. As we saw dramatically in Enron and
                                      Global Crossing, members of the audit team often move to work for
                                      their audit clients. The bill should have included provisions that
                                      limit the practice of hiring members of an audit team who will then
                                      become the client of their former audit team colleagues. This dy-
                                      namic creates a revolving door system that compromises the ability
                                      for auditors to challenge management regarding their accounting
                                      practices and public disclosure.
                                                                                         JOHN J. LAFALCE.




                                                                                          (55)




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00055   Fmt 6604    Sfmt 6604   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 56 ===
                                                          ADDITIONAL VIEWS OF MR. SHERMAN
                                        Mr. Chairman, I voted for H.R. 3763 with the hope that, on the
                                      House floor, we will improve this legislation. I do not know if I will
                                      support this legislation on the floor, if we are unable to improve it.
                                      As approved by the Committee, the bill is a modest but inadequate
                                      step forward.
                                                                                         BRAD SHERMAN.




                                                                                          (56)




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00056   Fmt 6604    Sfmt 6604   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 57 ===
                                            ADDITIONAL VIEWS OF MESSRS. BENTSEN AND WATT
                                         The Bentsen/Watt amendment adopted by the Committee to H.R.
                                      3763, the Corporate and Auditing Accountability, Responsibility
                                      and Transparency Act of 2002, is designed to enhance the Securi-
                                      ties and Exchange Commission’s (the ‘‘SEC’’) authority with respect
                                      to scope of services provided by auditors deemed to be independent
                                      under the bill. Specifically, the Bentsen/Watt amendment author-
                                      izes the SEC to review services provided by auditors of public com-
                                      panies to audit clients to determine whether the provision of such
                                      services would impact the auditor’s independence. Additionally, the
                                      amendment provides authority for the SEC to adopt rules to modify
                                      the list of prohibited services in order to cure any such conflict. Fi-
                                      nally, the amendment directs the SEC to report to Congress peri-
                                      odically on such reviews and rules.
                                         We offered this amendment because we believed that the under-
                                      lying bill insufficiently addressed the need for ongoing oversight by
                                      the SEC of potential conflicts between auditors and their clients to
                                      the detriment of investors. Failure to adequately ensure auditor
                                      independence potentially puts investors at risk and undermines
                                      confidence in markets. Additionally, we believed efforts to expand
                                      the list of prohibited services by statute, while well intentioned, to
                                      be inflexible and would be better handled by regulators. While
                                      some have argued, not incorrectly, that the SEC has existing au-
                                      thority to address conflicts of auditors of public issuers, we also be-
                                      lieve the Congress should be on record endorsing and encouraging
                                      such authority when necessary to protect investors and ensure con-
                                      fidence in the markets.
                                                                           KEN BENTSEN.
                                                                           MELVIN L. WATT.




                                                                                          (57)




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00057   Fmt 6604    Sfmt 6604   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 58 ===
                                                             DISSENTING VIEWS OF MR. PAUL
                                         Seldom in history have supporters of increased state power failed
                                      to take advantage of a real or perceived crisis to increase govern-
                                      ment interference in our economic and/or personal lives. Therefore
                                      we should not be surprised that the events surrounding the Enron
                                      bankruptcy are being used to justify the expansion of federal regu-
                                      latory power contained in H.R. 3763, the Corporate and Auditing
                                      Accountability, Responsibility, and Transparency Act of 2002
                                      (CARTA).
                                         So ingrained is the idea that new federal regulations will prevent
                                      future Enrons, that the debate on H.R. 3763 has largely been be-
                                      tween CARTA’s supporters and those who believe this bill does not
                                      provide enough federal regulation and control. I would like to sug-
                                      gest that before Congress imposes new regulations on the account-
                                      ing profession, perhaps we should consider whether the problems
                                      the regulations are designed to address were at least in part
                                      caused by prior government interventions into the market. Perhaps
                                      Congress could even consider the almost heretical idea that reduc-
                                      ing federal control of the markets is in the public’s best interest.
                                      Congress should also consider whether the new regulations will
                                      have costs which might outweigh any (marginal) gains. Finally,
                                      Congress should contemplate whether we actually have any con-
                                      stitutional authorization to impose these new regulations, instead
                                      of simply stretching the Commerce Clause to justify the program
                                      de jour.
                                         CARTA establishes a new bureaucracy with enhanced oversight
                                      authority of accounting firms, as well as the authority to impose
                                      new mandates on these firms. CARTA also imposes new regula-
                                      tions regarding investing in stocks and enhances the power of the
                                      Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). However, companies
                                      are already required by federal law to comply with numerous man-
                                      dates, including obtaining audited financial statements from cer-
                                      tified accountants. These mandates have enriched accounting firms
                                      and may have given them market power beyond what they could
                                      obtain in a free market. These laws also give corrupt firms an op-
                                      portunity to attempt to use political power to gain special treat-
                                      ment for federal lawmakers and regulators at the expense of their
                                      competitors and even, as alleged in the Enron case, their employees
                                      and investors.
                                         When Congress establishes a regulatory state it creates an op-
                                      portunity for corruption. Unless CARTA eliminates original sin, it
                                      will not eliminate fraud. In fact, by creating a new bureaucracy
                                      and further politicizing the accounting profession, CARTA may cre-
                                      ate new opportunities for the unscrupulous to manipulate the sys-
                                      tem to their advantage.
                                         Even if CARTA transformed all (or at least all accountants) into
                                      angels, it could still harm individual investors. First, new regula-
                                                                                          (58)




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00058   Fmt 6604    Sfmt 6604   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 59 ===
                                                                                          59

                                      tions inevitably raise the overhead costs of investing. This will af-
                                      fect the entire economy as it lessens the capital available to busi-
                                      nesses, thus leading to lower rates of economic growth and job cre-
                                      ation. Meanwhile, individual investors will have less money for
                                      their retirement, their children’s education, or to make a down pay-
                                      ment on a new home.
                                         Government regulations also harm investors by inducing a sense
                                      of complacency. Investors are much less likely to invest prudently
                                      and ask tough questions of the companies they are investing in
                                      when they believe government regulations are protecting their in-
                                      vestments. However, as mentioned above, government regulations
                                      are unable to prevent all fraudulent activity, much less prevent all
                                      instances of imprudent actions. In fact, as also pointed out above,
                                      complex regulations create opportunities for illicit actions by both
                                      the regulator and the regulated. Publicly held corporations already
                                      comply with massive amounts of SEC regulations, including the fil-
                                      ing of quarterly reports that disclose minute details of assets and
                                      liabilities. If these disclosure rules failed to protect Enron inves-
                                      tors, will more red tape really solve anything?
                                         In truth, investing carries risk, and it is not the role of the fed-
                                      eral government to bail out every investor who loses money. In a
                                      true free market, investors are responsible for their own decisions,
                                      good or bad. This responsibility leads them to vigorously analyze
                                      companies before they invest, using independent financial analysts.
                                      In our heavily regulated environment, however, investors and ana-
                                      lysts equate SEC compliance with reputability. The more we look
                                      to the government to protect us from investment mistakes, the less
                                      competition there is for truly independent evaluations of invest-
                                      ment risk.
                                         Increased federal interference in the market could also harm con-
                                      sumers by crippling innovative market mechanism to hold cor-
                                      porate managers accountable to their shareholders. As former
                                      Treasury official Bruce Bartlett pointed out in a recent Washington
                                      Times column, during the 1980s, so-called corporate raiders helped
                                      keep corporate management accountable to shareholders through
                                      devices such as the ‘‘junk’’ bond, which made corporate takeovers
                                      easier. Thanks to the corporate raiders, managers knew they had
                                      to be responsive to shareholder needs or they would become a po-
                                      tential target for a takeover.
                                         Unfortunately, the backlash against corporate raiders, led by de-
                                      mographic politicians and power-hungry bureaucrats eager to ex-
                                      pand the financial police state, put an end to hostile takeovers.
                                      Bruce Bartlett, in the Washington Times column sited above, de-
                                      scribed the effects of this action on shareholders, ‘‘Without the
                                      threat of a takeover, managers have been able to go back to ignor-
                                      ing shareholders, treating them like a nuisance, and giving them-
                                      selves bloated salaries and perks, with little oversight from cor-
                                      porate boards. Now insulated from shareholders once again, man-
                                      agers could engage in unsound practices with little fear of punish-
                                      ment for failure.’’ Ironically, the federal power grab which killed
                                      the corporate raider may have set the stage for the Enron debacle,
                                      which is now being used as an excuse for yet another federal power
                                      grab!




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00059   Fmt 6604   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 60 ===
                                                                                          60

                                         The free market, if left alone by Congress, is perfectly capable of
                                      disciplining businesses who engage in unsound practices. After all,
                                      before the government intervened, Arthur Anderson and Enron had
                                      already begun to pay a stiff penalty, a penalty delivered by indi-
                                      vidual investors acting through the market. This shows that not
                                      only can the market deliver punishment, but it can also deliver this
                                      punishment swifter and more efficiently than the government. We
                                      cannot know what efficient means of disciplining companies would
                                      emerge from a market process but we can know they would be bet-
                                      ter at meeting the needs of investors than a top-down regulatory
                                      approach.
                                         Of course, while the supporters of increased regulation claim
                                      Enron as a failure of ‘‘ravenous capitalism,’’ the truth is Enron was
                                      a phenomenon of the mixed economy, rather than the operations of
                                      the free market. Enron provides a perfect example of the dangers
                                      of corporate subsidies. The company was (and is) one of the biggest
                                      beneficiaries of Export-Import (Ex-Im) Bank and Overseas Private
                                      Investment Corporation (OPIC) subsidies. These programs make
                                      risky loans to foreign governments and businesses for projects in-
                                      volving American companies. While they purport to help developing
                                      nations, Ex-Im and OPIC are in truth nothing more than naked
                                      subsidies for certain politically-favored American corporations, par-
                                      ticularly corporations like Enron that lobby hard and give huge
                                      amounts of cash to both political parties. Rather than finding ways
                                      to exploit the Enron mess to expand federal power, perhaps Con-
                                      gress should stop aiding corporations like Enron pick the tax-
                                      payer’s pockets through Ex-Im and OPIC.
                                         If nothing else, Enron’s success at obtaining state favors is an-
                                      other reason to think twice abut expanding political control over
                                      the economy. After all, allegations have been raised that Enron
                                      used the same clout by which it received corporate welfare to ob-
                                      tain other ‘‘favors’’ from regulators and politicians, such as exemp-
                                      tions from regulations that applied to their competitors. This is not
                                      an uncommon phenomenon when one has a regulatory state, the
                                      result of which is that winners and losers are picked according to
                                      who has the most political clout.
                                         Congress should also examine the role the Federal Reserve
                                      played in the Enron situation. Few in Congress seem to understand
                                      how the Federal Reserve system artificially inflates stock prices
                                      and causes financial bubbles. Yet, what other explanation can
                                      there be when a company goes from a market value of more than
                                      $75 billion to virtually nothing in just a few months? The obvious
                                      truth is that Enron was never really worth anything near $75 bil-
                                      lion, but the media focuses only on the possibility of deceptive prac-
                                      tices by management, ignoring the primary cause of stock overvalu-
                                      ations: Fed expansion of money and credit.
                                         The Fed consistently increased the money supply (by printing
                                      dollars) throughout the 1990s, while simultaneously lowering inter-
                                      est rates. When dollars are plentiful, and interest rates are artifi-
                                      cially low, the cost of borrowing becomes cheap. This is why so
                                      many Americans are more deeply in debt than ever before. This
                                      easy credit environment made it possible for Enron to secure hun-
                                      dreds of millions in uncollateralized loans, loans that now cannot
                                      be repaid. The cost of borrowing money, like the cost of everything




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00060   Fmt 6604   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 61 ===
                                                                                          61

                                      else, should be established by the free market—not by government
                                      edict. Unfortunately, however, the trend toward overvaluation will
                                      continue until the Fed stops creating money out of thin air and
                                      stops keeping interest rates artificially low.
                                         Finally, I would remind my colleagues that Congress has no con-
                                      stitutional authority to regulate the financial markets or the ac-
                                      counting profession. Instead, responsibility for enforcing laws
                                      against fraud are under the jurisdiction of the state and local gov-
                                      ernments. This decentralized approach actually reduces the oppor-
                                      tunity for the type of corruption referred to above—after all, it is
                                      easier to corrupt one federal official than 50 state officials!
                                         In conclusion, H.R. 3763 expands federal power over the account-
                                      ing profession and the financial markets. By creating new opportu-
                                      nities for unscrupulous actors to maneuver through the regulatory
                                      labyrinth, increasing the costs of investing, and preempting the
                                      market’s ability to come up with creative ways to hold corporate of-
                                      ficials accountable, this legislation harms the interests of indi-
                                      vidual workers and investors. Furthermore, this legislation exceeds
                                      the constitutional limits on federal power, interfering in matters
                                      the 10th amendment reserves to state and local law enforcement.
                                      I therefore urge my colleagues to reject this bill. Instead, Congress
                                      should focus on ending corporate welfare programs which provide
                                      taxpayer dollars to large politically-connected companies, and end-
                                      ing the misguided regulatory and monetary policies that helped
                                      create the Enron debacle.
                                                                                                 RON PAUL.




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00061   Fmt 6604   Sfmt 6602   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 62 ===
                                                          DISSENTING VIEWS OF MR. CAPUANO
                                         The Enron and Global Crossing bankruptcies and the increase in
                                      corporate earnings restatements have shaken the public’s con-
                                      fidence in our financial system. Congress has a responsibility to
                                      help restore this confidence by enacting legislation that strength-
                                      ens oversight of our accounting system, improves corporate govern-
                                      ance, and modernizes financial reporting standards. While this leg-
                                      islation makes a number of significant reforms, I oppose H.R. 3763
                                      because I have serious concerns with two provisions in the legisla-
                                      tion reported by the Financial Services Committee.
                                         The first provision addresses the composition of the Public Regu-
                                      latory Organization (PRO) created by the legislation. Under an
                                      amendment that was adopted, the board will consist of five mem-
                                      bers, with at least two of these being persons licensed to practice
                                      public accounting and with significant experience auditing public
                                      companies. The three other board members must be members of
                                      the public.
                                         Unfortunately, the definition of the public members of the board
                                      in the amendment is troubling. It specifically allows members of
                                      the accounting profession to serve as public members of the board
                                      as long as they have not practiced in at least two years. In addi-
                                      tion, the legislation fails to adequately define ‘‘members of the ac-
                                      counting profession.’’ This would potentially allow the entire board
                                      to be comprised of practicing and non-practicing members of the ac-
                                      counting profession.
                                         While I strongly believe that members of the accounting profes-
                                      sion should serve on the PRO, and that all members should meet
                                      a standard of financial literacy, I also believe that at least one pub-
                                      lic member of the board should come from the accounting profes-
                                      sion. Individuals working in other professions, including those
                                      managing pension funds, trading in the financial markets, those in-
                                      volved with corporate governance issues, or governmental experts
                                      on budgeting and finance could bring important knowledge, experi-
                                      ence and perspective to the board. In addition, appointing members
                                      from outside the accounting profession will give the PRO greater
                                      credibility as a protector of investor interests.
                                         The second provision directs the Securities and Exchange Com-
                                      mission (SEC) to analyze whether officers and directors of issuers
                                      should be required to disgorge profits gained or losses avoided by
                                      the sale of securities related to the filing of a restatement of earn-
                                      ings on the part of the issuer. However, the bill only directs the
                                      SEC to investigate requiring disgorgement for transactions under-
                                      taken in the six months prior to the restatement. Since many SEC
                                      investigations uncover earnings manipulation over a span of sev-
                                      eral years, requiring disgorgements of inappropriate gains over a
                                      limited time period will not give an accurate picture of the profits
                                                                                          (62)




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00062   Fmt 6604    Sfmt 6604   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414

=== PAGE 63 ===
                                                                                          63

                                      gained by the manipulation of financial statements by insiders.
                                      This arbitrary six-month limit should be lifted.
                                        Without significant changes to these provisions to address these
                                      concerns, I cannot support this legislation.
                                                                                   MICHAEL E. CAPUANO.

                                                                                          Æ




VerDate Apr 19 2002   05:54 Apr 23, 2002   Jkt 099006   PO 00000   Frm 00063   Fmt 6604   Sfmt 6611   E:\HR\OC\HR414.XXX   pfrm17   PsN: HR414
