
=== PAGE 1 ===
                                              U.S. Department of Justice


                                              Executive Office for United States Trustees

Office of Research and Planning                                                      Washington, D.C.


                                           PRESS RELEASE
For Immediate Release                                                                         May 22, 2002

                                U.S. TRUSTEE SELECTS NEAL BATSON
                          AS EXAMINER IN ENRON CORP. BANKRUPTCY CASE

        NEW YORK, N.Y.–United States Trustee Carolyn Schwartz announced today that she will seek
court approval for the appointment of Atlanta attorney Neal Batson as examiner in the Chapter 11
bankruptcy of Enron Corp.

         The examiner is authorized to investigate and report on transactions involving Enron Corp. and
related entities, including transactions not reflected on Enron’s balance sheets. This authority is set out in
the Bankruptcy Court’s order of April 8, 2002, which also directs the examiner to file an initial report
within 120 days after entry of the order approving his appointment.

         “I reviewed at least two dozen excellent candidates for this post, taking particular care to select a
candidate of stature, independence, and expertise,” Schwartz stated. “Mr. Batson is recognized as one of
the top bankruptcy practitioners in the country, and is widely respected for his integrity as well as his
intellect. In addition, he and his firm have agreed to detailed restrictions to avoid conflicting professional
relationships that sometimes arise in large and complex bankruptcy cases.”

         Batson is a partner in the national law firm Alston & Bird LLP. In addition to serving as counsel
for parties in major corporate bankruptcy cases, Batson was the court-appointed examiner in the Chapter
11 case of Southmark Corp., a real estate and financial services conglomerate with stated assets of more
than $8.5 billion.

         Batson received his law degree in 1966 from Vanderbilt University School of Law, where he was
editor in chief of the law review and a member of the honorary society Order of the Coif. He received his
Bachelor of Arts degree cum laude from Vanderbilt University in 1963. He clerked for Judge Griffin B.
Bell of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit in 1966 and 1967.

        Batson’s professional affiliations include: chairman of the American College of Bankruptcy
since 2001; member of the National Bankruptcy Conference, a selective organization of top bankruptcy
professionals; fellow of the American College of Trial Lawyers; former vice chairman of the Business
Bankruptcy Committee of the American Bar Association’s Section on Business Law; by appointment of
the Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, member from 1993 to 1999 of the Advisory Committee on
the Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure of the Judicial Conference of the United States; panel member of the
American Arbitration Association; panel member of the Register of Mediators for the U.S. Bankruptcy
Court for the Southern District of New York, and former president of the Atlanta Bar Association.

Contact:            Jane Limprecht, Public Information Officer
                    Executive Office for United States Trustees
                    (202) 305-7411

                                                     [End]
